













































April 4, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 4, 1986 

 

 

361 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Unemployment Rate in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel like 

directing my first question to the Minister of Health to inquire 

about the epidemic which has obviously decimated the ranks of 

the government, but I will address my question to the Deputy 

Premier in the absence of the Premier. And my question deals 

with the latest unemployment figures released by Statistics 

Canada this morning. Their report shows that in March there 

were 47,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan, 1,000 more 

than the same month last year, and 5,000 more than last month 

of February. 

 

Now with the kind of month-to-month jump in the number of 

unemployed shown by these figures, and with the kind of very 

large year-to-year jump shown, can you, Mr. Deputy Premier, tell 

us what specific government projects will be in place in the next 

week or two or three or four to provide some meaningful job 

opportunities for 47,000 unemployed people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, while I have a great deal 

of sympathy for those among us who are unemployed, I would 

like to come at this from another angle, Mr. Speaker, and talk 

about the employed. Mr. Speaker, there were 11,000 more people 

working in Saskatchewan in March of ’86 than there were in 

March of ’85. There are 1,000 more people in Saskatchewan 

working in March of ’86 than in February of ’86. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina has recorded a 0.7 per cent drop in 

unemployment in March and now stands at 9.3 per cent. There 

are 6,000 more people, Mr. Speaker, in Regina working today 

than there was one year ago. Services, Mr. Speaker, mostly small 

businesses, recorded the greatest employment growth — 3,000 

more in March than in February, Mr. Speaker, and 7,000 more 

today than one year ago. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, in actual numbers we have the second 

lowest, Mr. Speaker, the second lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada, tied with Manitoba at 9.5 per cent actual. The 

unemployment rate is up from February’s rate of 8.7 but down, 

Mr. Speaker, from the 9.6 of March of 1985. The major cause, 

Mr. Speaker, for the change in the rate is the large growth in the 

number of people entering the work-force. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there are 6,000 more 

people in our work-force in March over February, and there are 

12,000 more people in our work-force today as opposed to one 

year ago. Our rate of increase, Mr. Speaker, in the labour force is 

double the rate of Manitoba, double the rate of Alberta, double 

the rate of Canada as a whole, and 15 times the rate of Ontario. 

Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the ministers when they answer 

questions to stay much briefer than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, following that flow of 

figures, could you give us an explanation of why, when 

comparing province to province as you did, the facts will show 

that in job creation from March of 1985 to March of 1986 

Saskatchewan stood eighth in performance, admittedly ahead of 

Prince Edward Island, admittedly ahead of Newfoundland, but 

behind every other province in Canada in the percentage of new 

jobs created. Can you explain that Mr. Deputy Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to get to the question asked 

by the Leader of the Opposition just a few minutes ago, he said: 

what programs, and what will this government be doing in the 

very near future to see that there is an opportunity for these 

people who are today unemployed to become, Mr. Speaker, part 

of the ranks of the employed? 

 

Well I want to talk a little bit about the Opportunities ’86 

program, Mr. Speaker, recently announced by the Minister of 

Small Business and Tourism. To date, there have been in excess 

of 5,400 applications requested by over 2,000 businesses for 

young people leaving university, entering the labour force, 

students, Mr. Speaker, — over 5,400 job applications to date by 

over 2,000 employers in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

based on the overwhelming response, Mr. Speaker, we expect the 

program to be fully subscribed. 

 

Another thing that we are doing, Mr. Speaker, to provide . . . 

They asked the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, some other things that are 

happening in Saskatchewan to provide opportunity, to provide 

opportunity that those members opposite would deny the people 

of Saskatchewan, and I talk, Mr. Speaker, about the Shand power 

project in Estevan; the upgrader in Regina; a paper-mill in Prince 

Albert; a fertilizer . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, to deal, not with the press 

release projects referred to by the Deputy Premier, but some very 

hard facts being faced by many citizens of this province, will the 

Deputy Premier indicate why his many success stories which he 

has recited here this morning has resulted in the number of 

employables on public assistance in this province increasing 

from a figure in 1982 of 4,400 to a figure of 1986 . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . 

 

Please — I’m making this very clear that the number of 

employables on social welfare in January of 1982 — I’ll give the 

exact figure, 4,492, and in January of 1986, not 4,492 but 14,632 

— these are employable people on social services. Would the 

Deputy Premier care to explain how those figures are consistent 

with the success stories which he was outlining at such tedious 

length? 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

362 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

asks a question about people on social assistance. I would be 

happy to provide some information to all of the members of the 

Assembly and to provide some information to the people of 

Saskatchewan, as well. 

 

If I recall correctly, during the last years of the former 

administration the welfare rolls were ever going upward. Here in 

the province of Saskatchewan, of course, we’ve had an 

increasing population; we’ve had an ever increasing labour force; 

we’ve had migration into the province of people that are coming 

here because rates here are higher than they are in some other 

provinces. So we would expect naturally to see some increase in 

welfare rolls. 

 

But what is really significant in terms of a statistic, Mr. Speaker 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, they asked a question about 

the rolls and I’m going to give them the information. They might 

not want to hear this, they might not want to hear this, but today 

in the province of Saskatchewan — these are January ’86 figures 

— there are 673 fewer people on social assistance than a year 

ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would think we are going in the right direction. 

We’re going in the right direction with the number of people on 

social assistance. And we are going in the right direction with the 

number of people who have more permanent jobs in the province 

of Saskatchewan today. And when you take the kind of projects 

that the Deputy Premier talked about, which the members 

opposite oppose, I think that the future for employment here in 

the province of Saskatchewan is very bright indeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well with respect to all the people 

moving in and all the ex-cabinet ministers moving out of this 

province . . . 

 

Would the Minister of Social Services care to explain why in 

January of 1982 the amount paid of assistance to employables 

was 2.2 million, and in January of 1986 it was 7.7 million? 

Would he care to explain that, having regard to the fact that he 

has reduced the allowances, and that the number of people has 

gone up from 4,500 to 14,500? Would he care to explain how his 

programs are operating to provide jobs for people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the former administration did 

absolutely nothing to attempt to get people off of the welfare 

rolls. And all you have to do is take a look at the welfare statistics 

during the last few years that their administration was in power. 

They continued to go up and up and up. And the last year that 

they were in power there were something like 50,000 

beneficiaries who were receiving some form of social assistance. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what you have to do is you have to take 

a look at the trends. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask the members to retain some 

decorum in the Chamber. It’s impossible to hear what the 

minister is saying. They listened to the question; I expect you to 

listen to the answer. 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And Mr. Speaker, I expect the members 

opposite will not want to hear that in the last few years of your 

administration there were only 4,000 permanent jobs created — 

4,000. Ten thousand part-time jobs . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to caution the member from Quill 

Lakes to maintain some decorum in the Chamber. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’ll continue answering the question. Four 

thousand permanent jobs, 10,000 part-time jobs under your 

administration. If you want people to have part-time jobs, that’s 

what you’ll get with the NDP. Under this administration, 21,000 

full-time jobs in a three-year period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan today have a much brighter future in 

terms of employment than they would ever have under that 

administration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary to deal with the 

bright future, obviously appreciated by the Bank of B.C. and the 

member for Wilkie. Would the minister care to explain why the 

policies which he characterizes as a failure led to 4,5000 people 

who are employable on welfare, and the policies which he 

describes as successes led to 14,6000 employable people on 

welfare? Would he care to explain how this is a success story of 

his government, instead of the story of abject failure which it 

obviously is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the abject failure in this 

province was when that administration drove people out of this 

province who wanted jobs here and couldn’t get them here. And 

everybody knows that. And I can tell the people of this province, 

that’s exactly what will happen again if those people ever . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If those people ever return to office, we will 

see the bacon plant in North Battleford shut down; we will see 

the P.A. paper project shut down; we will see Rafferty shut down; 

we will see . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We will see project after project 

discontinued, job after job opportunity lost, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

exactly what will happen if that administration were ever to get 

back into power. I will reiterate the statistics: 4,000 permanent 

jobs created in their last three years, 21,000 full-time jobs. The 

facts speak for themselves. The choice is clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Situation in the Oil Industry in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just say that false 

optimism, certainly in the face of real adversity, is a characteristic 

of this government. In a recent publication of their Saskatchewan 

Viewpoint, the Minister of Energy  



 

April 4, 1986 

363 

 

 

does, in fact, exemplify that false optimism. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Energy, Mr. Speaker, and he 

suggests in that article, “No panic in the oil patch,” published in 

the spring of ’86. Further he says, the energy minister, Lorne 

Hepworth, says that despite recent price declines there will be no 

panic in his department or in the oil patch. I ask the minister: at 

what price level does panic set in, and how many jobs have been 

lost to date in the oil patch in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s about time that 

somebody in this legislature got around to addressing the 

question, because certainly this kind of issue is a lot more serious 

than humbugs and jelly beans, Mr. Speaker, because this is a 

serious issue facing the oil patch today. There is no question that 

as prices move down, the oil patch is threatened, and it’s 

threatened in a serious sort of fashion. 

 

From the outset we put in place an action plan to deal with it, and 

when that article was written, it may well have been that the price 

was 18 or 20, but as you and I full well know, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a lot of turbulence in the market today, and it’s moving 

up and down. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that from a government standpoint 

it is no longer good enough for us to look simply at the oil patch 

as a cash cow. We must look at it as an agency in an area of this 

province that can create jobs, and that will be the focus and the 

direction of this government as we work to help those people in 

the oil patch whose jobs and livelihoods are threatened, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the budget 

Estimates just tabled by the Hon. Minister of Finance, it’s 

indicated that over 1985 revenues we’re going to lose 

approximately $200 million from the oil patch in 1987. I suggest 

that at $21 a barrel, where this was in fact based, we will likely 

lose closer to 400, or at least $300 million in revenues from the 

oil patch. And I ask the minister where that shortfall will be made 

up, or will it simply become another part of the 1987 deficit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What the actual number will be of 

course is anybody’s best guess. Obviously for budget purposes 

we had to put a number together. It was predicated on our best 

judgement. Our best judgement was this: at this point in time, and 

perhaps for the next two or three months, we are likely to see low 

prices. And by low prices I mean in this 10 to $15 range. At the 

same time, as we move into the fall and through the winter, albeit 

these numbers are based on starting April 1, that we will see 

perhaps recovery into that 18 to $22 range. 

 

As we know in this business, no matter what guestimate or what 

guess or estimate you make, it’s likely to be wrong. That’s all we 

really know because who is controlling this is somebody outside 

our borders. That is all we know. But we have to make the best 

estimate. And I can tell you, insofar as what it means, we’re not 

about to solve the deficit or the revenue implications of that on 

the backs of the oil workers and the families whose livelihoods 

depend on that oil patch. That is not what we are going to do. We 

are not going to knee-jerk react; 

we’re going to pursue a course of putting in place programs to 

maintain the jobs out there. 

 

Ombudsman’s Report Regarding Social Reform 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Minister of Social Services and it’s based on the report of the 

Ombudsman, which clearly shows that the biggest abject failure 

has been the policy of that minister with regard to the question of 

social services and welfare. That so-called reform, Mr. Speaker, 

as is clearly indicated by the Ombudsman, is nothing more than 

political smoke-screen to cover up for the inadequacies of this 

government. In his report the Ombudsman calls for an 

independent review of the government’s changes to the welfare 

system which he says, and I quote, “have created a lot of hurt and 

a number of serious problems.” 

 

Will you, Mr. Minister, accept the Ombudsman’s 

recommendation and agree to appoint an independent and a 

qualified group, such as the school of social work, to review the 

impact of your disastrous changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of 

accepting the member opposite’s recommendation or of 

accepting the Ombudsman’s recommendation, and I’m going to 

tell you why, Mr. Speaker. And I hope the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, listen very carefully as I have some information that 

I think is very, very significant for the public of Saskatchewan 

and for the members opposite when it comes to the 

Ombudsman’s report. 

 

The Ombudsman’s report is critical, as the member opposite 

says. However, the criticisms levelled by the Ombudsman are not 

supported by the facts, Mr. Speaker, and I want to let the people 

know what the facts are. And if the members opposite will look 

closely at some of the statistics in the report, they will get an 

altogether different picture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to respond to the members’ 

questions if they would be so courteous as to be quiet and listen. 

Mr. Speaker, income security, the branch of my department that 

deals with these particular matters, deals with approximately 

10,000 family income plan cases, approximately 20,000 

Saskatchewan income plan cases, and a number of other social 

assistance cases, for a total of about 55,000 cases in one way or 

another who receive assistance. When you consider that the 

Ombudsman states that he received 317 complaints about that 

system, you’re talking about 0.5 per cent of the entire system. 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, our 

departmental records show that only 31 of those complaints — 

only 31 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s impossible to hear in the 

Chamber if you’re going to behave . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — But you went on for a long, long time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well you asked a complex question, and it 

deserves a factual answer, and I’m giving you one. 

 

Of that 0.5 per cent of the case-load that the Ombudsman was 

concerned about, there were only 31 complaints that 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

364 

 

 

were serious enough to warrant a formal investigation by the 

Ombudsman. The deputy minister received 31 letters concerning 

welfare from the Ombudsman. Of these, 11 are outstanding, 15 

were resolved as unsubstantiated complaints, and five were 

substantiated. So as of today, Mr. Speaker, we have five 

substantiated cases. 

 

In light of that, Mr. Speaker, whether or not I have to choose 

between the Ombudsman’s report or whether or not I have to 

choose between reports which talk about the people that are 

getting education and training and productive opportunities that 

will help them to build for the future, I have no problem 

whatsoever deciding between these people who are getting 

education and training — choosing in favour of them, and not in 

favour of this report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has trouble with 

complex questions. I therefore shall ask him a very simple one. 

Will you, Mr. Minister, accept the recommendations of the 

Ombudsman and appoint a qualified group to review the impact 

of those changes which you claim to be welfare reform? 

Certainly, if you do not feel that there is anything wrong with 

your so-called changes, you should not be afraid of having an 

independent body take a look at them and give you a report. Will 

you accept the recommendation of the Ombudsman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, how typical of the members 

opposite. How typical of the members opposite. We’re talking 

about a system that was out of control under the former 

administration. When he was minister of Finance, literally 

millions of dollars being wasted; taxpayers’ money being 

wasted; no opportunity for people to get education and training. 

Now we have five substantiated cases out of a total of 55,000 

possibilities. He’s calling for some kind of study using taxpayers’ 

money. That’s irresponsible. 

 

What is responsible, Mr. Speaker, is to carry on down the track 

of welfare reform to provide thousands of welfare clients with 

education and training and opportunities to build for the future 

and to ensure that abuses in the system are dealt with and are 

dealt with expeditiously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary to the Minister of Social 

Services. Mr. Minister, can you explain to this House how you 

can define 4,500 employables on welfare in 1982 as out of 

control, but 14,000 in 1986 as not being out of control? Which 

system worked better? Your system, which has caused 14,000 

employables to be on welfare, four times as much as were on in 

1982? Which system do you think has worked better? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, when you look back to the 

former administration, they had people on social assistance. The 

question really has to be asked: what were they doing to get those 

people off of social assistance in that period of time, Mr. 

Speaker? Was there any welfare reform program to provide 

education? Was there any welfare reform program to provide 

training? Was there any welfare reform program to curb the 

abuses so that you could take the money that was saved to put it  

into education and training for welfare reform clients? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was nothing like that under the former 

administration. Today I have a report in front of me, Mr. Speaker, 

that indicates very clearly, for example, that whether it’s in 

Saskatoon, whether it’s in Prince Albert, whether it’s in Moose 

Jaw, it doesn’t make any difference where it is, in this province 

today people are being trained to get off of welfare, and that 

wasn’t the case under the former administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax 

Credit Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill ordered to be read a second time at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 

member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Land Titles 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Builders’ Lien Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Builders’ Lien Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane, and the amendment thereto moved 

by Mr. Shillington, that the Assembly do resolve itself into the 

committee of finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Assembly. It is with a great deal of pleasure 

today that I join in the debate of the March 26th budget presented 

by our Minister of Finance, and the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has my sincere congratulations. He has 

presented to this Assembly and the people of this province a 

prudent and a progressive financial document that deserves the 

support of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and of the people of  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

365 

 

 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This budget document recognizes pressing economic issues of 

today with meaningful, Mr. Speaker, and I say meaningful 

programs and meaningful policies. And yet the long-term 

direction of this budget does consider economic reality by 

fostering a steady and a stable growth. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 

point that we should all take note of. As the economic reality of 

the 1980’s takes shape, our province must be in step and on time, 

from a fiscal point of view. The Minister of Finance’s budget 

does indeed do just that. It builds on what this government has 

done, with a clear vision of what needs to be done in the future. 

Again to the Minister of Finance, I say, my congratulations, sir. 

 

Before I go further, Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer my thanks 

to those people who have placed confidence in my abilities and 

as well to those who assist me in carrying out my duties. Since 

becoming minister I have enjoyed a very busy and rewarding 

introduction to cabinet and to departmental responsibilities. And 

I would like to now extend my thanks and appreciation to 

Premier Devine for placing his trust in my abilities. I admire our 

Premier for his leadership style and for his leadership qualities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Premier Devine is a living embodiment 

of what Saskatchewan is all about, and as I work alongside him 

as my cabinet colleague, that impression is reinforced with me 

each and every day. 

 

Premier Devine has entrusted me, Mr. Speaker, with a very, very 

important portfolio, and I pledge to you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

pledge to the people of this province that I will discharge my 

duties in the best interest of the Saskatchewan people, with your 

leadership, Mr. Premier, as my guide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another group of people who I wish to 

acknowledge at this time. The people who work in the 

Department of Highways and Transportation deserve my thanks 

as well. From the deputy minister and throughout the 

organization I have been impressed, Mr. Speaker, with literally 

every person I have met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have visited most of the department’s district 

offices and, as well, the offices in Regina here. And just about 

every individual that I talked to in the department has had 10 

years or 15 years or 20 — service or more, of tenure with the 

department. It is truly a testimony, Mr. Speaker, to those civil 

servants’ professionalism and dedication to public service. And I 

look forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting many more of the 

departmental employees. And I look forward to working with 

them in providing service to the people of this province for many, 

many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to make special mention of the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company and its employees. As 

you well know, STC celebrated its 40th anniversary on April 1st 

of this year. And I would like to offer my congratulations to STC 

on reaching this milestone in history. To all STC employees, past 

and present, I would like to extend this government’s  

appreciation for building an enviable record of success and an 

enviable record of safety. We look forward to many, many years 

of continued good service from the employees of Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to provide details of the $100.6 

million construction program for the year 1986. I do have a copy 

of the details of this construction program that I will be tabling 

following my speech. 

 

It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that this year’s construction 

program, in total, has 96 grading and paving projects which will 

affect 74 different highway locations. This year, Mr. Speaker, 

more than 950 kilometres of highway will be improved. In 

addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there are seven major bridge 

projects on the array. These will include various bridge redecking 

and major upgrading projects. As well, the completion of the 

Meridian bridge north of Lloydminster will be on the program. 

 

And I should add, Mr. Speaker, that those people in the Meridian 

bridge area can expect grading and paving of Highway No. 17 

north of the intersection with Highway No. 3 for a total of 13 

kilometres. That stretch of road leads right up to the new bridge. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, construction of four-laning will start 

this year between Lloydminster and Marshall on Highway No. 

16. This stretch of road, Mr. Speaker, is one of the busiest in the 

province. And I know that all area residents and, indeed, the 

Yellowhead Highway Association are pleased that this busy road 

will be four-laned. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where are you four-laning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — If the member opposite would care to 

listen, I will repeat: we are four-laning this year between 

Lloydminster and Marshall on Highway No. 16. Another 

four-lane stretch of road, Mr. Speaker, and for members of the 

opposite, another four-lane stretch that I am announcing today is 

a 22-kilometre — if you’d care to take note — a 22-kilometre 

stretch on the Trans-Canada from west of Webb to 5 kilometres 

west of Gull Lake. 

 

This represents a continuation, Mr. Speaker, of our efforts to 

four-lane the Trans-Canada. Over one-half of the Saskatchewan 

section of No. 1 is now four-lane. Over one-half of the 

Saskatchewan section of No. 1 is now today four-lane, Mr. 

Speaker. And this project takes us one step further towards our 

goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to major bridge work and four-laning, 

this government has made a commitment to improving roads 

affected by increased industrial traffic. One project, the 

four-laning east of Lloydminster, I have already mentioned. Two 

more projects will be started this year. A 13-kilometre stretch of 

road between Regina and Pilot Butte will be graded this year. 

Known locally as “old No 1,” this project will service an 

increased traffic anticipated with the new Regina oil upgrader. 

Another industrial road that will be improved this year is from 

Rocanville to the PCS potash mine. That 14-kilometre section of 

road will be paved. 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

366 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more important sections of road 

throughout Saskatchewan that could be announced in my speech, 

but I will let the construction listing speak for itself, Mr. Speaker. 

But I would be remiss if I did not mention the extension of 

Highway No. 41 from Wakaw to Melfort. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, grading work will be completed from 

east of Wakaw to Highway No. 20 and paving of this section will 

commence this fall. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, grading will start 

on a 13-kilometre stretch from the junction of Highway No. 20 

east to the fine little village of Yellow Creek. Mr. Speaker, this 

is an important highway for the people of that area, and I am 

pleased that progress will continue towards its completion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before ending this portion of my speech, I would 

like to note two very important facts. First, there is an 

ever-growing emphasis on resurfacing work on our highway 

system. If you look closely at the construction listing, you will 

note that there are 18 resurfacing projects. In the last three years 

the resurfacing budget has increased 55 per cent to more than $19 

million this year. 

 

Coupled with an increased emphasis on resurfacing, the 

maintenance budget has also been increased by 4.3 per cent to 

$87.2 million. In the past four years nearly 4,500 kilometres of 

highways have been improved in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And it makes good economic sense, Mr. Speaker, to protect and 

care for that investment, and increases in resurfacing and 

maintenance budgets most definitely demonstrate that fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on those same themes of protection and care, I 

would now like to turn to the subject of safety. In 1985 the traffic 

fatalities experienced another decline. That sad total has dropped 

to 214 in 1985 from 221 in 1984, and we are encouraged, Mr. 

Speaker, by this trend. And we remain committed, Mr. Speaker, 

to reducing the traffic fatalities on our streets and highways. 

 

And that commitment extends, Mr. Speaker, beyond improving 

our highway system. Public education and leadership is very, 

very necessary. And I would like to take this opportunity to make 

a public thank-you to Mr. Terry Simpson and the players of the 

Prince Albert Raiders. This past year the department launched a 

multi-media safety campaign, and Terry Simpson and his players 

assisted us in getting the message across to the people of 

Saskatchewan that hockey is a contact sport, and driving is not. 

 

Members of this Assembly should know that the general driver 

handbook that was revised in 1984 uses the sports theme to 

instruct beginning drivers. Mr. Simpson and the Prince Albert 

Raiders’ organization deserve our thanks in the cause to reduce 

accidents, injuries, and fatalities in the province. As a model of 

success in sportsmanship, they have done a superb job in 

delivering our safety message to the people across this province. 

 

By demonstrating leadership, and by better public education, it is 

our belief that we can accelerate the downward trend in accident 

statistics. Mr. Speaker, before concluding my remarks on the 

highways portion  

of my speech, I have an important announcement for small 

business. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance’s budget has 

placed great confidence in Saskatchewan small business to create 

jobs and stimulate our economy. And in highways and 

transportation we are doing our part for small business. Last year 

we introduced a new signing policy for small businesses that 

were located some distance from a provincial highway. 

 

To complement that project, or that policy, we will be 

introducing legislation that will allow small businesses to 

advertise adjacent to provincial highways. And I should add, Mr. 

Speaker, that care will be taken to ensure that highways safety 

will not be affected. There will still be no signing allowed near 

or adjacent to intersections, and we will ensure that the placement 

of signs will not be a safety hazard, and that it will be done in a 

very orderly manner. 

 

(1045) 

 

I would at this time like to thank my colleague, the Minister of 

Small Business and Tourism, for his assistance in this matter. We 

know, from talking with the small-business community of 

Saskatchewan, that this change will be of greatest benefit to rural 

communities in our province. We trust that the emphasis given to 

the small-business sector by the Minister of Finance, and this 

policy change for highways signing, will give these 

hard-working people the opportunity to create jobs and to 

improve their service to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concludes my comments on the highway side 

of the department budget, and I would now like to address the 

transportation side. On a national and provincial perspective, 

transportation today is experiencing unprecedented change. The 

federal Minister of Transport’s freedom to move discussion 

paper has stimulated a transition to less regulation, Mr. Speaker. 

The federal minister is also preparing to re-write the National 

Transportation Act. 

 

Furthermore, the federal and provincial ministers have started the 

process that will result in a national safety code for the transport 

industry. In each of these areas, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 

been proud to participate. 

 

As part of a re-regulation package agreed to by the council of 

ministers, we will be introducing two key reforms in our 

provincial trucking regulations. Effective April 14th of this year, 

the reverse onus test and the ease of entry commodities will be 

available. These two key changes will reduce costly and 

unnecessary regulations. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, these two changes will maintain 

the provincial industry’s competitive edge. Our provincial 

counterparts are moving in the same direction, and it is essential 

that our regulatory environment be compatible with them. I 

should add, Mr. Speaker, that these changes will not be at the 

expense of safety or at the expense of fitness. The Highway 

Traffic Board will still give prime importance to the ability of a 

firm to provide the proposed service safely and fairly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, safety is also being addressed at the national 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

367 

 

 

level. By the beginning of next year a national safety code will 

be implemented. This code will give the transport industry a 

minimum set of safety standards that will be recognized by all 

provinces. The national safety code will ensure that differing 

safety requirements will not become the next regulatory barrier 

to better service. More importantly, a national safety code will 

ensure that the safety of the industry and the public will not suffer 

as a result of re-regulation. 

 

Right now the council of ministers has committed five task forces 

to assemble a working draft of the new code, and the transport 

industry has been invited to participate and contribute to this 

worthwhile project. It is encouraging to find, Mr. Speaker, that 

there is a new period, a new period, that is very, very significant, 

of federal, provincial and industry co-operation. I say thanks to 

co-operation between the all-interested groups. Our province and 

our country will pass through this transition period with 

improved service and a healthy and a competitive edge. 

 

My announcements regarding reverse onus and ease of entry 

commodities demonstrates to the highway transport industry that 

we are committed to the re-regulation process. I would like to 

thank the highway transport industry for their co-operation in this 

phase of our re-regulation implementation. I look forward to 

more co-operation in the development of a comprehensive 

national safety code for our province and for our entire nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn to some important issues 

for Saskatchewan transportation users that are being conducted 

at the federal level by my colleague, the Minister of Transport. 

The first issue is the review of the Western Grain Transportation 

Act. The Government of Saskatchewan, through my department, 

has been involved in this review. We have submitted a detailed 

brief to the grain transportation agency who are conducting the 

review, and we have made various representations to the review 

committee. 

 

We have stressed the critical importance that the percentage of 

costs of rail transportation of grain to be borne by the grain 

producers must be directly related to the grain producers’ ability 

to pay, and the remainder of the costs being borne by the federal 

government. We will closely analyse the revisions to the Western 

Grain Transportation Act when they are announced by the federal 

government to ensure that the interests of Saskatchewan 

producers are protected. 

 

The second involves the review of the National Transportation 

Act. The Government of Saskatchewan, through my department, 

has been involved actively in this review. We have submitted a 

detailed brief to the federal Minister of Transport, and we have 

included several recommendations that there must be a 

reasonable access and rates to remote regions, that the role of 

transportation and economic development must be recognized, 

and that captive shippers must be afforded protection from 

monopolistic carriers. 

 

We will be carefully scrutinizing, Mr. Speaker, the new 

transportation Act to ensure that Saskatchewan shippers,  

receivers, and travellers obtain a fair deal from the national 

transportation system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this brings a close to my speech. The budget for 

highway construction that I have announced will continue to 

protect and maintain an important investment and asset in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

the highways construction program recognizes the needs for new 

bridges, four-laning, and industrial road development. To that, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize and thank a very important 

Saskatchewan industry. The road builders of our province have 

built a solid reputation of excellence and co-operation. They are 

prime examples, Mr. Speaker, of the risk-takers and the 

job-creators of our province, and I, Mr. Speaker, am very, very 

committed to their free enterprise spirit. Today’s construction 

budget has sustained nearly 4,000 road-building jobs. Jobs and 

opportunities are the key emphasis of the Minister of Finance’s 

budget, and the highway construction contribution is very much 

in keeping with that commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will now table the construction listing document 

for the members of the Assembly. And I want to add that I do 

offer my complete support of the budget address by the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, before I go into the address I was 

going to make this day, I would like to compliment the Minister 

of Highways on respecting the recommendations and the desires 

of the people around the province over the last year or two, who 

have informed him some of the things that they would like, and 

some of the highways they would like to build. While his staff is 

in the Chamber — and I had the pleasure for two years of 

working with them — I once again would like to thank them for 

the cordial assistance they gave me while I worked with their 

department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my speech today is about revenue, and how the 

former government took money out of the pension plans of the 

people of Saskatchewan who put their funds in, and how they 

used those, not in the spirit of what pension plans are about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will use the public service pension as my example. 

These are the employees of the government who, by all normal 

means of pensions, the government should be putting in an equal 

amount of money as what the pensioners are putting in to give 

them their benefits. 

 

Let me go back and take a couple of years for an example. In 

1976, Mr. Speaker, the people who paid into the pension plan put 

in $8.573 million; paid out of the plan that year was $7.805 

million; $768,000 was taken out of the people’s pension money 

right into the general revenue of the former government to 

balance their budget. 

 

Let’s go to 1977. We had the same again, Mr. Speaker.  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

368 

 

 

The people who work for the government put in $12.240 million; 

the pensions paid out were $9.756 million; they took $2.484 

million into the general revenue to balance their budget. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, not only did they balance their budget by doing that, 

they did not put in one cent of $12.24 million they should have 

put in to start. 

 

Now let’s go back a little bit, Mr. Speaker, and let’s take this 

pension plan from 1927. Let’s go back and find out why this 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker, why is this pension plan 

approximately . . . the public service pension . . . $1.6 billion — 

$1.6 billion in the glue? Why? Now we’re just picking on one. I 

mean, we can start with the teacher’s pension, which is 1.3, and 

quite a few more. 

 

Yesterday the speaker said government should pay their bills on 

time. He said that in this House when he spoke — the member 

from Regina Centre; let’s go back and look. Did he pay his bills 

on time when they were the government in 1978? The people put 

in 14.418 million. The government didn’t match it. They didn’t 

put their 14.890 million. They paid out only 12.635 million, Mr. 

Speaker. They took 1.783 million into their budget to balance it. 

And as I’ve always said, Mr. Speaker, if we continue following 

through the 19 pension plans, you will find when the NDP were 

the government of this province, they didn’t have a balanced 

budget since 1975, no matter what bahooey they give us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Let’s go to 1979, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

I’ve got to go back to yesterday a little, Mr. Speaker, and 

remember that the member from Regina Centre didn’t want me 

to speak all day. I guess I shouldn’t have told what I was going 

to speak on because he didn’t like to be told the truth. Mr. 

Speaker, 1979: 15.357 million put in by the employees of the 

Government of Saskatchewan; paid out 23.832 million. Well, the 

government finally had to put a little money in. 

 

Now let’s go back and let’s look at what happened over the 

history, as I said earlier. The pension plan that we have today for 

employees who came in since 1977 have been matched dollar for 

dollar for dollar. In 1978 the employees put in 453,000; the 

employer finally learned; he put in 479,000. Mr. Speaker, let’s 

go back . . . I believe it was last year if my memory serves me 

correct. The deficit that had to be picked up by the present 

government and is built into the present deficit that we have, was 

$54 million for back — $54 million roughly for back payments 

that were required. All the years, if the NDP and the Liberals, 

who were government prior, would have put their fair share in as 

required, that plan would have sufficient money to pay out the 

pensions of the people who were retiring. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s going to happen in 1990? 

 

Mr. Katzman: — In 1990, one of the members has just asked 

me — in 1990 the estimate is the government of that day will 

have to put in $200 million. I repeat, the estimate is: in 1990 the 

government will have to reach $200 million out of the revenues 

to pay for unfunded liabilities created by a government who was 

using the pension plans of the citizens of Saskatchewan to 

balance 

the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a lot of other people who are going 

to want to speak today so I’m going to cut what I had — about 

an hour’s speech — down to a lot less to allow other members 

the privilege of talking. 

 

But let’s go into other plans. I understand that prior to 1980 even 

the teachers’ plan was not funded as is supposed to be. And the 

teachers’ plan today, Mr. Speaker, has $1,347,720,000 that it is 

basically short by the actuary decisions and recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am basically trying to make the point of here 

is that Saskatchewan has not had a balanced budget for many 

years, no matter what Allan Blakeney and the little tribe of 

Indians that run around . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would caution the member not 

to use members’ names but use their positions. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize. No matter what the 

member from Elphinstone says, and the little cheering group that 

he has running around beside him. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go through all the extra money that they have 

taken out over years, and how much they are short, let me first 

say, in the public service pension plan, from the numbers that I 

have derived, they didn’t put in $183.241 million. Now 

remember, Mr. Speaker, if you put money in the bank or into 

certificates or something else, it usually doubles itself in seven 

years. Remember, this pension started in 1927, and in 1965, when 

I accrued the ’27 to 1965, they were already behind $3.455 

million. 

 

They didn’t start to correct the problem then, and the problem got 

worse. I guess you have to say that in ’77 they started to make a 

cure, and you must give them credit for that. But they did not 

match the public service who were here prior to 1977. 

 

Since we have been government, we have been matching on the 

side of what the people pay into the one plan, which is the public 

employees’ superannuation plan, which is better known as the 

cash plan. We have also been putting funds in to make up for 

their shortfall, and as I said it was approximately in the 

neighbourhood of $54 million in the last few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while they were doing this, if you take a look at the 

annual reports of SaskTel, for an example, you will discover, 

when they were government in ’73 I believe the year was, we 

owned 34 per cent of SaskTel. Well that sounds not bad. When 

they left government, we owned only 20 per cent of SaskTel. 

They mortgaged 14 per cent more of our ownership. Today I am 

informed that we now own more than 20 per cent, and we have 

been doing a lot of improving — private lines will be coming to 

farmers, and many other things. 

 

But that’s not the worst one, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about Sask 

Power. Sask Power you have to look at a little  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

369 

 

 

differently, and I wish the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

was here so he could holler and scream a little as I give him the 

facts of life. 

 

When they built Coronach, they did not bring the deficit for the 

construction into the budget. They didn’t show it as a debt for 

Sask Power. It did not come as a debt for Sask Power until after 

they were defeated as government. They put that deficit in an 

outside construction account, which they say we can’t do. It’s 

improper of us to build things and then bring them in once it’s 

completed. But yet when they built Coronach and when they 

committed to other projects, Mr. Speaker, they had committed 

Sask Power to over 110 per cent of their equity in debt. They had 

Sask Power into 110 per cent of committed stuff even though 

they only showed they had about a 90-some per cent debt. But 

they had committed it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to do it, don’t accuse somebody else 

of inventing the game if they continue to do it. And that’s what 

they did. Mr. Speaker, the decisions that were made prior, they 

put a debt burden on the people who use the major corporations 

— SaskTel, Sask Power. 

 

Hopefully we will start to bring those around. As I look at the 

information made public, Mr. Speaker — made public as not 

before, but now made public — the predictions of Sask Power 

must be placed before PURC. It is now out in the public realm 

what they believe is happening, when they believe it will happen, 

and why they must do things. It is not hidden behind the cabinet 

door by those who are around that magic table. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is, when you want to condemn 

somebody, check your own house first. He who has never caused 

the sin is the one that can throw the stone. And he who sits on 

that side with eight other members was part of the major deficit 

this province has and will be paying and will be much larger than 

the deficit we have had during rougher times. During good times, 

they spent and spent the money; they took the money away from 

people as they put it into pension plans. They didn’t put anything 

away. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They didn’t put it into pension plans 

either. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — They didn’t put it into pension plans either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the past serviced debt which must be paid is 

$2,115,363,294. That’s for past service. And if we continue to 

match, as we have been doing, we will not see, which they left us 

with, the future of $898,597,130 of deficit built up, which if 

you’re following their plan would have built. But fortunately, the 

former minister of Finance and the present Minister of Finance 

are putting funds in so hope that deficit would not build. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just on that point alone, as the member from 

Qu’Appelle has said earlier in his speech, if they would have left 

money behind to just grow revenue and interest on terms deposits 

in a credit union or any one of those organizations, it would have 

looked after these problems. But no, Mr. Speaker, they spent the 

money like a drunken  

sailor on shore leave, and that’s why we have a 2,115,363,294 

past service deficit and if it wasn’t for the foresight of our two 

ministers of Finance, we would have also built another 

898,597,130. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point that I am making is that when the NDP 

were defeated they left this province with a 3 billion deficit built 

in the pension plans. They built a deficit . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I should answer the 

member from Regina North West. His comments would suggest 

that the hidden deficit of ours, I just read to you, it was over $3 

billion, plus the deficit, that when we took power they left a 3 

billion plus, plus . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .No, no in the 

pension funds. The 3 billion basically in the pensions plus the 

billions of dollars that they had left in the equity in the Crowns. 

But remember when you talk about Crowns, there was equity to 

balance but they had took the equity and spent it and brought our 

deficit further in the hole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I was just going to touch on some 

of the numbers. Basically there is an employee saving account 

which they have never done the proper thing with. There’s the 

labour service retirement pension which they have never done the 

proper thing with when they were around prior to 1976. They 

have not done the proper thing with the teachers’ pension, 

judges’ pensions, anti-tuberculosis pensions, Saskatchewan 

Transport Company pensions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 

you’d come to public accounts once or twice, Mr. Member, who 

you are on public accounts, more than once or twice, you would 

know about these because there were all tabled in public accounts 

but I realize . . . The liquor board pensions and the workers’ 

compensation pensions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I’m trying to say is, there is a deficit of over 3 

billion in the pensions . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the members’ pensions? 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Yes, the members’ pension is also about $16 

million in deficit. There’s pension deficits for over $3 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. They have taken the Crown corporations and mortgaged 

them during their years as government — in fact, mortgaged one 

over 100 per cent of what that corporation was worth and 

committed future debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those were during the good years, the years when 

money was flowing. And the only thing they did was buy things 

like used holes in the ground. Farm land, they took it away from 

people — and that of course, when you want to talk about farm 

land purchasing, Mr. Speaker, you have to go back to the Regina 

Manifesto and refer to. That was the way they intended to own 

the province. They believed that they should own every business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on to one other topic today. Mr. 

Speaker, what I must do here is quote a speech of mine in this 

House, April 23rd, 1980. Now why would I go back to 1980 for 

a speech? Well in those days, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan built buildings and they put a value on them of a 

dollar, and so forth, but they didn’t charge departments rent. 

What they  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

370 

 

 

did is say, oh, in Yorkton you’ve got so many square feet and in 

Uranium City you’ve got so many, and Vonda, in St. Walburg, 

and Stanley Mission, in Pelly. Be they the Department of 

Highways construction shops or be they the Sturdy Stone 

Building in Saskatoon, no department paid rent. What happened 

is everything was absorbed in government services — everything 

was absorbed in government services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in April 23rd of 1980, the former minister of 

government services and Labour and I got in a debate. And the 

member from Estevan, Mr. Larter, and I were also in the debate. 

But what Mr. Snyder said . . . Sorry, what the member from 

Moose Jaw said on page 2145 of April 23rd: “We don’t charge 

consumer affairs. This bill is paid directly . . .” And he goes on 

to say how it’s paid by government services, and so forth. All I 

am trying to say is with the new Crown that will be put together, 

for the first time we will know the honest truth of what it really 

cost for a department. 

 

(1115) 

 

Now what’s happened in other provinces where they have gone 

to this formula that says, department manager . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You know the member from Pelly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is chirping from his seat. I remember the Pelly 

by-election when I was there, and it was the only time that a man 

was quoted in a newspaper as saying, why do you vote for the 

NDP? The comment was, I vote for the NDP because they pay 

me not to work. That’s what was said; it was the headline in a 

newspaper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what you did. That’s 

what you did. That’s what the voters in Pelly said when they were 

voting for that member — they pay me not to work; that’s why 

I’m voting for him. And there was a picture of the man with the 

big trucks in the newspaper. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sit down. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — You know, the member, from his seat, says, 

sit down; yet he forgot that his own member took the whole day 

yesterday and didn’t allow anybody else in. There’s 64 members 

in this Chamber, and every member has the right to speak, but 

your members don’t want to let our members speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I started to say . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I 

started to say, Mr. Speaker, is, with this new system, the Health 

department, the Highways department, Social Services 

department, all departments will show in their estimates what the 

cost of all that space they use is. 

 

Now what’s happened in the province of Manitoba, British 

Columbia, where they have done some of this? Do you know that 

most of those big, lavish offices have got smaller? Because they 

chose. They wanted more people rather than more space. And so 

people got to work rather than more space. So what’s happened 

is, the governments have given more service to the people and 

less service to some of their larger offices for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was going to — if I would have had the 

opportunity to speak yesterday, but the member from Regina 

Centre chose to monopolize the day — I would go  

through some of the departments explaining what it would mean. 

But being that this is the . . . I have several of my colleagues I 

would like to get into debate, I will refrain from doing that. 

 

All I will say is to the minister: read, if he wishes, the debate of 

April 23, 1980, government services estimates, where we 

discussed the value of putting a value on space so everybody pays 

their way and you don’t hide in somebody else’s budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously you can tell I’m going to be supporting 

the budget, because I believe the budget started along the way 

that it should go, for two or three reasons. First of all, it’s starting 

to recognize the problem with the pension plans by putting funds 

in. Next of all, it’s starting to recognize that office space in a 

building is worth something. It isn’t just worth a dollar; you must 

put an honest value on it for the people of Saskatchewan. Second 

of all, it addresses the future of Saskatchewan by building on the 

strengths of Saskatchewan for the future of this province. 

 

And yes, it might have a deficit, Mr. Speaker. But why does it 

have a deficit versus the other kind of deficit that I spoke of at 

the start? It has a deficit when it says, we will put the bank roll 

of our province to assist our primary producers, our farmers. It 

says, we will use the bank roll of this province and the credit 

rating and the borrowing power of this province to make sure that 

if our primary sector is safe, then our people in the cities will 

have jobs, our transportation will have jobs. And every time, if 

we have to prop anything up, you prop up your prime sector 

because it is the engine of progress. It causes everything else to 

go. 

 

The members cry, fix the highways. You need money to do that. 

And what you need is the economy moving. Their way of 

economy-moving is: government does everything and only 

government can do everything. Our way is saying: the 

government, the private sector, the people, together we work; 

together we benefit; together our province grows. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier, there was a deficit left by 

the former government. He whose house is clean can throw 

stones. And even the WCC’s house isn’t clean because they’re 

already announcing promises that nobody could live with or pay 

for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’ve just said, as I said a moment ago, I will 

be supporting this budget. And the reason I’m supporting this 

budget is very straightforward. It looks to the future for 

Saskatchewan; it looks for the future for the people of 

Saskatchewan; and it takes us upon the road to become one of the 

greatest province in this country. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

definitely will support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: —Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 

great deal of pleasure today to enter into the budget debate. 

 

First of all, I’d like to congratulate my colleague, the  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

371 

 

 

Minister of Finance, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, on 

the fine job and the great amount of effort which I’m sure that he 

and his staff put into drawing up this budget. 

 

In talking today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are several areas I’d 

like to talk on. First of all I’d like to touch a little bit on 

leadership, because I think that’s something that is essential that 

we talk about in this House and that the people of this province 

talk about. I think it’s definitely one of the reasons that I am here 

today as a member of this legislature, is the leadership of our 

Premier, the Hon. Grant Devine, the member from Estevan. 

Because you have to think about the potential of this province 

when you offer yourself up as a member to be elected to this 

legislature. Because if you don’t think about potential and about 

growth, then what are you doing here as an elected member of 

this legislature? 

 

I think our Premier is the epitome of someone who thinks about 

growth and potential of this province and where it can go and 

where the people of this province can go. And I think that’s the 

main reason I’m here. I think it really came home to me last 

summer. 

 

My high school had a 75th anniversary and I looked around at 

that class of 128 that graduated with me in 1969. You know, after 

three or four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you couldn’t find hardly 

any of that 128 in the province of Saskatchewan. It made you 

start to wonder and it made you start to think, why, under a 

previous Liberal administration, and after a long haul of the 

previous NDP administration, that none of my graduating class 

were in this province. And it’s one of the things that the Premier 

always talks about, about providing the opportunity for people to 

come home to our province and prosper and work at jobs and 

raise their families. 

 

So anyway, last summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had this 75th 

anniversary celebration at Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw. And 

as I got looking around the room and meeting my former 

class-mates, it was amazing the number of them that had come 

home to Saskatchewan since 1982 — people who had come 

home and started up their own small business, or come home and 

got into the family business, or had come home to the family 

farm. 

 

And it really made you think, Mr. Speaker, and it made you 

know, that the things that the Premier of this province has been 

talking about for the last four years are starting to work. Because 

it’s growth, it’s potential, it’s development, and it’s moving 

ahead. And it’s having the right attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because attitude is 90 per cent of doing things. Once you’ve got 

your attitude straight, you can move ahead. 

 

And you know, I’ve heard members around this Chamber from 

the opposite side knock the growth and the potential and the 

development which we’ve been trying to put forward in this 

province. And they say, times are tough; you shouldn’t be doing 

that. You should be cancelling these projects. That’s exactly the 

time that you show the confidence; that’s exactly the time that 

you move ahead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when things are against 

you. You don’t stop. You keep moving. 

When I hear that people in this Chamber knock something like 

the Rafferty-Alameda dam system in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan, it really makes me wonder what they’re doing 

here. They’ve only got to go back 50 years ago when that whole 

area down there was dried out, when there was no cattle feed, 

when there was no water anywhere for anything. And the fact 

that we can get another country to come in here and invest 

millions of dollars to help us solve a 50-year-old problem, to me 

is development and growth and potential. 

 

When I think about a pulp-mill that has been a drag on the 

province, on the taxpayer of this province, for years and years 

and years, and some company wishes to come in here and 

become a good corporate citizen and invest hundreds of millions 

of dollars and hundreds of jobs to make that thing go, and expand 

it, and get out into the world market-place where we know that 

the product can be sold, and people in this Chamber decry that 

type of development. And I wonder why. 

 

And then I think of an upgrader — an upgrader for our oil, an 

upgrader that will supply fuel to Saskatchewan farmers and 

Saskatchewan families. And yesterday we had the news that a 

large international chemical and fertilizer firm wishes to come 

along and marry in with that upgrader and provide fertilizer 

products to farmers in Saskatchewan — something that we’ve 

never had before. And yet I hear negatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I hear negatives from that side of the floor. 

 

Any time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have a fertilizer plant 

within 15 miles of my farm and I’m not having to get fertilizer 

from Medicine Hat or Alberta or Pocatello, Idaho, or Toronto, 

Ontario — that has got to be positive. It’s growth, it’s 

development, and it’s potential for the farmer in this province. 

And yet people in this Chamber decry that type of development, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wonder why. What are their motives? 

Why stop? 

 

And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel so good about being 

here and supporting a budget that is on track. When I look at 

agriculture, my industry, how I make my living, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I see the agriculture budget doubled for this year. I 

see an ag development that talks about irrigation and talks about 

research; that talks about moving ahead in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It talks about an ag equity corp and the members 

opposite say, ah, funny, baloney. For the first time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a government in this province has tried to form a vehicle 

where people can invest money in this province and in 

agriculture. For the first time we’re setting up a vehicle for 

people, Saskatchewan people, to invest in the primary and the 

number one industry in this province — agriculture. 

 

And that is far different, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than a government 

which said, we will buy that resource; we will buy that resource, 

and we as a government will control it, but we do not create one 

more job. We do not create one more dollar for investment in this 

province. All we do is put people in a virtual serfdom situation. 

 

And I really wonder when I look at the members opposite here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the member from Shaunavon, the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg,  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

372 

 

 

the member from Pelly. These are people that were here in the 

good times. They represent agricultural ridings, rural ridings. I 

wonder what was going through their head as money in this 

province was flowing in from our resources and it was being used 

for various things, but not one dime was put away for an 

eventuality, which comes upon this province in regular cycles — 

whether it be drought, grasshoppers, low commodity prices. 

 

(1130) 

 

If you’ve been in the farming game for very long, you know that 

this thing happens. And when you’re a province that has 40 per 

cent of the arable land in this country, and you’re a province that 

has agriculture as your number one industry, why, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in those 11 years, was no provision made to set 

something aside for that number one industry? Not one dime; not 

one set of planning. Was there an ag equity corp put in place? 

No, there was land bank. Was there an ag development fund for 

irrigation and research? No. Was there a new ag college proposed 

because that is the number one industry in this province? No. And 

that is why I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members 

opposite have such a low credibility rating in rural Saskatchewan 

right now. I suppose you can excuse a few of the members 

because they know very little about that industry, even though 

they like to talk a lot. 

 

It tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have . . . we just have to 

not stop thinking of growth in this province. We have to continue 

because you don’t stop rural gasification just like that. They 

disagree with that program. 

 

You know, if I had to stop the programs that are under way in my 

constituency right now, after 1,300 kilometres of gas line was put 

in, people would say to me, you’re absolutely crazy. What are 

you doing out there? Because that gasification has significantly 

lowered the costs to my agricultural producers. And you don’t 

stop; you use your resources and you keep moving ahead. 

 

You don’t stop improving Sask Power and SaskTel delivery to 

our rural residents. You go ahead with buried lines so that our 

people out in rural Saskatchewan have the same abilities, they 

have the same opportunities as those that our urban brethren have 

enjoyed for many years. 

 

And I also in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, am very pleased 

at the route taken as far as generating extra revenue, because 

when you tax banks and you tax large corporations, I think you’re 

fitting in very well with the middle ground in this province — 

with the farmer, with the small-business man, with the people in 

the middle-income brackets — who we, through our various tax 

reductions and taking the tax off of various things, have helped 

that middle-income group and the lower-income groups in our 

province. 

 

I can only say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that out in my constituency, 

out in rural Saskatchewan, this budget has been very well 

accepted. It’s been classed as a good budget by the farmers of 

this province. It’s been classed as a good budget by the 

small-business men in my constituency. And it’s been classed as 

a good budget by  

the people in the small towns in my constituency. And for that 

reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 

to support that budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the 

member from Morse. Order! Is the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg referring those derogatory comments to 

the Chair? Is he? I would caution the member to watch the 

language, the parliamentary language, in the House, the 

neutrality of the Chair, and the decorum of the House. 

 

I ask the member again from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: were 

those comments made towards the Chair? 

 

The member from Morse. 

 

Mr. Martens: — As I began my remarks today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to point out . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. A point of order has been asked 

for. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the rules provide the Speaker 

recognizes the first person on his feet. The last person on his feet 

between those two was the member for Morse. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I may refer the member from Regina 

Centre, the rules state as of page 99 in Beauchesne’s, not the first 

one to his feet, and I may read to you, but the one “that catches 

the speaker’s eye.” 

 

Order. Order. If I may continue with the ruling. First of all, 

“There is not official list: . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Order. 

Order. 

 

There is no official list of speakers with an order of 

precedence in the House of Commons. Any member who 

wishes to speak may rise and endeavour to catch the 

speaker’s eye. 

 

. . . (inaudible interjections) . . . If you are questioning the 

neutrality of the Chair in terms of allocation of time, in terms of 

numbers of members of this House from the three various parties, 

I will be more than happy to invite the Speaker back . . . 

(inaudible interjections) . . . Call back the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to, 

before I go into the main part of my remarks today . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Please be seated, member. I call 

back the Speaker to rule on your point of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’d like to speak to that motion before the 

Speaker returns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member is out of order. Please be 

seated. 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

373 

 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, this morning just before you 

returned, the member from Thunder Creek concluded his 

remarks. At that point in time the member from Pelly and the 

member from Regina North West rose quickly in their seats. The 

Deputy Speaker appeared to see both of them. A second or two 

later the member from Morse stood up. The Deputy Speaker 

looked at the member from Morse and recognized him. It 

appeared clear, I think, to an impartial observer that the Deputy 

Speaker had in his mind a prearranged order of speakers, and I 

suggested to him that was contrary to the rules of order. He then 

said if we didn’t like his ruling, he’d call you back, and indeed 

he did. But I would ask for a ruling on the matter which occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It’s difficult for the Chair to come back and say 

who was first on his feet, as you can all appreciate. What you 

sometimes see from your chair and what you see from this chair 

are not the same thing . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Order, 

order please. Order! Order. When I’m on my feet you’re to give 

me the opportunity to speak. 

 

I believe that if the member says the person in the Chair saw this 

person first, then there is no point of order. That’s what he tells 

me, that that’s who he saw first, then that’s who he has given the 

right to speak. There will be opportunities for others to speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — As I begin my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that I have 

been to my feet four times in the Assembly this morning. I know, 

and members of the opposition know, on at least two occasions I 

was the first one to my feet. I am difficult to miss, and I suggest 

that if he hasn’t seen me rise this morning, possibly he should 

have his eyes checked because I have been up on every occasion. 

And I would ask you to rule fairly for the opposition and allow 

us into the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a new point of order but the same 

point of order. The member from Morse as recognized. When he 

has completed speaking, someone else will be recognized. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to, as I begin 

my remarks today, talk a little bit about some of the things that 

have been in the news, and I want to just outline a little bit of 

them. What I want to say is this, there was news in the 

Leader-Post the other day that I thought has fairly significant 

impact in my constituency, and that is that Ottawa puts a hefty 

duty on beef imports. And for the people in the south-west part 

of Saskatchewan, that has a fairly significant impact. 

 

And I want to commend the Minister of Agriculture for the kinds 

of things that he has done in relation to the federal government. 

This, in my opinion, indicates some of the  

kinds of things that our Premier has put together, as it relates to 

the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the member 

from Quill Lakes to withdraw the statement that he just made 

about the Chair. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — What statement, Mr. Speaker, are you alleging 

that I made in respect to the Chair? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member was just saying that the Chair was 

unfair. And I’m asking you to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to know exactly the words that you 

are alleging that I have said that’s an affront to the Chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — From his seat, straight at me sitting here in the 

Chair, and saying that the Chair was unfair. And I ask the 

member to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I was referring to what appeared to 

be unfairness by the previous Deputy Speaker, not yourself. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That’s still the Chair., and I ask the member to 

withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I think we have an entitlement to enter into the 

debate also, and I find it very difficult that during the day . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have asked you to withdraw one statement. 

This is not a time for debate, but rather a time for correction, and 

I ask you to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I am prepared to withdraw that statement. I 

would very much like to know, for clarification purposes, what I 

am particularly alleged to have said that I’m withdrawing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member knows what he said — what he 

said — and he called it straight to me. And it’s not on the record, 

and I know that. But you are stating that the Chair is unfair, and 

that cannot be allowed in this Assembly. And I’m asking the 

member to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — It’s your interpretation that I have alleged that 

you have been unfair, and I withdraw it if that’s your perception, 

but I’ll say that I did not perceive it to be that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t ask for that kind of withdrawal. I ask 

for an unequivocal withdrawal. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll withdraw it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to indicate to the House here today that 

I am pleased with the response of the Minister of Agriculture, our 

Premier . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to, again, Mr. Speaker, ask . . .  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

374 

 

 

We cannot carry on the business of this House with this much 

hollering and yelling. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There isn’t any business. We’re now 

going to close her down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’ve been shut out. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member that has been recognized has the 

right to speak, and I’m going to ask you that you maintain some 

decorum. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to indicate to 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to caution the 

members that we can’t have this kind of order — and for the last 

time I’m cautioning you. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to indicate to this House today that I am 

pleased with the way the Minister of Agriculture, the former 

minister of agriculture, the member from Weyburn, has helped 

the livestock industry in the province of Saskatchewan. We have 

for a long time, Mr. Speaker, put the emphasis on the grains 

sector in agriculture, and rightfully so. We have 40 per cent of 

the arable land in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the concept that grain is the only part of 

the agriculture sector that needs to be recognized. And in dealing 

with the problems that arose when the European Economic 

Community put the emphasis on the kinds of systems that they 

have over there, with supply management, that the people over 

there were subsidizing their beef to large amounts, the Canadian 

government announced that they were going to put a duty on 

Danish and Irish beef. 

 

And for the people in Saskatchewan I think that’s a very good 

thing to have done. It’s going to be there for 120 days, and I want 

to commend the Minister of Agriculture, the former minister of 

agriculture, for their role in encouraging the federal government 

to do it. It is just, I believe, one more example of the kinds of 

things our provincial government can do in conjunction with the 

federal government. 

 

The Canadian Cattlemen’s Association were looking for a 

40-cents-a-pound duty tariff on the cattle moving into Canada. I 

think this even surpassed their estimation of the impact of the . . . 

of the negative impact that it has in the country of Canada. 

 

I know that when the agriculture caucus went to speak with the 

federal government, we did have a meeting with Mr. Wise at the 

time, and we indicated to him that we were going to very much 

appreciate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I have asked the members to 

maintain some decorum and I hear nothing but shouting, and I’m 

asking for order. 

Mr. Martens: — We were going to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture for Canada to put some emphasis on the beef industry 

in relation to the kinds of things that were happening as far as the 

EEC moving cattle into Canada. It has, in my opinion, been a 

very good thing for the people of Canada to have a government 

that is prepared to listen. 

 

And I know, as after the federal budget came out, the Minister of 

Agriculture for Canada was in Swift Current and we discussed 

this to some extent, and I appreciate the amount of work that he’s 

done there. 

 

I want to go on to some other things that I think are of some 

significance. One of those things . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to caution the member for Regina 

North West that this is the last time I’m going to ask you to be 

quiet this morning. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to just go into a little bit of background 

in one other thing, and that has to do with the venture capital 

corporations in regard to labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’ve also cautioned the member for Shaunavon. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to just indicate to the House that in the 

past week we have had some people into our agriculture caucus 

meetings, and one of those meetings we had was a group of 

fellows who worked — and there happened to be a lady there, 

too — who worked for the provincial government. And they were 

concerned about the problem that arose when they were asked to 

pay a little bit more into the SGEU union. The one gentleman 

there indicated that in this month’s cheque that he got, the union 

had taken off for dues $90. We did a calculation while they were 

sitting there and on a 12-month basis that would be $1,080 a year, 

Mr. Speaker, and that, in his opinion, was not what he wanted to 

see happen with his money. He indicated to me that there were 

275 or up to 300 people that were in the same category as he was 

and that represents a volume of dollars of $300,000 a year. I just 

wanted to read a little bit that appeared in the Star-Phoenix here 

on March 28 of ’86. 

 

And the government has gone a step further with a venture 

capital endeavour. Offering investment in venture capital 

corporations to the labour sector was a gutsy move, 

although it may be a wasted one. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that what we have here is a situation where 

people would like to do something like that but they feel a little 

bit of intimidation by the union and its representative. It goes on 

here: 

 

The response from the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union president indicates organized labour is 

not interested in investing in provincial business. It’s not for 

us to risk members’ hard-earned dues and funds in venture 

capital issues. Financing strikes is obviously considered 

more productive. 

 

If you take a look at what the union tried to do and what they did 

after the agreement was reached, they’ve lost a  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

375 

 

 

lot of support in the various areas in my constituency for the 

kinds of things that they have done. 

 

I want to just preamble a little bit about the things that were there 

in the provincial government when we took office in 1982. What 

did we have then, Mr. Speaker? We had at that time interest rates 

that were going up. They had been going and escalating from 

1979, ’80, ’81 and ’82, and the people in my constituency were 

asking, where do we go for help? What do we do for help in this 

area? Homes were being threatened. I recall the former 

government indicated that they would save the home. They put a 

bill in, froze the opportunity for people to take it away. It wasn’t 

altogether bad, but that was not addressing the root of the 

problem. 

 

The root of the problem, Mr. Speaker, was the interest rate was 

escalating at such a rate that the people couldn’t afford to make 

their payments anymore and that was what the problem was. And 

when we came in in 1982 we did that. We fixed that at thirteen 

and a quarter per cent interest and we are doing that today, and 

we’re doing that on into 1988. And I think that that’s an 

important part of what we have as a provincial government here, 

as a Conservative provincial government. And I appreciate the 

Minister of Finance for the kinds of things he did in that area. 

 

Home owners were not the only ones that were having a problem. 

Agriculture was suffering from the same sting that was going on 

from ’79, ’80, ’81 and ’82, and that, Mr. Speaker, was a problem 

that we had. As the interest rates were going up, the cost of 

production was going up. We had, in 1973, an inflation cycle that 

was matched by probably none in the history of this country, and 

that inflation cycle caused serious problems to occur in 

agriculture. The interest rate was causing a problem to all sectors 

of agriculture, and that didn’t matter whether you were talking 

about the farmer, whether you were talking about the agriculture 

business sector, or whether you were talking about the bulk 

dealers, whatever. They were all affected by the costs of the 

interest rate. 

 

As we go along in the time from 1981-82 we saw, as we came 

into power in 1982, that something was going to have to be done. 

And that is a part of the programs that the Minister of Finance 

has dealt with in this budget, and we’ve done it in previous 

budgets. I’m going to address that a little later. 

 

One of the key things that was pointed out in dealing with the 

kinds of things that happened in my constituency in 1979, ’80 

and ’81, we had serious, serious problems in the oil sector, far 

more serious than what they are today, Mr. Speaker. And one of 

those things is they did not have confidence in the government to 

provide the economic environment and the climatic conditions 

for the oil industry to grow. In my constituency that is extremely, 

extremely important. 

 

As I travel through the southern part of my seat, down towards 

Shaunavon, the farmers told me this year — this winter — they 

told me: don’t allow the oil sector in this province to go down, 

for some very simple reasons. We do not want to be in control of 

the Canadian — or we do not want to allow the overseas, 

middle-east oil  

companies to determine how the oil in Saskatchewan was going 

to be developed. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have a serious 

problem in our oil industry today, and it’s recognized. The 

Minister of Energy just mentioned that today in question period. 

But we have, I believe, Mr. Speaker, a serious problem, and it’s 

being addressed. 

 

The second thing I want to point out is that at the time when they 

were doing it they were addressing it from the back in. What they 

did was they allowed people to drill dry holes and they were 

taking those dry holes and they were giving them the opportunity 

to hire people they didn’t need. And that was causing a serious, 

serious problem in 1979, ’80 and ’81. 

 

What we have initiated in the province, and the Minister of 

Energy was in my constituency just the past week, talking about 

the various things as it relates to the oil industry — and one of 

the concerns that was raised by these people, the small 

independent service kinds of people in my constituency, is: we 

don’t want the government to put their finger into this business. 

And they said that more than once, of all of the people that we 

had there to that meeting, be very, very careful in what you do in 

the oil industry because we don’t want to have the government 

involved in it. 

 

And so that investment that was being taken out of the province 

of Saskatchewan at the time when we took over is prepared to sit 

and wait to see what goes on as far as the international oil scene 

is concerned. And they recognize that it is not our problem. They 

recognize that it is far more serious than that. 

 

I want to just indicate one other thing here about the health care 

program in the province of Saskatchewan, and that has to do with 

the nursing home construction. I have been involved in municipal 

politics before I become involved in the legislature, and one of 

the things that I noticed as I was reeve of the municipality, I had 

people coming to me asking to have the council consider 

developing a nursing home or senior level 4 care facility in the 

town of Cabri. 

 

That was between 1973 and 1978 when I was involved in the 

municipality, and in that time frame we have what I would see as 

a classic example of what we have with a former administration. 

They placed an emphasis on telling people about what they were 

going to do, but they never put their money where their mouth 

was. And they even decided that they were going to put a 

moratorium on nursing home facilities in this province. The 

result was that people who have traditionally worked in that area 

through the hospital board, the chairman of the board, has time 

after time after time and continually, through these years, had a 

glimmer of hope that maybe we could some day get a nursing 

home or a level 4 facility in the town of Cabri. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I am happy that they have already begun the 

planning process for next year as to how they’re going to 

integrate that into their hospital. And I think that those are the 

kinds of things that are very important. 

 

Maybe I didn’t hear it correctly, but the Leader of the  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

376 

 

 

Opposition indicated it wouldn’t be in his budget. That’s the kind 

of thing, I think, that we need to emphasize here, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s very important. They will do the same thing again if 

they’re elected. They will have a moratorium on nursing home 

care. And I think it’s extremely important that we recognize that, 

as people of Saskatchewan. That’s what makes us different. We 

listen, and we do something about it. 

 

I want to go on to another area that deals with the change of the 

attitude of this government in its relationship to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1200) 

 

I believe that there is a very important feature here in our 

examining what is necessary, and we did that last year in our 

budget — the four pillars in our budget. They addressed 

agriculture, they addressed education. And that’s what I want to 

deal with a little bit of pointed things. We have the development 

of various facilities in Saskatoon: the geology building that is 

continuing to be constructed; we have the addition to the 

University Hospital; we have the addition to the facilities there 

of the agriculture building, and as that is expanded into what I 

believe could be a potential for an extremely important function 

in agriculture. 

 

We have travelled the province for three weeks, Mr. Speaker, 

dealing with various sectors of agriculture, and one of the things 

that came up very, very strongly was research. It was extremely 

important. Everywhere we went, people talked about research. 

They said it is absolutely necessary. And here I think is where 

you need to tie it into education. 

 

The research is absolutely necessary. We need to encourage, I 

believe in a far greater way, a better method of providing 

counselling to high school students, to people who are capable of 

providing the education and counselling direction for people to 

enter the agriculture research field. And we need a far greater 

expansion of that. The people in the province realize that, and I 

think it’s extremely important. They need to have that kind of 

initiative to tell them: look, agriculture is the driving force of this 

economy in this province and I think we need to take a serious 

look at how we motivate that. And one of those things is through 

education, and the other thing is through research. The total 

direction that we take has to be done in that direction because 

research will give this province the status it needs. 

 

One of those example of the kinds of things that research can do 

is the veterinary infectious disease organization which has 

initiated some of the international relationship of the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the member to withdraw that 

statement. We don’t allow that word. The member for Regina 

North West. I’m asking . . . You called “liars” across the floor. 

You’re saying they’re all liars. We don’t allow that in this House. 

Do you care to withdraw it? 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I think “admires” was mentioned, not “liars.” 

Mr. Speaker: — All right. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Admires and liars, just in case there’s been an 

oversight. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Withdraw the word “liars.” 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — And “admires.” I’ll withdraw them both. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to continue, Mr. Speaker, into the 

recognition of the people of Saskatchewan, into the two areas of 

research and education. Where do we go when we have serious 

problems in this province? We go back to the people and we ask 

them: which direction shall we take? 

 

In the very first budget that was introduced in this House, the 

Minister of Finance at that time decided that the people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Raise the point of order. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Yesterday 

in the debate, the member for Regina North used the word “liars,” 

and at that point, you didn’t ask him to withdraw it. Today the 

member from Regina North West is said to have used the same 

work, and you asked him to withdraw it. 

 

My point of order is one of clarification as well. Can you give a 

ruling whether we have one set of rules for the members of the 

governing party and one for the opposition? Or is it a rule that 

when people use the word “liars,” they are to withdraw it; and if 

that is so, would you ask the member for Regina North to now 

withdraw that remark, because everyone heard it yesterday? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the member is right that I didn’t ask 

the member yesterday, and I perhaps should have. It’s a word that 

should not be used. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do it now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the members, when I’m on my feet, give 

me a chance to complete what I’m saying? In the future any 

members who use the word will be asked to withdraw. 

 

An Hon. Member: — If they sit on this side. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I said any members. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I’m going to continue, Mr. Speaker. The 

budget that we began with in this House asked for a mid-course 

correction in relation to the changes in direction that this province 

needed. 

 

One of the things, I think, that was very important was that the 

implications of the gas tax removal. I think that was a very key 

point in developing the strategy that was necessary, in taking the 

amount of taxes away from the people and putting it right back 

into their hands to use it wherever they wanted. And we have had 

that kind of initiative develop through the past four years, and I 

think  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

377 

 

 

it’s a very important feature. 

 

The mortgage protection program that we had was a part of the 

development of the stability in the home mortgage market-place, 

and I think that the 50,000 families who receive that, and are 

going to receive that till 1988 — that security is very well placed. 

 

The other thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that our 

farm purchase program has given an extremely important 

initiative to the people of my constituency. And I just want to 

indicate that we have had a lot of benefit in my constituency in 

the past three years that we’ve had it, and $1.5 million has gone 

into my constituency on that very thing — that we lowered the 

rate from whatever it was down to the 8 per cent, and that has 

been a $1.5 million benefit in my constituency. I think for the 

people of my constituency we want to thank the Finance minister 

for continuing that program and that is a very important benefit 

in agriculture. And it doesn’t only impact in mine, it impacts 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to deal with the increase in benefits to the people of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to health care, the nursing homes in 

the province of Saskatchewan that are being built today. I just 

want to use the example of the one in Saskatoon where they are 

building one facility that will give us the kinds of places for 

seniors to spend their last time here. In that one development we 

have more than what they did in five years. I would expect that 

that is a very important feature of the kinds of things that we want 

to do. Saskatoon is very, very appreciative of the fact that they 

are doing that. It’s not only in my constituency where they’re 

doing it, but they’re doing it throughout the province. 

 

I thought there was some significance when the president of the 

University of Regina here was asked to speak in a number of 

states in the United States and various provinces in the country 

of Canada in relation to the kinds of things that we are doing with 

providing a direction for the budget in university education — in 

facilities, in the kinds of things we’re doing in relation to program 

development. I think those are the kinds of things that are very 

important. 

 

The emphasis as I’ve discussed here has two things that I think 

we want to look at. One was the opportunity and one was the 

protection that dealt with the kinds of things that were available 

to the people of Saskatchewan. I think those two things are very, 

very important. 

 

I just want to go to the opportunity side. We created a very 

positive climate for growth, Mr. Speaker, in relation to this 

economic development, job creation. And we heard that this 

morning in the question period about the kinds of things that our 

job creation program is doing. We heard it from the Minister of 

Urban Affairs; we heard it from the Deputy Premier. I think that 

those are keys in providing an optimistic climate for us to 

develop the kinds of things that we need to have as a growth 

sector in this province. 

 

We, as government on this side of the House . . . And the Minister 

of Finance’s budget pointed to the fact that we need to have a 

development of the kinds of things for opportunities, for young 

people, for older people to have  

the kinds of things that they would like to have in their life-style 

— and the opportunity to work is one of those places. 

 

We have done something else. We have built on our natural 

strengths. I just want to point out how we’ve done that in 

agriculture. The research side is being emphasized. We put, in 

the soil testing lab for example, in this province, $400,000 for 

construction. The other thing that we did is we put in $100,000 

per year for the kind of impetus needed for the development of a 

better construction, and also for the employment in that area — 

$100,000 for the people of Saskatoon to have in their city. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the small business in my 

constituency, and I think it’s extremely important. They have 

done an awful lot of the kinds of things that are a benefit to the 

constituency that I live in. I have about 13 or 14 small 

communities in my constituency, and those communities, Mr. 

Speaker, provide a backdrop for a number of things. They 

provide a backdrop for  community involvement as it relates to a 

social climate, an economic climate. 

 

And I believe that the opportunity that we have given to these 

people as it relates to the 8 per cent money on loans up to, getting 

it up to $100,000, I think this gives an opportunity for those small 

businesses — the IGA stores, the other food stores, the small 

shops that we have, the machinery dealers out there, the repair 

shops, the bulk dealers. 

 

I think all of those people recognize the importance of that. They 

don’t only recognize the importance of that, Mr. Speaker. The 

farm purchase program, I believe, provided in this province one 

of the first corner-stones of protecting the family farm. 

 

One of the . . . The second most important feature in the budget 

announced by the Minister of Finance was the 6 per cent money 

at $25 an acre. And that, Mr. Speaker, those small businesses in 

my constituency really, really appreciate that. 

 

It provided an opportunity for the farmers in my constituency 

who were affected by drought to have a time when they can say, 

look, we can pay my bill to my co-op or my Imperial Oil agency 

or my Shell dealer, and that’s the kind of thing that’s important 

They had the opportunity to do it and we provided it. 

 

And the 47 to 50,000 farms in Saskatchewan who have the 

opportunity to use that really, really appreciate it. And as we went 

around the province on our cabinet committee, they told us that 

in a very, very definite way. 

 

(1215) 

 

I want to just point out another thing that’s good for small 

business, Mr. Speaker, is the pension plan — the pension plan 

that we have announced that will give an opportunity for these 

small businesses who have not been able to afford the chance to 

provide a pension for their employees; for their employees or for 

their employees to do it themselves — or for their own pension. 

A lot of these small-business men have not been able to do that. 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

378 

 

 

The other thing that I think is extremely important in this pension 

is that part-time employees can finally have an opportunity to 

take advantage of a pension. And do you know who it affects 

most, Mr. Speaker? It affects the women in this province 

probably more than anyone else. And I think that that’s an 

extremely important function. It’s recognizing the need of 

developing this kind of a positive attitude in relation to the small 

business in my constituency. But it also addresses itself, Mr. 

Speaker, to the point where the small farmer, the big farmer, can 

have an opportunity to provide an additional kind of a pension 

plan for himself. And I think that is extremely, extremely 

important. 

 

I want to take a look at some other things in the small-business 

side of the agenda that we placed in our budget. And I want to 

take the opportunity to say that the people in the agricultural 

sector are very pleased with the opportunity that we have in the 

venture capital corporation, placing it so that agriculture can be 

involved in it. We had the introduction of that Bill today in the 

House. I think that it’s extremely important that agriculture will 

deal with venture capital corporations in intensive livestock 

operations and in other places. And I think that’s an extremely 

important feature in what the Minister of Finance has provided 

for in our budget initiative. 

 

There are a couple of things that I want to add as it relates to 

things that are rather striking. And one of the things is this, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s finally quiet enough so that we can discuss this on 

a rational basis. 

 

An Hon. Member: — All the opposition is gone. 

 

Mr. Martens: — You’re right. It is. 

 

The exemption, Mr. Speaker, of the 5 per cent sales tax on E&H. 

I think I can only explain it this way. I went into a shop on 

Saturday after the budget, and of course there was Good Friday 

in between, and I bought myself a hat. And I said, look, how has 

business been in the last few days? He said, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I have done more business in the last two days, 

Thursday and Saturday, than I did in any day since the 1st of 

January. 

 

You know, as this thing impacts, as it goes across the province, 

you’re going to have more and more of this coming to light all 

the time. Because the east side of the province is going to have 

the people from Manitoba coming in to buy. The establishment 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Martens: — I’m going to list some of the things here, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think are important. I went down through 19 of 

them, but I want to point out before I do that: I think that the 

announcement yesterday by the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade, and the Premier, about the upgrader 

working in conjunction with the Sask Wheat Pool, Federated 

Co-op, and the company from France, I think is a step in the right 

direction that we need to take. 

 

That was another one of the things that we heard in that  

cabinet committee that we travelled around. You need to get a 

fertilizer plant in this province to reduce the prices. And that’s 

the kind of thing, I think, that is absolutely necessary. 

 

I’m just going to list these things as they deal with my 

constituency. As I said before, the exemption for E&H tax on 

clothing, I think, is an extremely important thing. The pension 

plan is an important thing for home-makers and all of those kinds 

of people who need it. The first-time home buyers, of $3,000, a 

grant for that. The provision of 8 per cent money for small 

business. I think that is an extremely important feature. The 

health expenditure increase in the budget as it relates to hospital 

facilities, as it relates to all of that building going on in Saskatoon 

— the university, the City Hospital, St. Paul’s Hospital — it’s a 

benefit to my constituency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re not doing it only up there; they’re 

doing it in my constituency too. Funding for elementary schools, 

and this is an extremely important part. In 1982 we had a school 

built in my constituency and it was at Stewart Valley. In 1986 

we’re going to have another school built and that’s in Neville, 

Saskatchewan. And there were children there who were in fire 

traps for 50 years because they didn’t have the proper facilities 

in dealing with the education. And I think it’s extremely 

important. And the other thing that I think is important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that those people have placed an emphasis on the 

community in relation to the school board. They have organized 

themselves into a community group to place an emphasis on the 

kinds of facilities that they build, and I think that that’s important. 

 

Agriculture. Agriculture has provided for this province some 

extremely important things, and I’ve mentioned some of them. 

But we’ve gone over what they ever expended by what we have 

increased in this year. And I think, Mr. Speaker, those are the 

kinds of things that we need to take a serious look. 

 

And I, Mr. Speaker, for one, and the people of my constituency, 

will be supporting the budget in the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

have the opportunity to get up and speak in this debate on the 

budget. Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that we have a government 

in this province that would use every method at their disposal to 

try and keep the opposition from speaking on this budget. 

 

Last night they adjourned the House when we could have been 

sitting and debating this budget that they say is so good. Today 

they wouldn’t give us the opportunity to get up and speak on it. 

They wouldn’t give us the opportunity to get up and speak on it 

until we are almost out of time. That is all they give us, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province know what 

kind of government this is. They have seen a government that is 

very close to what we have in this province, and they’ve seen it 

on TV the last couple of weeks. They’ve seen it going on in the 

Philippines. And  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

379 

 

 

now we have it here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say that the people of this 

province are not going to accept the kind of actions that this 

government has been using in this House, nor what they are doing 

to the people of this province.  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — One would hope that there’d be an election so 

that the people could voice their opinion and could decide who 

they want to run this province. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 

we’re going to see an election. This government is scared. They 

don’t have a Premier in this province that can make a decision 

and stick to it. He keeps changing his mind from day to day 

depending on what his pollster says. That is how they put 

together this budget, Mr. Speaker, and that is how they run the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Pelly, the good people of Pelly that 

I’m proud to represent, know what this government has been 

doing. They talk about all the good things that they are going to 

do but nobody will believe them because none of that has been 

happening. They have — deliberately, I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker — made sure that nothing, nothing at all in any of their 

programs, comes into my constituency. But that’s fine. The 

election is coming soon; the election is coming soon, whether it’s 

this week or this month, or next month, or three or four months 

from now, it is coming. And I know that people are confident that 

we will see a new government in this province and that then they 

will get some of the things that they rightly deserve in that 

constituency. That’s some of the building of their roads, the 

highways, the buildings, the nursing homes. All of those, Mr. 

Speaker, will eventually get built. They’ll eventually get built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about all the things that they are doing for 

farmers, because it appears that’s the only area that they are going 

after right now. They’re going after rural Saskatchewan thinking 

that they can give them a $25 loan, another debt, and somehow 

that’s going to buy them some votes. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in this province knows that an additional debt is not 

going to help. You cannot borrow yourself out of debt. And that’s 

all that this government is doing, providing more money that the 

people can borrow. And what do they do? Get deeper and deeper 

until there is no return. That is what this government is doing for 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about all the good things that they have done; they talk 

about a forward-looking Premier of this province. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, he is looking so far forward that he can’t even see 

what’s happening around him in this province. 

 

They say that the young farmers want to look ahead. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I agree, young farmers want to look ahead. Young 

farmers want to know what is going to happen to them, not only 

this year, but what the prospects are for next year, the year after 

that, and the year after that. That, Mr. Speaker, is what farmers 

want to know. They want to know what governments are going 

to do for them. 

We have put forward a program — part of a program, Mr. 

Speaker — that we think is going to help farmers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will have more help for farmers. There is no 

question about that. Farmers are important, farmers are important 

to this province as are many other people in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. But this government has not done anything of any 

significance that would turn around the economy in this province. 

What do we have? A $2 billion debt. That’s what they have given 

this province over four years — $2 billion; 2 billion in the 

consolidated fund. And as the member for North West says: it’s 

eight and a half. Well it’s 8.7, which is true. That is the total debt 

of this province; that what they have done. 

 

And now they’ve created another Crown corporation that they 

will be able to hide more debts in, a Crown corporation that they 

could borrow money through to try to cover up some of these 

promises they make, and have a debt there that won’t show up in 

a budget. That’s what this government is doing. They are trying 

to hide the debt, so they create another Crown corporation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been many things that this government 

could have done that would have helped. But no, they certainly 

did not do any of that. They have been the ones that have been 

promising and promising and promising. And now we see, four 

years after they’ve been in power, promise after promise, day in 

and day out, on projects that are never going to happen. 

 

The member for Morse was talking about the fertilizer plant in 

Regina. They’re going to tie this on to the heavy oil upgrader, an 

upgrader that’s not even there. There is nothing in the plans that 

I have seen yet that says that upgrader’s going to be up this year 

or next year. And what have they done? They have promised a 

fertilizer plant to be tied to that project. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that could be five years down the road, maybe 

10 years, before we see it. That is the kind of government we 

have. Nothing but promises, but promises that will never be kept 

because they haven’t kept any for four years, and they are not 

likely to keep all of those that they are promising on the eve of 

an election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the members has said that they would want 

government to stay out. The farmers and everybody wants 

government to stay off their backs, to get off their backs. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re not only on their backs right now, but 

they’re there and they’ve got both hands in the people’s pockets 

right now. That’s what this government is doing. 

 

(1230) 

 

When you’re paying over $200 million a year in interest, then 

that money has to come out of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

And every cent of that has to come out of the taxpayers. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is what this government has given to the people of 

Saskatchewan over four years — billions of dollars in debt and 

interest payments that the people of Saskatchewan can hardly 

afford to keep on paying anymore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also talk about all the unemployment  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

380 

 

 

they are creating — unemployment that does not seem to be 

visible anywhere. When we look at what the unemployment is 

today, what we have for unemployed people, it’s around over 

40,000 people. In ’82 it was only in the 20,000 range, now it’s 

40; it’s doubled. The same thing happened to welfare. We’ve got 

over 60,000 people on welfare. People, some of them that could 

be working, but the jobs are not there. 

 

The jobs are not there because this government would choose to 

bring in corporations and give them the resources of this 

province. Corporations like Manalta — Peter Pocklington that 

got $10 million for nothing of taxpayers’ money — Manalta that 

$145 million of a government-guaranteed loan which didn’t cost 

them any money. The taxpayer will be paying for it. The 

Weyerhaeuser, the big deal they’re bragging about now, with 

$248 million — doesn’t cost the company anything. The taxpayer 

will put up that money. That is what they are doing for the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they are saying that somehow this is supposed to be good 

for them. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you the people of 

Saskatchewan are not going to believe that. They will not believe 

it because they know that all these give-aways are costing them 

money. It has cost them money to give $300s of millions to the 

oil companies every year at a time when the oil companies were 

doing good, the price was high, and some of that money could 

have come back to the people of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they did not take that money and give it to the people. 

They gave it . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Under rule 14(3) it’s my duty to 

interrupt the debate and give the Minister of Finance the 

opportunity to close debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciated the comments of the member from Pelly. I think he 

was misinterpreting, though, what his constituents were saying. 

What they’re telling us is they didn’t get anything out there for 

10 years, and they’re prepared to elect a Conservative to be able 

to get something done for the constituency. I’m sure that the 

message will be given loud and clear to the hon. member in the 

days ahead. 

 

It’s been a very interesting budget debate, Mr. Speaker, because 

the opposition have been attempting to talk about everything 

except for one thing, Mr. Speaker: they’ve refused to talk about 

the budget. And I’ll tell you why they’ve refused to talk about 

the budget. I’ll tell you why they’ve refused to talk about it. I’ll 

tell you why they have gone a full week and a half now and never 

once asked the Minister of Finance a question about the budget. 

I’ll tell you: why they haven’t done that is because everybody 

else in the province of Saskatchewan except the little nine over 

there believe it’s a good budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Every group around the province believes 

it’s responsible. Even the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, which is 

certainly no friend of this government in most cases, Mr. 

Speaker, says in its  

editorial of March 28th that, “On balance, given the economic 

situation Saskatchewan finds itself in right now, it was a 

responsible approach.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, press coverage, and comments 

by those affected by the budget, headlines: “Workers get a 

chance to create more jobs.” For the first time in Saskatchewan’s 

history the trade union movement has a challenge. It can take 

advantage of the challenge and create new jobs and lower taxes 

for its members, or it can miss a tremendous opportunity, a 

chance for the trade union movement to create some 1,000 new 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“Small business ecstatic over the budget, and that goes on. “The 

commitments in the budget outlines pleases home builders.” 

“Saskatchewan school trustees very pleased with the budget.” 

“Hospital boards extremely pleased with the budget.” 

 

Saskatchewan people all over this province — farmers, 

small-business men, home-makers, everyone, Mr. Speaker, is 

very pleased with this budget. They believe it to be a responsible 

budget and a fair budget. And they are taking that message loud 

and clear, I believe, to the opposition, because they haven’t 

talked about the budget. They are certainly taking it to the 

Conservatives from one end of this province to the other, that 

they believe the course set by this government is the correct 

course. 

 

And let’s see, Mr. Speaker, what teachers say. Let’s take a look 

at the Star-Phoenix, April 3rd, Thursday: “Education seen facing 

better times. Province makes it a priority.” — Mr. Frank Garritty. 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, as I say, believe this 

budget to be fair, and they believe this budget to be a responsible 

one. 

 

The budget reiterates the climate that we are trying to create in 

this province, the climate that this is the best place to do business 

and that this is the province of opportunity in Canada. And the 

budget has followed that consistent thrust established by this 

government some four years ago, a climate of optimism, because 

the people of this province are fundamentally optimistic about 

this province. And they’re beginning to resent more and more the 

negative doom and gloom coming from the official opposition. 

 

Small business believes that this is the province of opportunity 

and are telling it to us loud and clear from one end of the province 

to the other. For the first time this province will be committed to 

a Saskatchewan pension plan, and as the budget made clear, and 

as this government has made clear, home-makers will be 

included in the Saskatchewan pension plan. And some $5 million 

has been allocated, Mr. Speaker, in one of the most progressive 

initiatives of any government in the history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve also seen over the last week and a 

half another political situation develop. We can all recall the 

events of the 1982 election that for the first  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

381 

 

 

week and a half the NDP ran around this province saying this 

province can’t have thirteen and a quarter per cent mortgages to 

help home owners; this province can’t take off the gasoline tax. 

They said that for two and a half weeks in the campaign. 

 

Then when they found out what the public wanted, and what the 

public were saying, they did a complete flip-flop, and all of a 

sudden they’re promising free eye glasses every month, and free 

false teeth for everyone, and I’m sure we’ll hear that again in the 

next election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Free hair-pieces, I 

suspect that the hon. member from Pelly is going to come out 

with. Free hair-pieces for the people of Saskatchewan — that’s 

about the only thing you haven’t promised, the only thing you 

haven’t promised. And I suspect and I predict — I predict that 

the election promises of the NDP will include free hair-pieces, 

free false teeth, and free eye glasses . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Another one they’ve been promising is to take the property 

tax off education. They’ve been doing that every election since 

’71 and it doesn’t have any credibility. 

 

But let’s look at what they’ve done. All of a sudden they start to 

see that the polls are showing them going down, down, down, 

down and the Conservatives going up, up, up. And what 

happens? All of a sudden they forget about all this talk about the 

deficit and they start promising and giving away the farm. And 

let me tell you, all of a sudden . . . It used to be promise-a-day 

Pawley and Manitoba who squeaked out with less than 1 per cent 

of the popular vote. What they are saying on the streets of 

Saskatchewan and in the farms, it’s billion-dollars-a-week 

Blakeney, a billion-a-week Blakeney giving it away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — And he’s trying to say he’s worried about the 

deficit. Let me tell you, the thought, and a lot of their policies 

have obviously been published in panic and prepared in panic . . . 

Let me tell you what the public reaction is to some of their 

promises. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty good. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member from Pelly is taking the 

same ostrich-like approach that he did prior to ’82. If you believe 

that, you’ll believe the Easter bunny, to quote the Leader of the 

Opposition. Oh, but what do they call it in Saskatoon? Crazy Al’s 

discount house — come and get it; get your promise here from 

the NDP. We’ll promise you anything to get back into power. We 

will be totally irresponsible to get back in power, says the NDP. 

We don’t care, says the NDP, about this province. We will do 

absolutely everything and promise absolute everything to try and 

get back into political power. 

 

Well I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are 

having no part of that. And I think we see proof of it. The night 

of the budget we heard the litany from the Leader of the 

Opposition about all this 7 times 7 times 7 times 7 times 7 — $7 

billion promises that they’re throwing away. And he said it again 

in passing the next morning. But has anybody heard about it 

since? 

 

If there was any pride in the program — if there was any  

pride in the program — every political observer could pick this 

up by watching how parties responded. And let me tell you, 

they’ve been deathly silent about their so-called program because 

they know, they know that it is being criticized from one end of 

the province to the other. It’s being seen as not only unrealistic, 

it’s being seen as foolish and stupid, and that strong words are 

coming from NDP themselves. It’s being seen as damaging to 

those people who already own their homes, who will see sharp 

drop in values of their homes. The home builders are attacking it 

and saying it’s foolish and unrealistic. And it’s being attacked, as 

I say, from one end of the province to the other. 

 

The home builders, what do they say? They say that it’s foolish 

and it’s unrealistic. I’m surprised, quite frankly, that the Leader 

of the Opposition would hold this fuzzy-headed program up as 

the corner-stone of the election. I hope it is. I mean, I happen to 

like ’82, and we’re seeing the same thing happen all over again 

— of the craziness of the members opposite when all of a sudden 

they start to panic. 

 

Costs at least $175 million a year — a year! And what do the 

housing industry people say? Quote Mr. MacPherson in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of March 27: 

 

I have been unable to find a single industry insider who 

believe it to be true that the program will cover its cost. 

Most of the housing industry and the real estate people 

regard it as a blatant attempt to buy votes. Most believe the 

housing industry is in pretty good shape right now, and most 

think that there are a great many better ways to spend the 

public’s money. 

 

I suggest to the hon. members that policies prepared in panic 

collapse just as quickly as they’re prepared. And I suggest that 

the hon. members abandon that policy before you’re laughed 

right out of the province because, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s 

starting to happen. 

 

As I say — as I say — we will see a series of unrealistic proposals 

from the NDP over the next months. And as I say, when we notice 

the actions of the opposition over the last week, that there’s been 

a deathly silence. They won’t defend their housing program 

because they know it’s ludicrous and they know it’s unwise and 

they know that they are being unrealistic. 

 

(1245) 

 

They’ve also lost their credibility about talking about the deficit, 

and from one end of the province to the other the NDP are saying, 

how can we criticize the Tories about the deficit when we’re 

making all these foolish promises? And you don’t hear the NDP 

out there talking about the deficit anymore, and the reason is they 

are thoroughly embarrassed. And they know, and the average 

NDP supporter knows, that the $2 billion worth of promises 

made already would lead to bankruptcy in this province, and it’s 

total irresponsibility on the part of the opposition. Fortunately the 

average NDP members know that. 

 

But what do they propose to do about it if — if they ever happen 

to take office? Who’s the only leader — who’s the  

  



 

April 4, 1986 

382 

 

 

only leader that is promising to raise taxes? The Leader of the 

Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition, the leader of the New 

Democratic Party, is going around saying, we may have to raise 

taxes year after year after year. He doesn’t even say it just once. 

He says in every year he may well have to raise taxes. 

 

And we’re getting the message out to the people, Mr. Speaker, 

that there was a very strong signal given to the small-business 

community in Saskatoon and Regina when the NDP invited the 

NDP Minister of Finance to speak. Usually the NDP Minister of 

Finance in Manitoba invited him to speak to the small-business 

men. Now it’s not common for political parties to bring in people 

that have brought in very unpopular taxes, unless they’re giving 

a message. And what happened with the NDP in Manitoba? They 

brought in a payroll tax, a payroll tax that every small business 

has to pay in Manitoba whether the business is making money or 

not. And the more people they hire, and the more people they 

employ, the higher the tax goes. Tell me the logic of that in terms 

of trying to create jobs. In trying to create jobs in Manitoba, the 

more jobs you create, the higher your taxes go. 

 

And the NDP gave a very strong message to the small business 

when they said they will bring in a payroll tax in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I predict that small business will reject any 

concept of a payroll tax in this province. They also bring in the 

NDP Finance minister from Manitoba who raised the sales tax 

from 5 to 6 per cent. They also brought in the NDP Finance 

minister who slapped a 3 per cent tax on everybody’s insurance 

premiums. You can’t even take out life insurance in Manitoba 

without being taxed, and they brought in the NDP Finance 

minister, because they’re sending a quiet message to the people 

in Saskatchewan that they endorse those taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the debate over the last week to come 

down to this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The government 

made it clear what the economic direction was, and where the tax 

cut should be, and if the hon. members believe that the sales tax 

reduction is unpopular, I hope you keep believing it. I hope you 

keep believing it because the people on the west side of the 

province are already noting an increase in retail sales because 

people are not going to Alberta. And on the east side, including 

into the constituency of Pelly, the small-business man is 

recognizing that people are coming from Manitoba to buy in the 

province of Saskatchewan for the first time, Mr. Speaker. Not 

only has that helped families, it’s also increased the business 

activity in the province of Saskatchewan. But they opposed it, 

and we’re going to get to vote very, very quickly find out whether 

the NDP support or oppose the elimination of sales tax on 

clothing under $300; we will know in a couple of minutes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They’ve also opposed — they’re going to shut down uranium 

mines, they’ve made that clear. They are now publicly on record 

opposing Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford, and the people 

of North Battleford are objecting to the NDP. And even their own 

candidate up there is saying: oh, oh, hold it, hold it; I don’t agree 

with Allan Blakeney. They’re unravelling over there, Mr. 

Speaker. They come up in Regina and they say they are  

not going ahead with the paper-mill in Prince Albert. They say 

it’s a black day for the forest industry. They’ve attacked it. They 

said they would do exactly to the paper-mill what they did to the 

Meadow Lake-Dore Lake mill, and what do they do, Mr. 

Speaker? They opposed it, and they say they’ll shut it down. And 

what do the NDP candidates say up there: oh, I don’t agree with 

Allan Blakeney on this. They’re panicking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask the member to 

cease using the opposition leader’s name. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker. The 

issues are becoming increasingly clear. They try to get away with 

saying one thing in Regina and another thing in North Battleford. 

They say one thing in Regina, they try and say the opposite in 

Prince Albert. They say one thing in Regina; they say the 

opposite in Shaunavon. They say one thing in Regina; they say 

the opposite in Saskatoon. And let me tell you, it’s catching up 

to you and it’s catching up to you in spades. And the people are 

starting now to look at what you’re really saying, and they are 

finding you wanting. 

 

And I said before to the hon. members opposite, one thing is loud 

and clear coming through the surveys, through the polls and 

through what the people are telling us — they don’t want you 

back in government; they don’t want you back in power; and that 

they believe that it’s this government under Grant Devine, 

Premier of this province and Leader of the Conservatives, that 

will build this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will continue to build with projects that 

will create diversification and we will continue to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

Blakeney Koskie 

Tchorzewski  Lusney 

Engel Shillington  

Lingenfelter Yew 

 

Nays — 24 

 

Birkbeck Maxwell 

Andrew Muirhead 

Berntson Rousseau 

Lane Young 

Taylor Hopfner 

Duncan Weiman 

Katzman Rybchuk 

Myers Caswell 

Dirks Baker 

Klein Glauser 

Currie Gerich 

Martens Swenson 

  



 

April 4, 1986 

383 

 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 24 

 

Birkbeck Maxwell 

Andrew Muirhead 

Berntson Rousseau 

Lane Young 

Taylor Hopfner 

Duncan Weiman 

Katzman Rybchuk 

Myers Caswell 

Dirks Baker 

Klein Glauser 

Currie Gerich 

Martens Swenson 

 

Nays — 10 

 

 

Blakeney Lusney 

Tchorzewski  Shillington 

Engel  Yew 

Lingenfelter  Sveinson  

Koskie  Hampton 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Advanced Education and Manpower 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before adjournment, I 

wonder if I might have leave of the Assembly to move, seconded 

by the Minister of Economic Development and Trade: 

 

That C. H. Glauser, Esquire, member for the constituency 

of Saskatoon Mayfair, be elected deputy chairman of 

committees of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 

 


