


















































June 2, 1986 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 2, 1986 
 
 

1601 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce to you, and to 
other members of the legislature, a group of 20 students from 
Southey elementary school. They are sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery. I had the pleasure of meeting with them briefly at about 
1:15, and they had a tour of the buildings, and they will now sit in 
for most of question period before going back to Southey, a 
community about 35 to 40 miles north of Regina. 
 
I trust that they will enjoy question period, and I ask all hon. 
members to welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
American Duty on Steel Products 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Acting Premier. Mr. Acting Premier, it appears that once again the 
United States government has proven that it backs free trade only 
as a one-way street. The international trade commission has 
imposed duties, so it is reported today, in varying amounts up to 
41 per cent on a number of steel products for the oil and gas 
industry sold in the United States by Canada companies. 
 
One of the companies which it would appear will be hardest hit by 
the decision will be Ipsco in Regina. I ask you, sir, have you been 
in touch with Ipsco today about this decision, and what action 
does your government plan to take as a result of this latest slap in 
the face by the United States administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been in touch 
with Ipsco today. And what action are we taking? The premiers 
and the Prime Minister are meeting this very day, as the Leader of 
the Opposition knows. One of the items on the agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, is the whole question of trade with the United States. 
And as it relates to the question coming from the seat of the 
member for Shaunavon who started this anyway, Mr. Speaker, 
trade between Canada and the United States is the largest single 
bilateral trade number in the world. And there are protectionist 
pressures coming on politicians on both sides of the border. 
 
My understanding is, Mr. Speaker, that there are over 300 pieces 
of protectionist legislation before the Congress in the United 
States. And if you think, Mr. Speaker, that we gain anything by 
not getting to the table and convincing them, Mr. Speaker, that we 
must have access to one another's markets; convincing them, Mr. 
Speaker, that trade is vital to the economic health of both of our 
countries, well, Mr. Speaker, I think we make a terrible mistake. 
 
I, in no way, shape, or form appreciate nor endorse the 
protectionist measures taken by United States. The  

premiers in Swan River last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, took the view 
that all protectionist measures must have a moratorium put on 
them on both sides of the border, Mr. Speaker, in order that these 
negotiations and discussions can be carried out in good faith. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Premier. As 
the Premier will know, this is an actin by the International Trade 
Commission and not as a result of any new legislation, but the 
application of existing legislation. I ask you, Mr. Acting Premier; 
are you satisfied with the performance of the federal government 
in its dealings with the U.S. government in getting existing 
legislation applied in this very discriminatory way against 
Canadian products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know what influence 
. . As I understand this body, it's a quasi-judicial body, and we can 
present our arguments and they pass judgement. Obviously they 
have passed judgement, and we don't have to like what they've 
done, and I fully expect that the premiers from right across the 
country, including the Prime Minister, will express that 
displeasure to the United States and the administration there with 
all of the vigour they can muster. 
 
I think it's not acceptable to Canadians. I think in the hearts of 
Americans, if they really looked at it, they would find that it wasn't 
acceptable to them either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In 
February the Premier stated his views on bilateral trade relations in 
the following way: 
 

The best thing for somebody like me to stay close to that 
Washington politician, keep giving him a hug, and say, look it, 
we're really on the same side. 

 
Are you still, Mr. Deputy Premier, convinced that that type of 
approach is the best way to get appropriate trade relations between 
Canada and the United States, or will you urge the Mulroney 
government to stand up for Canada and bargain on a level playing 
field instead of this method of hugging politicians in Washington. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 
confidence in that ability of our federal government and our 
provincial premiers to bargain, and bargain tough — and bargain 
tough they must. But I'll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that I will bet 
that hugging a Washington politician will be far more effective 
than burning an American flag. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 

Lack of Commitment to Reforestation 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the Acting Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources and it 
has to do with this government's lack of commitment to 
reforestation. 
 
At a time of high unemployment in the North, can the Minister 
explain why his government has reduced the  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1602 
 
 

activity of its four provincial nurseries? This not only means a 
reduction in reforestation, which threatens the long-term future of 
northern forest, but it also means fewer jobs for Northerners today. 
Can the minister explain why reforestation work has been given 
such a low priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess in the absence 
of the minister and the acting minister I will act, and I will take 
notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary to the Deputy Premier. He's 
take notice of that question. I would like him also . . to ask a 
supplementary, and he can take notice of that too. 
 
But go back to, by way of information, Mr. Minister, the member 
from Meadow Lake who indicated that this government would be 
planting 14 million trees . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: More trees were planted than you ever planted 
in a single year . . . 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That's right. The member from Meadow Lake 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! There's enough 
conversation on both sides of the House that it's impossible for the 
member to get his question off. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the member 
for Meadow Lake was minister, he indicated that 14 million trees 
would be planted by your government. Mr. Minister, by way of 
supplementary, I think that the minister should read your own 
department's annual reports. Those annual reports show that the 
four provincial nurseries have steadily produced fewer trees for 
reforestation in each of the past three years. In fact, last year the 
four provincial nurseries produced fewer trees than in 1980-81 
when there were only two nurseries in the province. 
 
Can the Deputy Premier tell this Assembly how many trees the 
provincial nurseries have been asked to prepare for reforestation 
work this year, and how many jobs will be created as a result, 
compared to the previous years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I'll have to go to 
the department and get the numbers. But I caution all members to 
take what has been put before us as gospel. This is the member, 
Mr. Speaker, that a week ago or 10 days ago stood up in this 
House and said that Weyerhaeuser would be bringing their trees 
here in the province of Saskatchewan for reforestation purposes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Deputy Premier seems sceptical of 
information coming from this side of the House. May I refer the 
Deputy Premier to a memo dated April 24, and it's from the head 
of the provincial forest nurseries, Mr. Thompson, and he talks 
about the implications of the budget cut. He says that it will mean 
that the provincial nurseries will have run out of money by the end 
of July and will have to let staff go. He states further, and I quote: 
 

Simpson Timber will not get their 500,000 trees for fall 
planting; we will be out of money. The nurseries will not be 
able to lift stock for winter storage; all nursery stock will be put 
in jeopardy if no staff are available to irrigate . . . etc. 

 
Mr. Deputy Premier, in the light of these comments by your own 
staff — and I would call them facts — will you now admit that 
your government is cutting back on reforestation work in the 
North, and cutting back on northern jobs in the process; and will 
your government change its policies and provide enough money 
for adequate reforestation and, in the course of so doing, provide 
jobs for Northerners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, once again I admit to 
nothing of the sort. I would simply say to the hon. member that I 
will take notice of the question, and perhaps in the future if you 
would give me a copy of these brown envelopes that are leaked to 
you, I could come to the House a little better prepared. 
 

Net Population Migration in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to address a question to the Acting 
Premier. It has to do, and by way of background, with Statistics 
Canada, which reported already that Saskatchewan had the worst 
net migration record in Canada last year where 6,000 more people 
moved out of the province than moved in in 1985. 
 
But I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you indicate whether you're aware 
of the worsening condition in 1986. I wonder, are you aware that 
the figures prepared by your own bureau of statistics show that 
during the first four months of 1986— and the minister may not 
believe his own records, but here they are — 4,347 moved into 
Saskatchewan while 9.983 moved out, for a net loss of 5,636 
residents who have left the province in the first four months? 
 
Are you aware of these statistics, and can you outline to the 
Assembly and the people of the province what you're going to be 
doing to see whether or not we can get job creation going? And 
we've already indicated two areas, one in the area of steel 
production, and one in the area of reforestation, where you've 
failed miserably. Will you now make a commitment to allow 
families to stay in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will compare the 
last four years to the previous 11 any time, day or night, in any 
way, shape, or form. Our population growth in the last four years 
has been significant and, Mr. Speaker, I expect that over the next 
few months it will be significant once again. 
 
One of the problems that we have, Mr. Speaker, is the doom and 
gloomers that sit opposite, who say that they will chase the bacon 
plant out, who say that they will cancel the Weyerhaeuser dealer, 
who will scrap the ammonia plant, who will chase Phillips Cables 
out of the province, who will close Canapharm in Wolseley, and 
all of these other projects that we have . . . and the power station at 
Shand, Mr. Speaker, Rafferty . . . 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1603 
 

I could go on and on. And I think I don't have to because of the 
people — the people of Saskatchewan are aware of these. The 
communities that are touched by these projects, they don't believe 
this doom and gloom stuff that members opposite like to just 
wallow in constantly. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that our 
numbers will stack up against theirs any day of the week. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the minister. And by way of 
background, you may try to end some of the doom and gloom by 
talking to Ipsco, who is looking at losing hundreds of jobs as a 
result of the inactivity of your Prime Minister in dealing with the 
United States. 
 
But my question to you, Mr. Minister: is the government aware 
that its own figures show nearly three times as many families are 
leaving Saskatchewan today as are moving in. And I want to 
indicate that between January and April nearly 2,000 families 
moved out of Saskatchewan while only 700 moved in, Mr. 
Speaker. Can you explain that loss to Saskatchewan of about 
1,300 families in the first four months of 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't take the hon. 
member's numbers as gospel. I will do my research, Mr. Speaker, 
and I'll respond to that member next day in question period. 
 
But since he raised the question of Ipsco and how are we going to 
explain this to the employees of Ipsco, the employees of Ipsco . . . 
Well we're not very happy at all with the countervail measures that 
were taken in United States relative to tubular steels. The 
employees of Ipsco know full well that it was that particular party 
that closed down the oil patch in Saskatchewan. It was our party 
that gave the employees of Ipsco employment for the last three 
and four years, Mr. Speaker. And they know that, and they 
understand that, and they understand the protectionist pressures 
that are coming in the United States. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the employees of Ipsco are very hopeful that 
we will resolve those problems with United States, not like 
members sitting opposite who hope we fail so that Saskatchewan, 
and particularly this government of Saskatchewan, and the 
Mulroney government in Ottawa, will get a black eye out of these 
negotiations. Everybody but members opposite are hoping for 
success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the Acting Premier. After 
all that bellowing, I wonder whether you would stand on your 
record and today convince your Premier, Premier Devine, to call 
an election, which would provide whether or not you're full of 
baloney, or whether you're serious about what you're saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think that I have to 
convince our Premier of anything. He's a very, very bright, 
articulate, sound judgement, and when it's time for the election, it 
will be called. And you will not be back. Mr. Speaker, that 
member from Shaunavon will not be back. 
 

Sale of SaskTel Cable Distribution System 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Finance, the minister responsible for SaskTel, and it 
deals with your plans, Mr. Minister, to sell off a major public 
asset, SaskTel's cable television distribution system. Can the 
minister confirm that one of the private cable operators, Image 
Cable Systems of Yorkton, has filed a court action to try to 
prevent this sale, and can you give the Assembly your assurance 
that SaskTel will delay attempts to sell off this important public 
asset until the court action has been dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated when questioning came about 
the other day as to the possibility of the sale, that there was a 
likelihood of a court action, and that matters were in abeyance 
pending that court action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Last week, 
Mr. Minister, you claimed that the proposed sale of SaskTel's 
television distribution system would not result in poorer service or 
higher cable charges to subscribers. The statement of claim filed 
by Image Cable Systems says the exact opposite, and I want to 
quote: 
 

SaskTel's vacating its contractual obligations in favour of a 
private corporation will automatically and necessarily reduce 
the quality of serve to Image Cable subscribers to an 
unacceptable level while at the same time increasing the costs 
thereof. 

 
Mr. Minister, as you know, Image Cable serves 50 rural 
communities in Saskatchewan. It says that there will be poorer 
service and higher charges. 
 
In the light of this document, Mr. Minister, does the minister care 
to explain his comments last week when he claimed that the sales 
would not result in poorer service or higher charges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
corporate plaintiff has made some allegations that are often made 
in a statement of claim, because approximately a week before, 
quite frankly we thought we had a deal. The issue is the amount to 
be paid for the facilities, and I suggest that it is merely part of the 
statement of claim that if an acceptable amount would be made, 
that they would be quite happy to acquire the facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the 
minister inform the House, can he confirm, for example, that as of 
November of '85 — the last figures I have — SaskTel's cable 
television distribution system was available to 226,000 
Saskatchewan households in more than 70 communities, and that 
the 141,000 households — and that's 62 per cent of all those in the 
province— were already cable subscribers? In other words, will 
you confirm that SaskTel's system is fast becoming a service 
available to a large majority of Saskatchewan people, and can you 
explain why this basic service should not be part of a telephone 
mandate and should be sold to private operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, several factors, the main one of the 
course being the cost to the taxpayer. In 1981 the system  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1604 
 
 

lost 2 million; in 1982 it made a profit of 500,000; 1983 it lost 7 
million; 1984, 1.9 million; and 1985, 17.7. 
 
Now the interesting fact of the losses — and we have been 
extremely conservative in the losses that we have given on the 
cable system — that's not taking into account the spare capacity of 
the coaxial distribution system. In fact, if we took into account the 
full cost of those cable systems, you can add an additional $5 
million a year losses on the cable television system, which mean 
that that system last year would, in fact, lose about $6.7 million; 
1984 about nearly $7 million. All we did was calculate the actual 
capacity used as opposed to the total capacity of the cable. 
 
So I suggest that the question to be asked, and should be asked by 
the hon. members opposite: how much of the subsidy should go to 
those using the television cable system? We believe that it can be 
done by the private operators. We also believe that the quality of 
service can well be monitored by the CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission), as it 
does in other jurisdictions. 
 
So it's an annual loss to the people, and the subsidy is being paid 
by all taxpayers. I frankly don't think that's fair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have been asked on 
previous occasions to table the documents which established the 
loss. You refuse to do so; instead, you read off figures. I suggest, 
Mr. Minister, you're not prepared to table those documents 
because the documents don't back up your claim. 
 
Documents SaskTel filed with PURC show that in 1982 the cable 
television distribution system provided SaskTel with net revenues 
of 6.4 million, and a small profit at that figure. I have an internal 
document here which SaskTel has not filed with PURC, but which 
shows that those revenues jumped from 6.4 million in '82 to 7.8 
million in '83 to 9.5 million in '84, and to an estimated 11 million 
in 1985. That represents a 72 per cent increase in just three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you suggest that the system is losing 
money for Saskatchewan taxpayers when revenues have increased 
by 72 per cent in three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — it is only the NDP that equate revenues with 
profits. It's only the NDP that equate revenues with profits. They 
don't take away and deduct from revenues the costs of operation, 
the expenditures, the expenses. 
 
I've indicated on numerous occasions that the losses have been 
substantial on the cable television distribution system; that in 
1983, for example, if we put the full capacity in, the loss would be 
nearly 6 million; that if we put the full capacity in 1984, it would 
be nearly $7 million; and we put the full capacity of the coaxial 
cable in in 1985, it would be approximately $6.7 million loss, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again, only the NDP — only the NDP — can argue that revenues 
are the factor. You can have very high revenues and still have 
losses, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker. And the coaxial cable which 
. . . and one should, I might add  

caution, take the minister's statement as to what was filed with 
PURC with a great deal of lack of credibility for the very simple 
fact that, of course, the coaxial cable distribution is not one of the 
systems that comes under PURC in the first place. So SaskTel 
themselves are expressing a great deal of doubt about the numbers, 
and they're still looking, trying to find the information that the hon. 
members opposite use. 
 
So sure, you can talk about revenues all you want. The fact is that 
it's a money-losing proposition. It's losing a substantial amount of 
money, and it's requiring the taxpayers to subsidize those getting 
cable television, Mr. Speaker. I don't think . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. it's impossible to operate with the 
amount of noise that we're having in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. Minister, the 
only known fact that we're sure of is that you won't give us the 
documents. That's all we're sure of. 
 
Mr. Minister, let's just think for a minute about what you are 
asking the Saskatchewan people to believe. You're asking them to 
believe that SaskTel's cable television distribution system is a big 
money loser and that it may require $17 million over the next few 
years to upgrade the system. Mr. Minister, if the system is such a 
money loser, then why are the private cable operators so anxious 
to buy it? 
 
Image Cable, which is based in rural Saskatchewan, obviously 
feels this is a bad deal for them and their rural subscribers. But the 
cable companies in Saskatoon and Regina have been pushing for a 
sale. If the system is such a money loser, why do they want to buy 
it so badly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well obviously they can buy it for several 
reasons, either tax losses . . . Secondly, I don't think that they will 
have to put in the capacity that SaskTel has put in which is now 
requiring a 52 per cent excess capacity. It may well be that they 
can install the cable far less costly than SaskTel. But certainly 
they've indicated they are prepared to buy. They'll obviously be 
buying a capital asset as well at a depreciated value. 
 
So having said all of that, there are numerous reasons for them 
wanting to buy. But the cost of refurbishing, or the figures that I've 
given from the estimates of SaskTel, we come back again. I mean, 
there is a big difference when you have the NDP, who aren't 
concerned about expenses . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The NDP are only concerned about the 
revenues. They aren't the least bit concerned about expenses. They 
aren't the least bit concerned about the cost of operating the 
various services, Mr. Speaker. This is being subsidized by all of 
the taxpayers. For a certain number, those that are on the coaxial 
cable system, Mr. Speaker, the subsidy is a heavy one. This is a 
good business deal and a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1605 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
announce to the Assembly that we have two new pages, really two 
pages who have served with us before and are back to serve again. 
We have Shawna Levee and Pam Quinnett. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 41 — An Act 
respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax Credits be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Tusa Sandberg 
Birkbeck Currie 
McLeod Martens 
Andrew Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Berntson Hodgins 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Parker 
Duncan Johnson 
Pickering Rybchuk 
Schmidt Caswell 
Folk Meagher 
Smith (Swift Current) Muller 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There's to be no talking while the 
vote is being taken. 
 
Myers Glauser 
Hepworth Zazelenchuk 
Dutchak Gerich 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm going to ask the member for 
Regina Centre to apologize to the Chamber for not listening to the 
instructions from the Chair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I apologize. I didn't realize it was that loud, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Dirks Sveinson 
Embury Hampton 
 

— 34 
 
Nays 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter 
Tchorzewski Shillington 
Thompson  
 

— 5 

Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at 
the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 8 
 
Item 1 (Continued) 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If the member from Regina North East is finished 
complaining that the member on her feet the last day is still on her 
feet, I'll continue. 
 
The last time in estimates we were discussing the social studies 
curriculum, and I was voicing a concern of the lack of education 
and hard facts and a trend towards psychological games. But I 
would like to finish off the concerns about social studies by asking 
you: what is the rationale for a change in the social studies 
curriculum? I think this is very important, especially since it's 
going the direction, according to the memos from the Department 
of Education, is that it's eventually expanding from grade 1 to 
grade 12. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe we had the 
question last week, perhaps in a different form. The process of 
curriculum, regardless of the subject area, is a ongoing, constantly 
an ongoing review, and it doesn't matter what grade. The social 
studies several years ago . . . If I can recall, I believe it was 
perhaps the late '70s when the issues first started to arise, 
particularly by school-boards and parents, about much of the 
material for young adolescents being uninteresting, perhaps not 
relevant to what was taking place in the world, and was there a 
process to look at and to consult with those that are affected most? 
That happened. 
 
I believe that the task force completed its work in approximately 
1982 or 1983. What came out of the consultations, Mr. Chairman, 
was that social studies should be looked at from grade 7 through to 
grade 12, that that was the area particularly sensitive to students 
and what they were going through at that age or that period in their 
lives. The question of relevant material kept coming up time and 
time again — from teachers, from parents, and also from students. 
 
I don't know if that in particular answers the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount's question. I would hope that it does. It 
arose basically from several concerns from educators and from 
parents and students, and has gone the process of public 
consultation. It has also gone an extremely intensive period of 
what I consider to be pilot projects with several changes being 
made along the way. And we are not finished making those 
changes, nor will we be, because the curriculum process does in 
fact remain in a constant review. And as it needs updating, then 
that will take place. 
 
One of the severest criticisms of the writing of curriculum has 
been that the material is not looked at in a constant manner, nor is 
it updated as quickly as what it can be. And  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1606 
 
 

therefore I think it is felt with in the educational community that 
we do in fact get a little bit behind in terms of the curriculum and 
the slowness of the process. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Having gone through a period of education 
myself where relevance was everything, I tend to think that we 
have to be very leery when we talk about relevance, because 
perhaps a grade 7 student or a grade 8 student may not know what 
is relevant and, if they did, they wouldn't need to go to school and 
be guided and directed. 
 
But to quote from a university professor again: 
 

The proposed curriculum appears almost deliberately to omit or 
at least to downplay some of the major cultural forces that have 
brought western culture to where it is today. It appears to 
over-emphasize aboriginal cultures that have had little or no 
influence on the evolution of western man. 

 
Now of course what he's talking about is western civilization; not 
that aboriginal cultures have no impact on the people they are 
involved, and so on. And he talks about the necessity of school 
and social studies to be a way of communicating the values of 
western civilization. 
 
It goes on to say that he's very concerned that there is a particular 
philosophy in the social studies curriculum that is dangerous, or at 
least, if not dangerous, is not necessarily shared by all people of 
Saskatchewan, and that is that all values are relative, that there are 
no absolutes except the absolute. There are no absolutes. And a 
social studies curriculum he doesn't think should be this ethically 
neutral. 
 
And so what I think is the constant concern we're finding in the 
criticisms of social studies is that there seems to be imposing a 
particular relativistic philosophy in the education. I guess that's not 
necessarily a question, but a statement. 
 
(1445) 
 
A major concern that people are concerned about is what I've 
talked about, is this philosophy. And I tend to think that we all 
know there are competing and conflicting philosophies in society, 
and all parents do not agree. And most certainly all parents would 
not necessarily agree in my views, nor in any view of a bureaucrat 
in the Department of Education. So it's incumbent upon the public 
school system, which is to serve everyone, to have a view that, 
you know, how should I say, be silent, where society cannot have 
a general . . . a consensus. 
 
And in this book, Toward the Year 2000 — I'll just show it to you 
so you know exactly what I'm talking about — curriculum and 
instruction review, we find a very dangerous use, I would say, of 
the Department of Education. Before 1982 many of us were 
monitoring the changes in the Department of Education, and we're 
very concerned that they seem to be imposing an agenda of their 
own. And it talks about in this book how there is a group of 
futurists met in 1980, and from the works begun in 1980 is based 
on the philosophy we have in this  

curriculum. And it is a philosophy of what is called futurism. 
 
And I have to explain that there are many parents who have come 
to me and they were . . . my ladies were coming to me and 
explaining, well, in the new curriculum they're talking bout the 
Aquarian conspiracy, Alvin Toffler's "New Wave," one-world 
citizenry, as core . . . basic to our education. And I couldn't 
understand what they were talking about, and I said, well that may 
or may not be right. But you know, I think that's too far-fetched 
for me to stand up and say that, because they would think I was 
extrapolating too much from the printed word. And then it got 
through my thick skull that what these ladies were talking about 
was not some obscure publication of a criticism, but the actual 
pamphlet where they are talking about the philosophy in education 
is based on futurism. 
 
And it's based on the idea, for example . . . And I know I'm not 
asking questions but making comments. And I think that is as 
germane as the . . . And the Leader of the Opposition is always 
telling us, is it's talking about how that we must train people to fit 
into, to be citizens of the world, and consistently I go to citizenship 
courts. I meet families from Poland, and from Vietnam, from 
totalitarian countries who come here, and they are so proud to 
change their citizenship of a totalitarian country that's been ruined 
by communism to one of freedom. 
 
And it very much disturbs me to think that we are talking in a 
publication, coming from the Department of Education, that we 
are training people to be the citizens of the world, because first of 
all that's a legal non-entity. We're citizens of Canada, and it's a . . . 
And the one-world philosophy that we should have as one-world 
government is, indeed, a philosophy that's out there, but it is not 
one that is shared by a great many people. Many of us think that 
our education should enhance sovereignty of Canada and not to 
impose a would-be philosophy and course of utopianism. 
 
And so I . . . You know, I guess the question is that: are you aware 
of the philosophical basis of the kind of things that are coming 
from the Department of Education when they talk about the 
futurist role. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think first of all we 
better clarify what the book is. Some time ago — and I've already 
alluded to it — there was a review done entitled Curriculum and 
Instruction Review. Out of that came a report entitled Directions, 
and before they got to that point of the Directions document, there 
was a very massive public consultation period that education went 
through, and it included something like 165,000 people solicited 
for their opinion. And their opinions, as they outlined them, make 
up this book, plus three others, and they're outlined in this, Mr. 
Chairman. What They Said is another book; Saskatchewan 
Education is another; Saskatchewan Children; Toward the Year 
2000, which is the one that the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount is talking about; and one entitled School 
Improvement, along with the one I've already mentioned, which is 
entitled Directions. 
 
It is not an outline of the department philosophy. This  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1607 
 

booklet is based on opinions of people and what it did; it examine 
what people had to say. If, in fact, you were looking at the future, 
some of the changes that you would say, and it says: 
 

Toward the Year 2000 examines the predictions of futurists as 
to how education should change in order to better prepared 
students for the future. 

 
You know, as to whether the school system should be into 
teaching one philosophy or another, I would suggest that perhaps 
the role of the school is to teach children how to think and not 
what to think, that with a good, sound base of knowledge students 
will be able to eventually master on their own, with the right 
support coming along with it. 
 
How this relates — and to come back to social studies — I would 
ask the member perhaps take a look at the objectives of the social 
studies. And when we're talking about Canada and a few other 
things, you know, some of the knowledge objectives, the student 
will know facts about people, palaces, and events in time and 
space, interpret situations in the historical past and present and try 
to apply them to the future. We've always done that in social 
studies. When I was a child in school, it was called history, and we 
did that then. Appreciate Canada's past and present — that's 
historical, plus dealing with today and perhaps what you can see 
into the future. 
 
So I would simply ask that member remember that the document 
Toward the Year 2000 is one based on people's opinions and in 
looking at the future, and it comes out of a very lengthy period of 
curriculum review. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — People submitted concerns to the Department of 
Education about the direction it should go. And I think one of the 
things that people were concerned about (a) is they wanted moral 
absolutes taught. Now that doesn't mean that the Presbyterians 
said they wanted the Shorter Catechism taught, but they wanted 
those things that are common to civilized man. 
 
And secondly, what concerned me most about this Toward the 
Year 2000 is the philosophy. And the very debatable and very 
controversial philosophy that it supports is so very consistent in 
the social studies curriculum when it consistently talks about 
making students understand the necessity of a one-world 
philosophy of interdependence and so on. 
 
I think there's a very big difference between appreciating other 
cultures and other societies, and propagandizing students in such a 
way that they believe the solutions can only come about by 
one-world government. And I certainly agree with you that we 
shouldn't teach people what to think, but how to think. And the 
way to do that has always been consistently to give them 
fundamentals and some basic skills, such as in language, in 
reading, in arithmetic . . . 
 
Excuse me while I just pause while the member from Regina 
North East doesn't know he's going to have his own turn. 
 
And these basic subjects were such they gave us tools that we 
could decide whether we wanted to read Karl Marx or  

Gandhi or the New Testament or all three. But that required 
teachers who were supported by the Department of Education and 
by the school board to teach definable academic skills. And this is 
the most alarming statement in the summary: 
 

. . . "The Kind of Schools We Need," says the following of the 
back to the basics movement: 

 
" . . (is) the idea that schools should go back to the basics, when 
the basics mean the three Rs, is really a symptom of wanting 
too little rather than too much from schools. Reading, writing, 
and arithmetic have no virtue in and of themselves. They are 
skills and, as skills, are educationally empty." 

 
And I tend to think that, if we are not teaching academic skills in 
our school, then the only thing left for our schools is a baby-sitting 
service and a means in which to shape the child through 
propaganda. 
 
So I would like to ask your opinion, the necessity of the three Rs 
in our schools. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan, unlike 
some provinces, has never totally swung from one side of the 
spectrum to the other when it comes to basics in education. It's 
been relatively well-balanced. The basics are as important, if not 
more so, than they were ever before. 
 
But I would also suggest that the schools are at a point in time 
when the basics, the three Rs, so to speak, are perhaps broadened. 
And I use technology or computer literacy as a very good example 
that will eventually become a basic within the school system in 
order that our children will be able to cope with the world as they 
will be living in it down the road. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Yes, I have no quarrel with computer 
knowledge being brought into the schools. But I do have a quarrel 
that we cannot make children think — as you said, you want 
children to know how to think — and that you can't think with a 
computer. The expression is: garbage in, garbage out. 
 
So we may be technologists, but we are not full human beings 
without a full understanding of language, communication skills in 
writing, and in spelling, and in grammar, and some of those things 
that are not necessarily glamorous all the time, but necessary. 
 
Clearly, when we discuss the third world, we say that if we give 
them literacy, they're on the road to freedom. And we must not 
deny our students in Saskatchewan the freedom of a well-founded 
in the basics, so that they can express themselves through the 
written word. 
 
And I see here in reports all over — here's from The Western 
Report — that the proposed core curriculum will be reducing the 
amount of emphasis on English about by half, which is a direction 
that most education reforms are going in the opposite direction. 
They have abandoned what we called the feely — if I may use, 
you know, the terms we used in education — the "feely-deely"  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1608 
 
 

approach or the "belly-button-gazing" philosophy, and back to the 
basics. And they're abandoning this approach to make school 
relevant and psychological and philosophy . . . 
 
But we want . . .I'm very concerned that . . . I want to know, why 
does the core curriculum think it should decrease the amount of 
English skills, and what is your view on that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I thought it was fairly 
evident, my views on the basic skills. Goals of education for 
Saskatchewan were reviewed and redone in 1984, and it was the 
first time in 20 years that they had been updated. And the first goal 
is basic skills, the very first. That's the priority: to read, write, and 
commute — to communicate ideas through written and spoken 
language and mathematical symbols, to process information, and 
to acquire information through observing, listening, reading, and 
experience. My apologies if I hadn't made that evident before 
today. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — One problem we have with basics is that some 
people can have a very different idea about basics than other 
people. For example, some people think basics is peace education, 
which others call it surrender-lobby propaganda. Other people 
think global education is basic, which other people call it it's the 
religious philosophy of one world government and is a philosophy 
that's coming from America and is consistently being fought there. 
 
So when we talk about basics, I think it's very incumbent we 
always have to ask whether it's a minister of education, a teacher, 
or administrator, what do you mean by the basics? And I think this 
is . . . when I read here, and this is from Nick Russell . . . I'm not 
sure where this was printed, but I think it was published recently. 
 

But the bottom line for the few intrepid souls who have fought 
their way through the bafflegab of provincial reports (and I'm 
quoting) titled . . . Progress policy proposals seem to be that 
English would be reduced by 40 per cent for the first nine 
grades and 50 per cent in the final three classes. 

 
(1500) 
 
Now do you agree with that statement that according to the core 
curriculum, English would be reduced by 40 per cent for the first 
nine grades and 50 per cent in the final three classes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, some time ago the report on 
core curriculum was released to the public, and public consultation 
had been set up around the province. I had made it very clear at 
that time that we had not taken a position on it and that we were 
interested in what the public has to say. And on June 20th we will 
be compiling the results and having a look at them, along with 
trustees and teachers and the home and school association, on 
what the public have to say about the proposals of the core 
curriculum. 
 
I have stated, Mr. Chairman, and quite clearly, that whatever is 
done with core curriculum in the end will be  

done with the view to strengthening the basics and not weakening 
them. Obviously I, like a lot of other people, don't agree with 
everything that is written in the report. I have a few concerns on a 
few of the recommendations. However, at this point in time I am 
open for public opinion on it. And I might add, Mr. Chairman, that 
many of the public have taken advantage of the opportunity to 
express their opinions on it. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I still want to know: is this reporter correct in 
saying that according to the proposed core curriculum that English 
would be reduced by 40 per cent for the first nine grades and 50 
per cent in the final three classes? I'm not asking your views, but is 
that a correct statement concerning the core curriculum as 
proposed by your department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, without having the core 
curriculum report in front of me — and that's what I would prefer 
to have to ensure that I accurately reflect what it said and how it 
said it — I believe they are suggesting that the basic skills or 
language is important enough that it should be paid attention to 
and taught in every subject area. If, in fact, that were to happen, 
the report proposes that you could see a reduction of a specific 
amount of time on language arts or English or French, if it was in 
a francophone school. Now the 40 per cent I'm not sure. I would 
have to sit down with the core curriculum proposal and make sure 
that my calculations and figures were correct on it. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I certainly appreciate that. I think that in social 
studies or science or whatever you're taking, that you still should 
spell correctly and your sentences should still be sentences. But I 
have noticed, both as a student and a teacher, the necessity of 
learning English as a skill. There is still a place to know what a 
conjunction is, etc., etc., so we can understand the written word 
and thus maintain our freedom as individuals and as a country. 
 
I'm just quoting from the Western Report again, by William 
Howard, chairman of the University of Regina English 
department. He's talking about: 
 

Current high school graduates "are not competent in the 
language, " . . . "They can't write an English sentence." Dr. 
Howard notes that 30 per cent of first-year students routinely 
fail the university's mandatory course in introductory English, 
something he blames on deteriorating standards in the 
secondary schools. Reducing English instruction even further, 
he adds, is "a frightening proposition". 

 
I think consistently I hear this, that at university we're seeing a 
lowering of English standards. And if this is the case at university, 
I'm sure it is at other jobs and other places where students go after 
grade 12 for a job or for technical training. Given this kind of 
criticism from Mr. Howard, will you continue to support this idea 
that English does not need to be taught as a subject per se, as 
much? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have never taken a 
supportive stand on it, and I'm not sure where the member gets 
that when she says, will I continue to  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1609 
 

support. I have stated I have some concerns; I do not agree with 
everything in there. However, I am serious about public 
consultation, and any final decision that I may have to take will 
not be taken until that public consultation is completed. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I certainly apologize if I made it sound as if the 
core curriculum had your imprimatur on it. But I tend to think that 
we always have this difficulty. If we have happen to be 
government, and it says Department of Education, then we are 
blamed for it, or we are thanked for it, and this is one of the things 
that we're very concerned abut. And I'm also very concerned, as I 
said, especially as we're the . . . I don't want to get in the debate 
about private schools today, but we're talking about standards in 
the private schools, and private schools often teach citizenry and 
patriotism. 
 
And when we see that a public school is not just discussing 
globalism as a philosophy, but as a goal, and I can pick up an 
American education news magazine and it's talking about what's 
wrong with globalism, what's wrong with global education; and I 
can see that this is a criticism totally fitting the program that we 
have in Saskatchewan, I question, one, if this is really a grass-roots 
Saskatchewan program, or are we just following a very debatable 
trend that's coming from America, and some American publishing 
companies will benefit if we follow their fad? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have before me the 
social studies curriculum guide, and it's very good in terms of the 
teaching of citizenship: to recognize her or his responsibilities as a 
citizen of Canada; to compare rights, privileges, responsibilities; to 
understand that a balance has to be maintained between individual 
freedom and public; to know the basic political and legal 
structures that exist in Canada and know the conditions of such. 
And there's much more in terms of citizenship. 
 
I do know from many parents and teachers that have responded 
and have taken the time and made the effort to write to me on the 
core curriculum, that some of the things that the member alludes 
to, like the teaching of citizenship, Canadian content versus 
American material, is very much an issue with many people. And 
I guess if there's one thing that I consistently hear teachers and 
parents saying, it is that there is, in fact, a dual responsibility there. 
And while there has been some in the school, there has to be more. 
But there's also a recognition that parents play a role in that area 
also. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I'm aware of that section that you quoted in the 
social studies curriculum, and in itself it's not necessarily bad. But 
within the social studies curriculum, I stress there is a very . . that 
it does put, I would say, Canada's sovereignty as second to the 
necessity for a one-world control. And when I see this reiterated in 
such things as Toward the Year 2000, that people are talking about 
national economic systems changing to more global economic 
systems; multiple options for people to make sure the future will 
have some basic changes in the way humans think and behave; 
various kinds of authoritarian restraints will be imposed on 
society. So these futurists are saying that it's inevitable, it's the 
right direction to go to have more and more  

control over the individual and to have more and more control 
over the independent nations. And that's very frightening. 
 
And I tend to think that in the debate about private schools and 
so-called public schools, which is probably a misnomer, is that we 
have to realize that if we are imposed to the growing trend in 
private schools, we must make our government financed schools 
minimal to the values that people hold dear in this country, one of 
which is national sovereignty, individual freedom of the family. 
And in all kinds of ways this is imposing a philosophy on students 
that is as much a religious philosophy as the most parochial 
private school. And that very much frightens me, and it frightens 
many people who want to see the public schools as viable. 
 
I think of people in my riding who do not believe that the private 
school is an option for them. A neighbour of mine with eight 
children, who I see him walking from work after doing his hard 
day's work with a huge Bible going to some church service with 
his family in the week day, and to him this type of philosophy 
would be considered a total anathema to everything he believes in. 
 
Now you say, well he may or may not be right. That's not a 
purpose of the Department of Education or this legislature, is not 
to decide theological views but to respect the religious freedom of 
families. And I think we have to be very careful of this kind of 
philosophy that's emphasized in this book. 
 
I think the member from Regina North East has some questions, 
but that will be all for now for this session. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If the minister 
has no response, I'll proceed. I really have to comment, and I'm 
tempted to ask the minister, either she doesn't attend caucus 
meetings or the member from Saskatoon doesn't attend caucus 
meetings where these questions could have been asked, but it is 
allowed in the legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Moosomin really is out of line, Mr. Chairman . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I think we should just get back to the 
business at hand, which is estimates. I think it should be noted that 
any member of the legislature has the right to ask questions. Let us 
now continue. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree, Mr. Chairman, any member does 
have the right to ask questions, and I accept that, but I thought that 
that comment maybe ought to be made. 
 
Madam Minister, I made my statement here the other day when 
we began on a number of issues, so I will proceed directly to some 
specific questions. And I want to deal first with the question of the 
foundation grants formula. I have information, because that is the 
latest annual report, on the foundation grant formula per pupil 
rates for 1985. Can you tell the House and the committee, Madam 
Minister, what the rate will be for — and let's do them one at a 
time and then I think it will be easier to follow — for kindergarten 
for 1986 and then again for 1987? I notice they're also divided into 
two categories: major urban divisions and other school divisions. 
And I assume other  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1610 
 
 

school divisions mean rural divisions, and smaller communities, 
and so on. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the rates and . . . Does the 
member want kindergarten and then division 1? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, Madam Minister. It's divided on the 
basis of kindergarten, division 1 and 2, division 3, and division 4. 
If you have them all for both '86 and '87, you can handle them all 
at the same time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I have '86s, not '87s. Well it's for the 
year' 87-87. Okay. This year kindergarten for urbans is 1,244; for 
rural kindergarten, 1,267. Division 1 and 2: urban, 2,415; for rural 
it's 2,454. Division 3: urban, 2,624; division 3 rural, 2,670. 
Division 4: urban, 2,979; for rural 3,028. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Since we're 
on formulas, I would like to ask you another question. I know that 
there is a rural pupil transportation rate that is established, and it 
was $108, and I'm wondering whether it is being changed in the 
present budget and, if so, by how much? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the transportation rates have 
been increased 2 per cent, on the average. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What are the rates, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — One hundred and eleven. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell us, the committee, Madam 
Minister — I know that the increase in operating grants is at 4 or 5 
per cent, 5 per cent — why you would not have a like increase in 
the transportation costs; those are costs that have gone up 
significantly, and there must be a rationale for it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well there's a couple of very good reasons. 
First of all the price of gas hasn't been increasing at a very great 
rate. And in fact, to refresh the member's memory, it was this 
government that, in fact, removed the gas tax, and which, in fact, 
created some savings. However, the simple fact is that in 1986 we 
do not estimate that the price of gas will be that high. 
 
I will also tell him that we have, through the educational 
development fund, a category for efficiency measures which many 
boards are in fact taking an opportunity to use. For instance when 
it comes to transportation, there are several that are converting 
their buses and have done that and will be able to run them at a 
lesser rate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I hear your argument, and 
I will not argue it. I don't agree with it, obviously. Two per cent .. 
Surely the cost of transportation has increased in the last year by 
more than 2 per cent. I remind you that you removed the gas tax in 
1982; surely you're not thinking that that's lowering the cost of 
operation every year since then; that's only a one-time reduction. I 
submit that the price of gasoline as it is now at the pumps, which it 
is in the city of Regina, is not the similar kind of price that it is 
everywhere else. So there  

is as much as a 10 cent a litre difference across Saskatchewan. We 
will want to pursue that in another forum with another department 
at some point in time, so I don't want to get into that now. 
 
I really don't think that that's a very strong argument for an 
increase of 2 per cent for transportation costs for school boards 
who have seen those costs, I suggest, increase of much more than 
that in the past year. 
 
Can I ask . . . We'll remain on transportation grants for a moment. 
Can I ask: what kind of formula do you apply for funding urban 
school transportation, because you do have a program under which 
the department, I know, provides funding to urban school 
divisions. What kind of financial formula do you apply in this 
case? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I really don't think the transportation policy 
has changed a great deal since you were in and around education. 
However, there's high-cost, special education students within the 
urban centres and that is to a maximum of $1,930 per pupil, per 
year. Then there is all other urban transportation expenditures up 
to a maximum $353 per pupil, and the policy on who can qualify 
for transportation has not changed. If there is no school in the area, 
an urban board may choose to bus and get some help from the 
department; if there is no program pertaining to a particular — oh, 
it might be industrial arts or something like that; they can qualify 
under that. a second language is another one. And the four 
kilometres is still in legislation as it has been since 1978. I believe 
that's the . . oh, and special education. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are these, minister . . . I appreciate that 
these are the numbers for this coming year. Is that an increase over 
last year, or is it remaining the same? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The first figure that I gave you — 1,900 — 
last year was 1,890. And the second one — the maximum of 353 
for '86 — for 1985 was 346. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I have a copy of the urban 
transportation policy, so I won't ask you to repeat it in the House. 
But I'm wondering whether . . And I know you mentioned that 
there has been not any change, and I'm not sure whether you said 
there hasn't been any change to the policy or nothing substantial. 
 
Has your department or yourself, minister, reviewed this policy 
recently to see whether there may be weaknesses in it and how it 
might be improved? Or is it just being maintained exactly as it has 
been for, say the last four years? We'll take that period of time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We've had some discussions for some time 
on urban transportation. And you will be well aware of some of 
the special problems that especially large urbans face. 
 
The regional directors were asked to review the policy, which they 
did so in February and March of this year, 1986. And they have 
recommended no change to the policy at this point in time. 
However, they have pointed out that the four kilometres is 
becoming a problem and that perhaps we will have to look at it, in 
consultation with the large urbans, and try and come up with some  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1611 
 

kind of alternative solution for it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would encourage that, because I agree. I 
don't agree that there are no problems with it. I think that there are 
some things that need looking at. 
 
I'll give you one example. Right now there may be . . . The longest 
distance, as I understand it, in Regina that the school system 
transports students is about eight-tenths of a mile. There are other 
situations where students are having to walk in excess of that. 
 
And I'm not suggesting that students are unprepared to walk. But 
I'm saying that there are circumstances in which the department 
and yourself should be considering factors such as safety, factors 
such as the kind of traffic areas that students have to pass through. 
 
And therefore I would like to know whether you are able, as the 
minister, under direction or under recommendation of your 
department, to make some discretionary judgements under this 
policy to allow for consideration of those things, because I don't 
think we should be ignoring safety factors when it comes to our 
young children — kindergarten children, or grade 8's, or whatever 
grade you have. 
 
Are you able, Madam Minister, to apply some discretion in 
recognizing some of the costs that some school divisions in urbans 
might have that result from the problems of safety that parents and 
the school division, in fact, may be concerned with? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well yes, Mr. Chairman, we do have that 
flexibility, and safety hazards are a very key consideration when 
looking at the request from an urban board. I might also add that 
boards have their own policies on that, and in fact make their 
decisions based on such factors as traffic, potential hazard areas — 
a highway, as an example, that students may have to cross when 
there is no school in their immediate attendance area. So those 
factors do come into the play, and they come into play under board 
policy. 
 
But yes, we do have the flexibility within the department to 
recognize some safety reasons or hazards that students may be 
dealing with. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm glad of that. The reason I asked, 
Madam Minister, is because in the policy itself it doesn't state that 
— and I'm not suggesting it should, as long as I can be assured — 
unless I have missed it, but I just wanted to be assured that that 
discretionary factor is there. 
 
I know you've had correspondence from a group of people who 
live in the Glencairn district in Regina, specifically relating to this 
kind of situation, where children have to walk really distances that 
are much in excess of what other children who are transported 
would have had to walk, even though they live in what is another 
area where another school is designated to be built. But they are 
having to walk greater distances than students who are actually 
being bussed — quite a bit greater  

distances — and, indeed, are having to cross some extremely 
heavy traffic streets in the city. 
 
And in the request that these families have made, they have been 
told that the policy of the department is what it is, and there was 
never any mention made of the discretionary factor. And I'm not 
suggesting you personally, Madam Minister; I'm just making a 
point of fact here and raising the concern. 
 
I think it's important that some discretionary judgements be 
allowed to be made, and I am glad that you have given me that 
assurance because, as I said, you cannot have a cut-and-dried 
situation. you will always have some exceptional circumstances, 
and I think they need to be recognized. 
 
I will therefore assure this committee of people that that 
discretionary power is there, so that when they next approach their 
school division they will be able to bring that to the division's 
attention, and the division can in turn make a request to the 
department so that these people can be satisfied that their concerns 
have been addressed. 
 
Another question, Madam Minister: looking through the annual 
report, I noticed that in 1984 tax arrears for school divisions were 
$31,244,925. In 1983 the tax arrears had been $28,249,068. That's 
a bit of an increase in one year. I'm wondering: can you tell the 
committee what the tax arrears were for 1985? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, just for purposes of 
giving a figure today, it would be approximately 36, 37 million. 
And we would have to pull together two sets of figures, and we 
don't have one with us, and that would come from audited 
statements. So my figure for 1985 is incomplete at this point in 
time. But we would estimate it at 36,37. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I guess that tells us that since 
1983 there has been a continuous increase in the amount of 
arrears. I suspect partly that might reflect the economic conditions, 
and I suspect it also may reflect in 1985, where actually there has 
been a fairly substantial increase in arrears, the fact that there are 
no longer property improvement grants provided — which were 
not only a relief for the property owner for property taxes for 
education that people who own homes paid, but also, from the 
point of view of school boards and municipalities, were an 
incentive for people to pay their taxes, and not only pay them but 
pay them early. 
 
And if you're involved with a school division or a municipality, 
the early payment of taxes, I'm sure none of us would argue, is an 
asset, and the kind of situation that local government boards look 
forward to because it reduces their borrowing costs and other 
related kinds of costs. 
 
So I think the point that needs to be made here is that, when you 
see a growing arrears in taxes, it must tell you that there is 
something not quite right economically, and I think also reflects 
on the matter of the removal of the property improvement grants. 
 
And along with grants, Madam Minister, I want to turn to  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1612 
 
 

the matter of capital project and money for capital grants. I note 
that there has, over the years, been some interesting numbers that 
have been provided in school capital. 
 
In 1982 - 83 school construction grants, $13.112 million, which is 
a 12.5 per cent increase over the previous year; in 1983 - 1984, 
$13.640 million, which was a 4 per cent increase over the previous 
year. In 1984 - 85 it's difficult to calculate, because apparently 
there were some changes in calculations of funding, but it appears 
it was about 12.276 million, which was a reduction over the 
previous year. In 1985 - 86, 69 million, which is a 10.6 per cent 
increase; in 1986 -87 it looks like there is a reduction again — it's 
down to 58 million. 
 
And I'm wondering why there is a reduction in the amount of 
school capital construction grants this year over last year, 
especially in light of the fact that there have been a lot of 
announcements made on various school capital projects, both by 
the department or yourself, Madam Minister, and by individual 
MLAs throughout Saskatchewan. Why is there a reduction in the 
amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there is no reduction. It has 
been moved to the property management Crown, that figure, and I 
thought that was stated in your Estimates book; perhaps it's not. 
There is no reduction. 
 
Just a point on the tax arrears. I would suggest to the member, 
before he draws any firm conclusion as to why, that he would 
have to take into consideration any kind of increases in new 
businesses, buildings on property, including homes. And with the 
growth in the population and in the small-business sector that 
we've had, I would suggest that that gain is not out of proportion 
— the ratio is not out of proportion with what was in place. So 
perhaps you should have a look at that aspect of it also. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I won't argue with that logic or illogic. It 
seems to me that if economic conditions are so prosperous that 
there is this tremendous growth which your government always 
talks about in business opportunity — and I could give you a list 
the length of my arm on the number of businesses in Regina that 
have closed in the last three years — but if everything is thriving, 
it shouldn't matter, Madam Minister; the tax arrears should not 
have grown, because prosperity leads to quicker payments of 
taxes. So I really don't know where your argument is coming 
from. 
 
But I want to pursue this capital construction matter further, 
because I'm wondering . . . If, as you say, capital funding for 
schools has been now transferred to the property management 
corporation — and indeed it is on page 134 of the Estimates book 
— I see in that, I believe, $50.4 million for Education in the 
property management corporation, Education capital. 
 
Are you able to tell me, Madam Minister, how much of that is for 
technical schools capital, university capital, and the school 
divisions which we are considering here? If you split that $50 
million up among those three school components, then the 
reduction of capital money for the regular school system, and I 
mean division K to 12, then there has been a massive decrease in 
the amount of  

funding. 
 
Now I'm not stating that to be so, because I'm sure there has to be 
a reason why these numbers, as they are in the Estimates as 
presented by the Minister of Finance, are misleading, not only 
myself, but the public. There's got to be an explanation. Can you 
provide the explanation, Madam Minister, so we can clarify that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only answer for 
what is in Education, and the amount $11.7 million, and the 
remainder of that would probably be with Advanced Education. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. 11.7 million, is that what you 
said? 11.7 million. That is a reduction . . . That is less than what 
was provided in 1983 - 84, because that was 13.6 million. In 
1982 - 83, which 13.1 million, that is a very substantial amount of 
money less that was provided in those years. And I'm wondering, 
how can you justify that reduction with your array of capital 
project announcements? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, he neglected to tell 
you that it's the same level that it was at last year. You know, if 
you're going to tell figures, don't be so picky about which ones 
you're telling. You might as well tell them all. 
 
It is not unusual to see the budgeted amount for down payments 
for school construction vary from year to year. Let me go to 
'71 - 72, was 4 million; and then '72 - 73 it dropped down to 3 
million; and then went back up again to 4 in '74; and then in 
'74 - 75 it went to 6 million; and then 7, 11, and then it dropped 
down to 9; and then in 1978 -79 it was down to $5 million. So it's 
not unusual to see it move up and down. In 1979 -80, for the 
member's benefit, it was $7 million. We have consistently held it 
within that range from 13 million to 11 throughout the four-year 
period without any great fluctuation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only thing consistent, Madam 
Minister, is the continuous decline in the amount of money you're 
providing in capital projects. And I appreciate the fact that they 
may vary, and I appreciate the fact that the cost of construction in 
1986 -87 is considerably higher than it was in 1977 or 1978. You 
could have built a considerable amount more, probably, for $7 
million in 1978, then you can today for $11.7 million because of 
inflation. I just want to make that point. 
 
Your amount of funding in capital this year is 11.7. You say it was 
11.7 last year; it was 12.2 in 1984 - 85. Yet this year the 
government has made more announcements, and if I'm wrong, I 
would appreciate if you'd provide me with a list of the capital 
projects that you have approved. But it seems to me you have 
announced more projects for 1986 -87 than you had in 1985 - 86. 
And so I'm asking: how can you justify the same level of money 
when, in fact, you are talking bout more projects which should 
cost you more money? You can only conclude one of two things: 
that some of those projects are not real and they're simply 
announcements,  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1613 
 

or that you don't have enough money in the budget to pay for 
them, and therefore your Minister of Finance is playing some 
games in order to try to keep his budget numbers less than what 
they actually are. 
 
So would you please tell me how you can justify the same amount 
of funding this year as last year and yet announce what seems to 
me a large number of capital projects? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that's really not very 
hard to figure out. Firstly, I would be happy to send the member 
. . . I will endeavour to run a copy off and get it back to him later 
this evening if I can. There were 42 major capital projects. And I 
don't recall the specific number last year. It might have been 38, in 
around there somewhere. 
 
We have this year taken a look at some smaller projects that have 
been requested for many, many years. And some of them may be 
the simple addition of computer room, library resource room. 
We've also looked at providing some major roof repairs, and we've 
been doing the laminated beams that we've had some difficulties 
with. So instead of going with five or six or seven or eight major 
projects, we have looked at trying to renovate and put some 
additions on to schools where boards have had their requests in for 
a lot of years. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, the amount of capital 
construction that you're doing this year is not going to be as much 
as last year. If you allow for inflation, Madam Minister, the 
amount of capital funding you're going to do this year is going to 
be less than last year, after allowing for inflation. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, our unit costs this year are 
approximately the same as last year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying that the costs have not 
increased — wage costs have not increased, material costs have 
not increase? I was to a lumber yard the other day, and I bought 
three separate items, and I can tell you that those costs have 
increased. Are you estimating your figures on the basis of no 
increase? No increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The dealer 
happens to be a friend of mine; I got a deal. 
 
Are you saying that your calculations for capital costs and the 
grants you're providing allow for no increase in the costs of 
construction in any of the areas? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That's not what I said at all, Mr. Chairman. 
The market-place, if the member doesn't know, is very 
competitive — has been for the last couple of years. And in fact a 
couple of years ago when the tenders were going out, boards were 
finding that they were coming in very reasonable, and some of 
them were under what they had actually estimated their projects 
were going to be worth. 
 
While that has tightened up to a considerable degree, it is still 
extremely competitive. And the taxpayer gets the benefit of that, 
and the consumer, when the market-place in fact is competitive. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well if you talk to anybody in the  

construction industry these days, Madam Minister, and 
tradespeople, they'll tell you some of them have not had any work 
for three years. So I won't argue with you that as a result of that 
there may be more competition just to survive. 
 
But I guess the question then is: is that the kind of economy you 
want to have, where you have people who are unemployed in the 
trades field for two or three years at a time because they are unable 
to get a job, either because there isn't enough work in the province 
in the construction industry for them to get a job, or because there 
has been a bias for the hiring of contractors, to some extent — to a 
large extent, who come out of province, bring their old staff? 
 
And Regina, in the city of Regina, you have a very prime example 
where, as far as I know — and you may correct me if I'm wrong 
— but since 1983 all school construction has been done by 
outside-of-province contractors, in the major sense. And if that's 
not the case, you can send over the information on that too. I 
would love to have a list of the different contractors who did nay 
significant school construction work in Regina. 
 
I think I heard you say that you would provide me with a list of all 
of the capital projects which your department has approved for this 
fiscal year, Madam Minister? Did I hear you say that? Can I have 
that today? And if you have it with you, can you have one of your 
staff go to our office or your office, run off that list for me so that I 
can take a look at it as we consider our estimates? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, firstly, the statement, 
another statement by the member from Regina North East is not 
true — that all major projects have gone out of province. That is 
simply not true, and I would be glad to give him the information 
that indicates that that is, in fact, not true. 
 
The member asks me what kind of an economy I would like. Well 
I can only tell him that, if I had a choice between private and 
competitive versus socialistic rule, I'll take the first any day. I 
think consumers and the taxpayers are the only ones to benefit 
from that, and not the government that might be in power. 
 
I want to clarify what list it is that he wants of construction 
projects. Does he want ones that are now under construction or 
does he want ones that are in this budget for the year '86 -87? 
Which are you asking for? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want . . Well let's have both. Let's have 
the projects which obviously were approved last year and are now 
under construction, and also those that have been approved for this 
budget. Is that clear? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I just would have thought that you had the 
projects that were approved last year, because that information 
was sent to the critic of the day. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you're in the committee 
now. I'm asking you the question: will you provide that 
information to me later today or will you not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can provide the  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1614 
 
 

'86-87 budget, which we are talking about today. I cannot provide 
the other; we would have to go back to the department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Good. Tomorrow will be quite adequate. 
And I will await to receive that tomorrow, because that's obviously 
on record. And if you did indeed provide it to the committee last 
year, then all you will have to do is dig it out, and it'll be on file 
somewhere. So I will expect to get them tomorrow, and I will 
expect to get the '86 -87 projects today. 
 
Can I ask, Madam Minister, what procedure do you use for the 
approval of the allocation of your capital money for school capital 
projects? There must be a system by which you get school boards 
who make requests, and then in turn you approve the projects 
which you think are justifiable, or which you can afford this year, 
and you do not approve others. Can you outline to the House what 
the procedure is? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do have a criteria 
that the capital projects are put under, and it would be health and 
safety . . That safety could cover things like beams; if your roof is 
in really poor shape, it would also come under that area; or if the 
building is particularly old and we have fire reports, that type of 
thing. 
 
The next one is enrolment: if the school is simply too small for the 
number of students that are there. And the third one — then we get 
into what we call the program deficiencies. For the rural areas it is 
usually gymnasiums, industrial arts, home ec, computer, those 
kinds of spaces, and library resource centres. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm sorry, I guess I didn't make my question 
quite clear. What I'm asking for is the process; that might have 
been a better word. The school division decides it needs this 
project. They must then make a request to somebody, and then 
somebody must ultimately recommend to you, Madam Minister, 
which project should go ahead. that's what I'm looking for. What's 
the process, step by step? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — First of all, the board requests a project to 
the department. There is a department team that then goes out and 
evaluates, and then approvals issued to the project are in 
accordance with the priorities that I just went over with you. There 
were basically three. And of course the available funding comes 
into place. And then the board employs an architect and proceeds 
to construct the project. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Have you consistently and always followed 
this procedure, or do you, from time to time, make exceptions, for 
whatever reasons? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the most recent that I can recall as an 
exception to this was when we had some, what I considered to be, 
severe safety problems with laminated beams, and we did not 
follow that procedure. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You have not made exception in the case of 
new capital projects. I mean, that obviously is something that's 
easy to project over a period of time. You  

have not made exceptions in the middle of a year for new capital 
projects. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what the 
member is getting at, but let me try and guess. I would believe that 
he is referring to Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and perhaps 
Moose Jaw, and neighbourhood schools. Last year we gave 
approval for those city boards to go ahead and being planning for 
some projects. And I believe that that is going to have to take 
place, that eventually the department is going to have to get to the 
point where, such as the Department of Health has done in the 
construction of nursing homes, and that is look at an overall, 
five-year plan, so that boards can, in fact, plan well ahead for their 
capital projects. And I guess that was perhaps one step in getting 
to that point. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, you guess well, and 
so you should, because indeed you did make the exception, and 
you conveniently made it during the process of a by-election 
campaign. So in other words, what you on your own, or what you 
did because you were so instructed by your own Premier or by 
your Deputy Leader, decided that the expediency of politics was 
more important than the needs of students in the class-room. And 
I'm not suggesting that these schools which you announced were 
not schools that were not needed. Indeed they were desperately 
needed. 
 
It's just the point is that you had an opportunity, because you were 
aware of the need when you prepared your 1985 - 1986 budget, 
you were quite aware of the need, yet you said those school 
divisions, no, we're not going to give you approval. Along comes 
the possibility of an election, or indeed it ultimately became a 
by-election, and all of a sudden you reconsidered. All I can say is, 
we should have more by-elections because then the needs of our 
school divisions and our children are going to be more adequately 
met. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, can you give me a list of those schools 
which you gave approval for but did not provide any budgeting for 
in 1985 - 1986? That's those that you announced either in October 
or the early part of November. You must have that with you. You 
certainly would have known that I'd be asking about the year 
before. Can you send over the list of those school projects which 
were approved then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly wouldn't 
have guessed that we might be doing 1985 estimates. However, 
he's quite right in terms of that announcement and when it came. 
However, I would also suggest he not be so sensitive. I mean not 
everything stops for five months preceding a by-election. 
 
I would also like the member to make a very clear note on it, and 
that is that the approval, though it comes in that year, comes out of 
the next year funding. There was Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Regina 
Public School Division, which was the school of Parkridge, I 
believe, and the Regina Roman Catholic board which was Maple 
Ridge. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many schools in Saskatoon  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1615 
 

and how many in Moose Jaw? I'm aware of the ones in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — One in Saskatoon; one in Moose Jaw; two 
in Regina — one public and one with the separate school system. 
One is Parkridge and the other one is Maple Ridge in Regina. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Don't you think, Madam Minister, that if 
you'd have given the school boards the go ahead when you gave 
the announcement of capital projects for 1985 - 1986, they might 
well be under way now, and therefore we wouldn't have a situation 
of extreme overcrowding and indeed some talk of transporting, 
although I think that's now changed to some degree? 
 
Wouldn't you agree that had you given the approval when you 
should have given it in the budget that was introduced in 
1985 - 1986, instead of waiting for your politically opportune 
moment, once again ignoring the needs of our children and our 
teachers and our school divisions, that those schools would be 
much farther ahead in the process of getting ready for construction 
than they are today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, no, I don't agree at all. That's like me 
standing in here and saying when that good member over there 
was minister of Education, he wouldn't give approval for the 
Johnson High School, even though there was substantial 
overcrowding. I mean, how silly can you be? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I don't know why the 
minister has to get quite so snitty when we're asking direct 
questions, unless she feels that she's being pressed. 
 
I remind the minister that maybe it's time that we put one 
falsehood of this government aside. Once again it showed the kind 
of things that this government is prepared to do in order to try to 
gain some political advantage. And I wish they would learn that 
playing games with the Saskatchewan public, whether it's games 
that affect our children in our schools or games that affect our 
workers who are trying to get jobs, is actually going the other way, 
and it's working against this political party opposite and this 
government, rather than working for them. 
 
The high school in Glencairn in Regina East which was built — 
and it's good that it was — was approved by an NDP government 
in 1982 - 1983. It was mentioned in the budget. It was announced 
to the school division that the planning should proceed. the only 
thing that changed, Mr. Chairman, is that when this government 
got elected, they delayed it for a year. They delayed it for a year, 
and that school could have been built and it could have been 
opened at least one year earlier than it was except for the 
politicking of this government opposite. And obviously it didn't 
help very much because the member who was elected at that time 
decided to leave the legislature and leave those constituents 
unrepresented for seven months while the Premier tried to make 
up his mind whether to call an election or whether to call a 
by-election. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to get to ask you a specific question. I'll 
wait until I have the minister's attention.  

Madam Minister, can you tell me the new capital projects or major 
renovations which have been approved this year for each of the 
public school system in Regina and the Catholic school system in 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The renovations are at Connaught in 
Regina, plus there is approximately a half a million dollars 
budgeted for relocatables for the Regina systems, and I do not 
have where the relocatables would be going. 
 
Mr. Chairman, just a comment in terms of when approval is given. 
And dating back to '82, you know, in one aspect the member is 
right; approval was given in this year and that year, and I could 
continue to go back, which he didn't do. And that was starting 
from '76 on — '76, '77, '78, '79. And yet while the politician was 
out giving the approval, somehow it was never quite budgeted for 
in the department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you get so carried away 
with trying to make the political argument, and I want to tell you 
that indeed the planning was budgeted for in the department for 
that high school, and that is the fact, and the record will show. 
Now having made your point, I wish you would answer the 
question. The question was this: can you give me a list of capital 
projects in the two school systems in Regina that you've approved 
in this budget — both major renovation and new projects? Have 
you somehow now forgotten about the new schools which you 
announced for the two school jurisdictions. I don't think you have. 
It must have been an oversight. But can you give me a list of those 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, it wasn't an oversight. Your question 
was specific in that you asked for major renovations and I gave 
that to you — Connaught. 
 
An Hon. Member: And new construction. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well you've added that now. Yes, I will 
give that to you. The renovations we will deal with: Connaught, 
Regina public school system, approximately $500,000 for 
relocatables for the Regina system; schools: Park Ridge, Regina 
Public School Division; Maple Ridge, Regina Roman Catholic; 
and that's it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. So what you have really done, 
Madam Minister, is taken what was announced last year and 
reannounced it again this year, and there is really no addition to 
the capital project array in the city of Regina in addition to or 
above what was announced last fall. You are introducing nothing 
new in this budget for capital construction in the city of Regina for 
schools. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it was made very clear when 
the announcement came that the board was being given prior 
approval to being their planning so that they could then begin 
construction at an earlier point in time. It was stated then and there 
that those would have been the projects that would have come in 
the '86 -87 budget. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I guess that's the point. And certainly, I'm 
sure that if I was a member of the school division, I would have 
been glad to get that advance notice. The point is: why would you 
not treat all other  



 
June 2, 1986 

1616 
 
 

school divisions in kind? We have a lot of school divisions in the 
province. Surely if you would stop playing your politics with 
education, you could have also indicated last fall to other school 
divisions what you were going to announce in this budget so that 
they could have started their planning. I mean, that's the worst 
kinds of games you can play. Selectively you will indicate some 
school divisions, and others you will say nothing. Now have it one 
way or the other, but don't treat those school divisions who elect 
responsible board members who try to plan for their children's 
education needs in different ways. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, you mentioned a little while ago that 
there's a need in our school budgeting, for construction purposes, 
for some five-year plans. Well I know that you have had sent to 
you a letter from teachers who teach at the Bishop James 
Mahoney High School in Saskatoon. I don't know what your reply 
has been. But I think in their petition, because they also wrote me 
a letter outlining the problem, and indeed I then wrote to you, and 
yes you did indeed reply to my letter, in which you said nothing. 
 
But what they have said is this, and I think this tells something 
about your long-range planning, or the lack of it. They said: 
 

We are extremely concerned about the recent announcement by 
the Department of Education concerning capital grants allocated 
for the expansion of our school. (And this is Bishop James 
Mahoney High School.) . . . 
 
Current and long-term student numbers indicate that twelve 
classrooms will be necessary. The eight-classroom addition 
approved will only serve short-term needs. 
 
According to the Saskatoon Catholic School Boards' 
projections, when the eight-classroom addition is ready (fall of 
1987) our projected enrolment will fill all available space. One 
year later, we will already be short of space . . . 

 
Now wouldn't you admit, Madam Minister, that, if you were really 
implementing long-range planning, you would foresee the need 
here and approve an adequate expansion to the school so that you 
wouldn't have to have this period in between in which there is 
going to be a shortage of space? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Regina North East talks about games, and so he should. He's been 
into one for as long as I've ever known the gentleman around the 
political arena. I would suggest any kind of concern that he shows 
for board members and the decision that they take is sadly late and 
is probably misplaced. 
 
He asks why we don't give this to other divisions. Well, he's well 
aware of the problems facing the larger urban centres on 
neighbourhood schools. It isn't all that often that rural 
Saskatchewan gets an opportunity to build a new school — a 
whole new school. They do renovations; they often do additions; 
but they don't see a lot of new  

schools, in total. 
 
But that's not the case in urban Saskatchewan because of the 
unique problems that a city like Saskatoon and Regina faces. 
While they have some of their inner core schools closing, they still 
have a need for brand-new schools to be opening up in the 
subdivision, and those are what we call the neighbourhood 
schools. The pressure points that we have been facing in urban 
Saskatchewan were felt extremely strong last year in the schools 
that were given the approval to begin planning, and that they 
would then receive the moneys in 1986 - 87. 
 
(1615) 
 
As for Bishop Mahoney, the member is well aware — or should 
be, if he's not — that we have reached an agreement with the 
board for an addition. And while I appreciate the concern from the 
group of teachers from that particular school that came to me, they 
did receive a reply, and I'm sure that they understood it better than 
what the member from Regina North East has understood it. 
 
However, the department does deal with the board in those 
matters, for it is the board that lays down how they're going to be 
built, where it's going to be built, and when and where they're 
going to have the additions, and that type of thing. So I don't think 
the member from Regina North East will find it unusual when I 
say that we have been dealing with the school board on it and in 
fact have reached an agreement. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will you give an undertaking to the 
committee and to the school boards of Saskatchewan that this fall 
you will again indicate to . . . Well let's stay with urban school 
divisions because that's the one you seem to think only need to do 
forward planning. I disagree with that, but that's your position. 
Okay, will you indicate this fall to urban school boards the schools 
that they should be planning for the next year when the next 
budget is introduced? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only say that 
many of the boards have in fact been into long-term planning. 
And, you know, the member is planting words in my mouth again 
by saying that I said rural boards don't need to do the long-term 
planning. they do not have the pressure enrolments that urban 
Saskatchewan has, and their long-term planning can be done 
perhaps in an easier method than what the urbans find themselves 
in, particularly if their population is shifting from subdivision to 
subdivision or from down-town Regina to the outskirts. Their 
long-term planning is much more difficult. 
 
The issue of long-term planning is still in discussion within the 
department and within several of the boards. The Saskatoon 
Catholic board in particular has outlined a five-year plan. I have 
met with them and we've had some discussions, plus they have 
been meeting with people in the department. But to this day, I do 
not have a firm direction in place that we will be able to go, and 
that will remain to be discussed with the likes of treasury board, 
Department of Finance, and the rest of government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, your new policy of  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1617 
 

announcing school capital project funding only lasted for a period 
of last year in the fall, and you're not proposing to continue it. Is 
that what I'm hearing you say? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, I didn't say that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, will you clarify 
then what you said? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have simply stated to the 
member from Regina North East that we are not at a stage where 
we have one policy in place for long-term planning for all school 
boards, because we recognize the very unique differences in needs 
between urban Saskatchewan and rural. And right now on the 
issue of long-term planning we have been trying to work with the 
urban boards and within the department to come up with a plan 
that can be taken to government, to Finance and to government, 
and put into place. We have not got to that point yet where we are 
able to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, are you saying to the 
committee that boards have not done long-term planning until 
now? Are you saying that this is new to the school boards, and that 
it's only happening now, and that school boards have been so 
negligent that they have not done long-term planning in the past 
and have not had a projection of their capital needs over the next 
period of years? 
 
If you're saying that, Madam Minister, I will suggest you are 
totally erroneous. School boards, indeed, have done planning, and 
I wish you would make up your mind. Have school boards done 
planning, or is this something new that you're suggesting school 
boards are doing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, no, I didn't say that. If 
the member would reflect back for a minute, he will probably 
remember what I said. it is the department that has been into 
looking at the policy on long-term discussions, long-term 
planning. I just stood here and told you that the urbans — 
Saskatoon Catholic was the one that I used as an example — has 
done some very good long-term planning, as have many and most 
of the other boards. I did not say that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Then, Madam Minister, if you now will 
agree with me that school boards have done future planning — 
call it long-term planning if you like — what would prevent you 
from doing in this year what you did last year — and that's later in 
the year, say in the fall — letting the school boards know what 
projects they should be planning for the next fiscal year when you 
bring in your new budget, or another government brings in a new 
budget? What prevents you from doing that when you did it last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, three things: financial 
considerations, budgeting processes, and pressure points are the 
three facts that we take into consideration, and those will remain 
for at least this year until we get back to the Department of 
Finance in what we think, perhaps, is feasible to take place on 
long-term planning. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why would you not have taken  

financial considerations, pressure points, and whatever your third 
criteria was in the last year when you made the earlier 
announcements? If it was legitimate to do that then, why is it not 
legitimate to do it this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, periodically, as good 
as we can project enrolments, periodically our predictions don't 
always turn out to be reality, as strange as that may seem to the 
member across the way. Perhaps reality to him is something 
different that it is to me. But obviously enrolments is a good 
example, and I could use a few specific areas where in fact that 
happens. 
 
The other thing that comes with it is the closing of schools. If a 
board is looking at closing one or two, or in the case of a few 
divisions around the province, three or four, and making one new 
school, obviously some planning takes places with that, 
particularly with the community. And so if the closing of a school 
comes into it. It is not always a simple matter of doing out your 
planning and saying it shall happen in 1986 or '87. And we took 
those things into consideration when we looked at the pressure 
points with the four schools that were given approval to begin 
planning. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, the closing of 
schools, as followed by school boards, is such . . . and their policy 
that they give the community at least a year's notice so the 
community, and so do you, Madam Minister, and your department 
know at least a year ahead of time that a school board intends to 
close schools. That is the general policy that responsible school 
boards are applying. 
 
Having made that comment, let me turn to another question on 
school capital. How many rural school divisions — and I would 
include rural to be such divisions as the Humboldt Roman 
Catholic Separate School system or like systems — how many 
rural school divisions have got approved in your budget, new 
school construction? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 
could clarify the question. Did you say how many have not? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I asked, Madam Minister, how many rural 
school division new capital projects have you approved in your 
budget as opposed to urban? Okay. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well just in dealing with new schools, it 
balances out at four and four — four rural new schools and four 
urban new schools. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you for that information. The reason 
I asked, Madam Minister, because I wanted to clarify something. 
In your earlier remarks on another question, you said that we don't 
approve near as many rural new capital projects as you approve 
urban. And here you're telling me that what you said earlier no 
longer applies because now I have asked a different question. 
 
You have approved new rural school construction — four schools 
— and you've approved new urban school construction — four 
schools — even though you argue that the pressure is in the urbans 
because of core schools closing down and population moving out 
are far greater  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1618 
 
 

than they are in the rural. Now, Madam Minister, use one 
argument, otherwise we will proceed very slowly in here today. 
 
Now can you correct yourself? Are there greater pressures in the 
urban school divisions for new school construction than there are 
in the rural, and if so, how do you justify that there are only four 
urban new schools approved this year and four for the rural? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one of the main 
differences between the urban and the rural is that when you 
approve a new school for the rural area, most of the time it is 
replacement of the old school. It is not another school or a new 
school in a subdivision. They're not adding to the number of 
schools that would be in that town or that community. 
 
You know the member hits his head like he doesn't understand. I 
don't find that difficult to understand. 
 
Let me use Leader as an example. Leader was given approval for a 
new school this year, but there will be several small schools 
closing outside the town of Leader in order to accommodate the 
new school being built at Leader. That is what the board looked at 
and requested, and they decided that's the best way to go with it. 
 
So instead of having like you had . . . for instance you keep talking 
about Glencairn in Regina, where the F.W. Johnson school was 
built. There was no high school over there, so that was put over 
there. But in the case of the school going into Leader, it is 
replacement for two or three smaller schools. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, one more question. Are 
you saying that when an urban school divisions closes a school, as 
urban school divisions have done, then therefore there is no 
replacement element involved? Or are you saying that when the 
F.W. Johnson Collegiate is built — and it was certainly needed — 
and therefore Central Collegiate was closed, that there was no 
replacement component involved? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, no, not in its entirety. I recognize that a 
shift in population, the mobility, the new subdivisions that open up 
in terms of city planning, that type of thing, are very much a factor 
in the cities. So you can't just in isolation take one reason and 
compare rural to urban. It doesn't work that way. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, along with the funding 
from the department, I wonder whether you and your government 
has addressed a problem, whether you have addressed a certain 
problem — is one dealing with the insurance that schools have 
had to pay for. And insurance for school divisions have increased 
by 50 per cent, 100 per cent, and depending on the school division, 
both liability and other insurance have increased very 
dramatically. I'm wondering, what kind of allowance have you 
made in the calculation of your operating grants to recognize the 
tremendous increase in insurance costs that some school divisions 
have had to incur? 
 
(1630) 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the operating grant, as 
it relates to insurance, first of all we don't give specific areas the 
increase. The overall operating grant received an increase, and as 
to the components of the expenditures that a board may have, you 
know, that's viewed with the overall picture in mind. 
 
There's no doubt that the issue of the rising costs of insurance is a 
concern to trustees and government, and we have been in 
discussion with them in trying to sort out the whys and perhaps 
some solutions. I'm also aware that there are several school 
divisions that have gone together and bought their insurance. Four 
divisions, for example, have gone together and bought their 
insurance and got a better deal than what the individual one was 
doing. That's nothing different or new for them because they've 
done it in the past with buses also. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, the Minister of Urban 
Affairs informs me when we considered the Urban Affairs 
estimate, that discussions are taking place with Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association and his department to see if 
there can be a resolve of this very serious insurance difficulty that 
local governments have had to face. What involvement have you, 
Madam Minister, and your department had in those deliberations 
on behalf of education? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, each one 
is dealing with their own agencies — Urban Affairs with SUMA; 
Rural Affairs probably with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities). And as I said earlier, we're dealing with 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). 
 
We are just at a point of trying to put together a data base in order 
to have something to come back to an overall group with, to find 
out the severity of the problem and who it impacts most on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm a little surprised at what I'm hearing. 
And maybe my question wasn't clear or maybe your answer wasn't 
clear. But it seems to me, Madam Minister, that a government in 
charge would have looked at the problem that municipalities face, 
recreation boards face, school boards face, and then determine that 
it's necessary to have some co-ordination of finding the solution 
here. 
 
What I'm hearing you say is that the Minister of Urban Affairs is 
going off on his own, dealing with Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association; you are going off in your direction, 
dealing with the school trustees association; and I don't know what 
other ministers are doing at all. Now I hope that that's not what 
you said, and I will not suggest that's what you said until I've given 
you an opportunity to clarify it. 
 
Is there some means through the cabinet, with your involvement 
of your officials' involvement, to co-ordinate the seeking of the 
solution to this problem? And if there isn't, why not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, first of all, the member did not 
understand me correctly, or chose not to understand me correctly, 
or perhaps didn't hear me. I said we are  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1619 
 

meeting with SSTA to collect some data on the extent of the 
problem that school boards are facing with the rising cost of 
insurance. Likewise, at the same time, the Minister of Urban 
Affairs is doing that with another local government body. And so 
it goes. 
 
At the point in time, after getting the data, we will be able to come 
together within cabinet and bring all the factors that have been 
impacted by the insurance. That is what I said. Is that 
understandable? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Quite understandable, and that's why I'm 
worried. Madam Minister, can you tell me: is there a committee of 
cabinet involving all of the departments involved, or is there a 
committee of officials involving all the departments involved, or 
are you still off on your own? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There is a co-ordinating body, Mr. 
Chairman, and the chair of it is Consumer Affairs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is this a co-ordinating body of officials, or 
is there also a committee of cabinet that's involved? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well at this point in time it's a little of both. 
I mean, I've already said that the ministers are meeting, officials 
are meeting with SSTA. I don't think that's difficult to understand. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Which ministers are on this ministers' 
committee, Madam Minister, that you referred to? The ministers 
are meeting; can you tell me which ministers are involved and 
which ministers are on the committee that are meeting, I hope 
regularly, on this question? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I already stated that 
the ministers that deal with local government bodies have been 
directed, with their departments. There's the Minister of 
Education; there is the Minister of urban Affairs; the minister 
responsible for the Crown corporation of SGI; and there is the 
Minister of Rural Affairs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you would 
have told me that 10 minutes ago, we could have been on another 
subject. I just want to know who the ministers are, Madam 
Minister, because I'm really serious about this. I want to be able to 
communicate with this committee from time to time to see how it's 
doing and offer and send to them any concerns that are sent to me. 
 
Can you tell me who is the minister that is the chairperson of this 
committee so that the public and so that others can have access to 
this committee? Who is the lead minister here? I assume it's the 
Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, but can you confirm 
that for me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I stated that three minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this minister reacts 
strangely. She didn't state anything of the sort. She made a 
generalized statement about the Department of Consumer Affairs 
being involved and somebody else being involved. We finally got 
her to answer who the  

minister is. I will appreciate dealing with that minister, I'm sure, 
and I will refer concerns that the minister has, and I think that's 
important. I don't say it in a facetious sense. I think it's important 
that the public knows and that the members of the opposition 
know, and that the members of the government side know who it 
is they're supposed to direct their concerns to. And we have 
established that now after a long protracted period of questioning 
— and I don't know why it would take that long — and I'm 
pleased with that. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, let me turn to another subject. Recently 
your department has been spending a lot of money on advertising 
— like other departments. And one of the major expenditures . . . 
and I'm not talking about information brochures to school boards, 
and so on, as part of your curriculum development; I'm talking 
about advertising. And recently you ran a series of advertisement 
of various kinds revolving around a famous Saskatchewan 
personality called Reuben Mayes dealing with, why don't you stay 
in school, type of thing. Can you tell me the total cost of that 
advertising, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we have done one 
advertising program, and the member from Regina North East has 
already given the title to, "stay in school." It is approximately 
$300,000 from start to finish. Half of it was spent in the last fiscal 
year, and half this year. I would also suggest to the member, as a 
teacher, he would well understand that that $300,000 is went spent 
when you compare it with 600 million to advertise Crown 
corporations under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, $300,000 — does that 
include all costs? Does that include production costs; placement 
costs; the fee that may have been paid to the personality? Is that 
total cost? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I said that is total cost from start to finish — 
approximately 300,000. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, can you tell me: how 
much of this is being spent for television, how much for print, how 
much for radio, how much for billboards, how much for 
brochures, and how much for the household poster which all of us 
received in our mailboxes recent? 
 
If it will be of assistance, Madam Minister, to save time, if you 
will send over that information to me, we won't have to take the 
time of the committee for the reading of it, and that would be 
sufficient. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well first of all I don't have the breakdown 
as you requested. I believe you said, how much on TV, how much 
on radio, that type of thing. All I have is phase one, the 
development costs, and then the total advertising costs from 
March; and then into phase two, April 1st to May 30th. There 
were no household posters, a general household poster which you 
said there was. There isn't. There was not a poster that was mailed 
to each household. That cost came to 319,000, and the 
components of the campaign were: TV commercial, radio 
commercial, billboard mall posters, there were . . . 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1620 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. Order! I'm sure 
the member who asked the question can't hear the answer. There's 
just too much noise in the House, and please desist. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, you didn't hear me say a 
word about not hearing quite well, actually, but thank you for your 
consideration. I know what the members opposite do get noisy 
from time to time, and to have them behave, I think is quite 
appropriate. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess I must have mistaken this poster for 
another department. Can you tell me . . . There was a poster sent 
out to all homes dealing with education and it was about 2 feet by 
3 feet. Was it not your department which sent it out? Can you tell 
me which department sent it out so I know where to ask the 
question? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, no it wasn't under my department and 
I would suggest the member talked to the minister responsible for 
Advanced Ed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will do that, Madam Minister. Can you 
tell me, this advertising, was it done through an advertising 
agency, and if so, was it one advertising agency, and which one? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we've been dealing 
with Dome Advertising, and the "stay in school" awareness 
campaign was done through Dome. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, was it tendered or did 
you just invite Dome into your office and say, well we need a little 
work done; give us a number so that we can give you the cheque; 
or was it tendered so that other Saskatchewan advertisers might 
have had an opportunity to give you a proposal or maybe give you 
better deal? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, it was not tendered and I 
would suggest that the member would have to go a long way to 
find a media campaign of this type of $300,000 from start to 
finish. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, who made the decision 
on which advertising agency? Did you make it, or did some other 
level of government made it? Who made the decision that it 
should be Dome Advertising since it wasn't tendered and you 
didn't have the benefit of being able to consider other advertising 
agency proposals? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, those kinds of 
decisions are made at the officials' level and in consultation and 
co-operation with many other people, myself included. Those are 
government decisions — government from elected people and 
from senior officials. And I don't find that unusual at all. I'm not 
sure what the member expects. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I see. Are you telling the committee, 
Madam Minister, that all decisions of your government when it 
comes to advertising are made by officials in the various 
departments, including yours? You simply have a hands-off 
policy, and your officials decide at the deputy  

level? The deputy minister decides whether it's going to be Dome 
Advertising; he's going to make that choice? You don't even ask 
for a tender from your deputy minister to find out whether he's 
made the right choice? Is that what you're telling the committee, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What did I just say? I said these things are 
done in consultation with many people involved, myself included. 
I said that very clearly — myself included. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What kind of consultation takes place? In 
other words — earlier you said that your officials made a decision, 
which means your deputy, ultimately, Madam Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That's what she said initially, and then 
she followed up with a comment that there is some consultation. 
 
Madam Minister, who is consulted in this kind of a decision 
besides yourself? Is it the Deputy Premier, or is it the Premier, or 
is there a special committee of cabinet that allocates this 
advertising to selected advertising agencies so that they could fill 
their purse up in order that they might be able to assist the 
Conservative Party in its election campaign plans? 
 
You say you do a consultation process. Please inform the 
committee who is consulted before your official approves the 
advertising budget, which, I might say, for this one item is 
$300,00. That is not chicken-feed. 
 
For $300,000 you could have . . . Because you don't spend all your 
money for a new school project in one year, you could have 
approved more school class-room expansion, badly needed ones, 
for $300,000. For $300,000 you could have provided some very 
substantial resource material to our teachers in the class-rooms and 
in our high schools, including as many as 10 counsellors who 
could have then done a really good job about encouraging students 
to stay in school, as we should do. I don't argue that that's not a 
good concept; indeed we should encourage them. 
 
But I suspect, Madam Chairman, that simply spending $300,000 
on your chosen advertising firm — your Progressive Conservative 
advertising firm — is going to do the job when you could have 
done the job better by hiring some people, by providing resource 
materials, by providing institutes and workshops for teachers to 
better prepare them to be able to do that kind of work. 
 
Who, Madam Minister, if I may go back to my question, who is 
consulted, besides yourself, before this kind of advertising is 
placed with a particular advertising agency? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I find the comments utter nonsense. 
And I would line up Dome Advertising any day with the 
NDP-chosen Dunsky and Struthers — any day whatsoever. He 
wants to talk about who's got a bag full of money; you will have 
only to look across the way and there it is. 
 
The money spent on the "stay in school" campaign, Mr. Chairman, 
I will defend anywhere. We are talking about kids and students — 
many of them non-students — who have already dropped out. 
They're not in school where  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1621 
 

the teacher can reach them. They're gone by that time. They're not 
just in the class-room, and these kids are hard to reach. 
 
Now if the member from Regina North East is suggesting that kids 
are not worth to spend a dollar on, then I think he should either 
resign from here, and/or teaching, or perhaps both. He'd do 
everybody a favour if he did so. 
 
When we did the "stay in school" campaign, there were several 
discussions. And while I am not at liberty to talk about what goes 
on in cabinet, there are several ministers where the impact of 
student drop-outs fit into. Advanced Education is one. The 
Employment Development Agency is another. And then we have 
the Department of Social Services, because many of these young 
kids end up on welfare, and so we have to look at that area also. 
So between us, several, it became a government thrust. 
 
First of all, it is important that students stay in school to grade 12 
and then set a goal in post-secondary education of some kind. 
That's important. 
 
And the question became one of, how do we reach them? We need 
an overall effort. Never in the history of the province had there 
been anything done in terms of media campaign directed towards 
the very young people, and that is people that were thinking of not 
finishing school or that in fact had already dropped out. Those 
decisions are made in consultation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, what additional 
programming have you instituted through your department? What 
additional programming or new programming in this budget are 
you initiating through your department to assist students who have 
difficulties in our schools so that they will not be turned off by the 
system but will be encouraged to stay in our school system? Can 
you tell me what in this budget you're proposing which will 
provide additional efforts in our school system for that to happen? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the education 
development fund, when it was set up, took several things into 
consideration . One of them was drop-outs or students having a 
hard time in the school system. And so it became a point of criteria 
for school boards, in order to access moneys, that they in fact look 
at their drop-out factor and the guidance and counselling areas that 
impacts the greatest on students. This year the fund is $35 million; 
last year it was 10. And that is the area that we will be looking at 
for this year. 
 
We have approximately 45 projects on the go for guidance 
counselling for about $647,000. There are also about 45 new 
drop-out prevention programs for about $700,000, plus we've been 
doing some in-service on community and staff involvement. Some 
of it is on alcohol and drug education and how to work with 
students that are having a hard time in those areas. 
 
So I think it's relatively set up well for this coming year. While 
some were started last year, there will be many more coming on 
stream, and in fact you will see an expansion of those that were 
there last year as they continue on in 1986. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad that you 
mentioned the concern dealing with alcohol and drug problems 
because we have raised that in the House before. And the Minister 
of Health smiles and I know he's quite aware of it, although he 
chooses to delay action on it for a year. But, Madam Minister, tell 
me: how do you justify your government's position on advertising 
alcohol, which our youth see, and at the same time express your 
great concern about the problems of alcohol and drug abuse? Even 
your federal Minister of Health has said, and I quote from The 
Globe and Mail: 
 

Canada's brewing industry is spending millions of dollars to 
recruit young people as drinkers, Health and Welfare Minister, 
Jake Epp, said yesterday in levelling a broadside against beer 
makers. He said, radio and television advertisements portraying 
drinking as a glamorous activity can be linked to a drop in the 
age at which young people begin to drink. 

 
Madam Minister, how can you rationalize your stated concern 
about alcohol and drug abuse, which you have just made and 
which school boards are acting on, and the position of your 
government that promotes the advertising of alcohol? Do you not 
believe, Madam Minister, that that's kind of phoney? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what is phoney is for 
the NDP to sit there, or stand there, and say it was never in the 
province in their day. It in fact was, and through cable vision, and 
that has simply grown. Two stations, CTV, CBC, didn't have it; all 
the rest had it. Now that's phoney. 
 
Let's talk about the advertising as it relates to kids. There's no 
doubt that the issue of life-styles, as it is portrayed in some of 
those advertisements, probably stretches the guide-lines that are in 
place as to what's appropriate and what isn't. And I think the 
guide-lines, once enforced, are fairly good in that particular area. 
 
You know, the member knows very well that consumption is not 
up, and perhaps one of the greatest factors to that is the awareness 
component. I mean, the first one in Canada where a substantial 
portion is given over to awareness of alcohol as we know it. And I 
think that is extremely positive. I don't see that as a negative — the 
awareness of that — and I really don't think that the member from 
Regina North East does either. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The point, Madam Minister, is that even 
your federal Minister of Health has now . . . and he should know. I 
mean, he sees the statistics . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
provincial Minister of Health doesn't know. He's shown that time 
and time again in the House. he laughs about the advertising of 
liquor. He thinks it's a big joke. I don't think it's a big joke. 
 
The federal Health Minister in Ottawa, the federal health Minister 
in Ottawa has rejected alcohol advertising, and, quite frankly, he 
has a point. And I find that peculiar when I've heard the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley talk about how the federal 
government is looking at them . . . 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1622 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. I think we need to have 
some quiet, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley has just got to allow me to be able to 
continue, and I shall do that. 
 
Madam Minister, the Minister of Health stood in this House and 
he said, oh, but our advertising program is so terrifically good and 
our whole efforts are so tremendous that even the federal 
government is looking at our operation as a model. Well, how in 
heavens can you stand in the House and say, if you support your 
Minister of Health, that that is happening, when the federal 
Minister of Health has stood up, as any courageous man would — 
and he obviously is a courageous man because he's standing up to 
those breweries who are supplying the Conservative Party with an 
awful lot of funding — and he has said, alcohol advertising is 
doing harm to our children and it shouldn't be allowed? And your 
provincial Minister of Health stands up and says, oh, go ahead and 
advertise because alcohol consumption has decreased. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, we asked in the House: has there been a 
change or has there been a decrease in alcohol consumption for 
young people, teenagers and adolescents; and we have yet to get 
an answer from this government. And I suggest to you that the 
reason we have not been able to get an answer is because the 
figures will show that the consumption of alcohol and drugs, and 
particularly the alcohol and drug-related problems in recent years, 
have increased very significantly with young people. You can't 
deny that, and I don't expect you to. As a responsible individual, 
and particularly the Minister of Agriculture, you know that those 
problems have increased. 
 
Now I'm seeing something happen which I think show some 
promise. We started several years ago with the Safe Grad 
program. I think that's had some significant result. Now there are 
some high schools that are introducing a "no-alcohol, no-drug" 
graduation program, and I think that their success is going to 
provide some incentive to others. And those are steps that are 
being taken by people who are concerned about what they see 
happening to the young people. They're giving of their time 
voluntarily, and they're organizing committees, and they're talking 
with young people — not to them, but with them — and they're 
trying to help. And while they're trying to do these things, and 
while they're trying to accomplish all of this, what does your 
government do? It promotes the drinking of alcohol. Let me 
correct that. You probably don't directly promote, but through 
your advertising permission, you are promoting it. 
 
And I submit, Madam Minister, whether a person is in favour of 
the advertising or opposed to it . . . and there are both sides to the 
question. The important thing here is that your government, and 
you, continuously go ahead contradicting yourself. You say one 
thing on the one hand, and then you do something else on the 
other hand. 
 
I wanted to bring this to your attention about what Jake Epp, the 
federal minister has said, because I think here is a man who seems 
to be so different from the normal mode of the conservative party 
approach to this issue. And I 

 respect him for that — I respect him for that. I don't respect the 
phoniness of a . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being 5 o'clock, I do now recess this 
House until later on this evening at 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


