













































December 1, 1986 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 December 3, 1986 

 

1 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Clerk: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have received a 

communication from the Private Secretary to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the First 

Session of the Twenty-first Legislature at 2 o’clock p.m. today, 

the third day of December, 1986. 

 

2:02 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and 

took his seat on the throne. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: I am commanded by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor stating that he does not see fit to declare 

the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until 

later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have elected a 

Speaker according to law. 

 

2:04 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Election of Speaker 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I move, seconded by the member for 

Souris-Cannington: 

 

That Arnold B. Tusa, Esquire, member for the constituency 

of Last Mountain-Touchwood, do take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Clerk: — By direction of the Assembly, I declare that A. B. 

Tusa, Esquire, is duly elected as Speaker of this Assembly 

nemine contradicente. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I beg 

to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledge of the 

high honour the Assembly has been pleased to confer upon me, 

and while I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the 

Speaker’s Chair, I feel that I also leave all political partisan 

feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all 

and to the best of my ability the various and important duties 

pertaining to the high office of the Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

2:09 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and 

took his seat on the throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May it please your Honour: 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, 

although I am but little able to fulfil the important duties thus 

assigned to me. If in the performance of those duties I should at 

any time fall into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to 

me and not to the Assembly, whose servant I am, and who, 

through me,  

the better to enable them to discharge their duty to their Queen 

and country, humbly claim all their undoubted rights and 

privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in 

their debates, access to your person at all seasonable times, and 

that their proceedings may receive from you the most 

favourable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he freely 

confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her 

Majesty’s person and Government, and not doubting that their 

proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and 

prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and 

allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 

have ready access to His Honour upon all seasonable occasions 

and their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will 

constantly receive from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Government was then pleased to 

open the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislature: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the 

Twenty-first Legislature. 

 

This Legislature opens at an important turning point in 

Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

The world economy is in transition. Traditional relationships 

between the prices of primary products and manufactured goods 

and the volume of production and employment are breaking 

down. International developments, both political and economic, 

are making themselves increasingly and more pervasively felt – 

despite national efforts to cushion their impact. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan continues to face difficult 

economic conditions. World commodity prices remain in 

decline and continue to exercise a dampening effect on incomes 

and employment with the province. Protectionist measures 

recently adopted by foreign governments further endanger the 

jobs and incomes both of Saskatchewan producers and those 

who provide them with services. 

 

My Government is not intimidated by the conditions it faces 

because it knows that the people of the province are not only 

accustomed to change, but have also consistently been able to 

find new opportunities as their circumstances altered. My 

Government remembers that Saskatchewan was founded and 

built in a period of global adjustment. It is confident that the 

traditions of openness, ingenuity and perseverance established 

by its pioneers will enable the province to exploit changes in the 

world economy. 

 

It is in this spirit that my Government will continue and 

intensity its efforts to assist individuals, communities and 

  



 

December 3, 1986 

 

2 

 

businesses to develop and diversify the provincial economy. At 

the same time it will continue to protect people from events 

beyond their control. In doing so, it will remember that the 

Saskatchewan economy is part of a larger international 

economy and it will order its activities to maintain and 

strengthen the province’s international competitive position. My 

Government will also remember that it is only the custodian of 

the public’s affairs and is therefore duty-bound to provide 

protection and create opportunity in as efficient and economic a 

manner as possible. 

 

An impressive start has already been made on this forward- and 

outward-looking programme. During the last Legislature, my 

Government announced new value added projects in meat 

processing, paper manufacturing, electrical turbine 

manufacturing, oil and irrigation development. My Ministers 

introduced mortgage interest rate protection, 

government-sponsored contributory pensions for home-makers 

and small business employees, venture capital and other tax 

incentives to encourage people in invest in Saskatchewan’s 

development, measures to ensure that all citizens contribute 

their fair share to financing the province’s services, and 

proposals for a national agriculture strategy. My Government is 

gratified that others are now following its lead. It intends to 

build on the experience and knowledge it gained over the past 

four years to add to this records of achievement. 

 

My Government intends to implement its programme in a spirit 

of co-operation and participation. Recent months have afforded 

my Ministers the opportunity to renew their special relationship 

with the public and to make themselves aware of the public’s 

ideas and aspirations. My Ministers will continue this 

consultation process as new options are proposed and evaluated. 

 

Saskatchewan and The World Economy 

 

Saskatchewan is a primary product economy, rich in forest 

products, grains, livestock, oil, uranium, gold and potash. As a 

primary product economy, it is strongly influenced by 

international political and economic developments and heavily 

dependent on international trade. That dependency is 

accentuated by the province’s relatively small population and 

by the fact that to date it has not developed major secondary 

industry. 

 

During the 1970’s the terms of trade of primary products 

favoured Saskatchewan along with other resource-rich areas. 

Commodity prices reached record highs, and economists 

predicted continuing shortages for all raw materials and a 

decline in the world food production. Farmers, workers, 

businesses, and governments raised their expectations to meet 

their new found revenues. Land prices rose as farmers bought 

land. Real wages rose strongly, supporting greater spending and 

a higher standard of living. Industries invested in new products. 

And government bought into resource industries and embarked 

on major and expensive policy initiatives. 

 

In 1981 international commodity prices began to decline and by 

1986 they were at a low point. This was because, contrary to all 

expectations, supplies of minerals, metals, forest products and 

agricultural commodities rose as  

nations made major investments in production. 

 

The results of declining commodity prices have been 

significant. A 30 per cent decline in world grain prices has cut 

billions of dollars from farm revenues. Low potash and oil 

prices have led to declines in employment and delays in new 

exploration and development. Declines in revenues have not 

and could not, however, be accompanied by equally dramatic 

declines in expenditures, with the result that farmers and 

governments across the prairies have found themselves in a 

deficit position. 

 

Declines in commodity prices have been accompanied by a 

growing tendency on the part of foreign nations to restrict 

access to their markets and to subsidize their exports. This 

protectionist tendency has already contributed to a decline in 

Saskatchewan farm incomes as nations compete for declining 

markets for imported food and is threatening other provincial 

exports such as potash and uranium. 

 

Fully aware of the dangers of growing protectionism for 

Saskatchewan, my Government some years ago began to 

encourage the Government of Canada to seek to remove 

barriers to trade through international multilateral negotiation 

and bilateral discussions with the United States. My Ministers 

continue to play an important role in making access to 

international markets a national priority and are deeply involved 

with their federal counterparts in developing positions both in 

the bilateral talks with the United States and in preparatory 

meetings for the next round of GATT negotiations. Their 

leadership on this important issue has been recognized by the 

invitation of the nation’s ten premiers to Saskatchewan’s First 

Minister to co-chair the Canada/United States Trade forum and 

also by the invitation of the federal government to its Minister 

of Economic Development and Trade to participate in 

international trade meetings in Australia and the Philippines. 

 

My Government will continue to promote the sale of 

Saskatchewan goods and services abroad. Particular attention 

will be given to markets in the United States and in the nations 

of Asia and the Pacific rim as the province seeks to capitalize 

on the relationships which it has recently established in New 

York, Hong Kong, the People’s Republic of China, India  

and Indonesia. 

 

My Ministers know that the success in international trade is 

more than a matter of market access. They are aware that 

Saskatchewan industry must develop and diversify so as to be 

able to compete effectively. They are determined to spare no 

effort in preparing this province to meet these challenges. 

 

Diversification and Development 

 

My Government is convinced that the diversification and 

development of the province’s economy must begin in the area 

of its traditionally greatest strength — the agriculture and food 

processing industry which produces over 40 per cent of the 

province’s exports. This industry accounts for an annual 2.5 

billions dollar megaproject which, as the farmers seed and 

harvest their crops, for ever binds urban and rural Saskatchewan 

in a single 

  



 

December 3, 1986 

 

3 

 

community of interest. 

 

In keeping with the belief that Saskatchewan is agriculture, my 

Government continues to take initiatives that will guarantee the 

full potential of this important world industry to both urban and 

rural Saskatchewan. The Agricultural Development Fund 

established in 1985 is working with farmers, the universities 

and the federal government to conduct research and 

demonstration projects designed to enhance the competitive 

position of Saskatchewan agriculture. Projects are now under 

way in applications of compressed natural gas, biotechnology, 

new grains and computer and information technology. The 

University of Saskatchewan College of Agriculture is being 

rebuilt to provide the proper environment for research that will 

support Saskatchewan agriculture in the future. Following the 

difficult drought years, my Government, in co-operation with 

the federal government, has undertaken to irrigate an additional 

250,000 acres over the next 15 years. Irrigation incentives, the 

announcement of the construction of the Rafferty and Alameda 

Dams, and a recently signed 100 million dollar federal 

provincial irrigation agreement have made a start on this 

commitment. Livestock production and processing for export 

have been encouraged by the introduction of livestock 

investment tax credits and by provincial participation in 

national stabilization programmes. Gainers and Intercontinental 

Packers have separately announced major expansions involving 

investments of more than 50 million dollars with the potential 

to create 2,000 jobs. 

 

My Minister of Agriculture has recently piloted his idea for a 

national agriculture strategy to a successful conclusion at the 

First Ministers Conference in Vancouver. This strategy will 

address both the short-term problems and longer-term 

opportunity for Canadian agriculture. 

 

During the next four years, my Government intends to make a 

concerted effort to reduce input costs for Saskatchewan farmers 

by encouraging the local manufacture of agricultural chemicals 

and fertilizers. In so doing it will create yet another link 

between the urban and rural sectors of the province and will 

support a further diversification of the province’s 

non-agricultural economy through the upgrading of natural gas. 

My Government will also introduce legislation to facilitate the 

organization of rural development corporations to mobilize 

local initiatives and capital. 

 

Small business is expected to play an important role in my 

Government’s diversification strategy. Aware that the health 

and growth of this sector depends on the application of the most 

effective, efficient technology available, my Ministers have 

already announced a commitment to provide 50 million dollars 

over the next five years to assist Saskatchewan small business 

to equip itself. My Ministers have also implemented a 

programme which encourages all public sector departments, 

Crowns and agencies to purchase from Saskatchewan sources. 

During the course of the current session, they will be extending 

that programme to ensure that the private sector is aware of the 

capabilities of Saskatchewan suppliers when making purchases. 

 

The potential of tourism to contribute to the development and 

diversification of this province has already been demonstrated. 

Expo ’86 proved to the world, to Canada, and most importantly 

to ourselves that Saskatchewan has the ability to compete with 

the best. My Government intends to build on the reputation and 

confidence established in Vancouver to create a Tourism and 

Hospitality Institute in the province. This institute, which will 

be built with the participation of industry and community 

groups, is intended to ensure that Saskatchewan has skilled 

entrepreneurs and employees who know how to make the best 

of the opportunity offered by this expanding industry. 

 

Aware of the importance of information and management skills 

in today’s information-based economy, my Government intends 

to harness the competitive excellence and international 

reputation that are the hallmark of the Saskatchewan grains, 

biotechnology, potash and uranium industries to pursue the 

establishment of research institutes associated with these 

industries in Saskatchewan. This action will strengthen 

Saskatchewan’s position in these significant world industries, 

where policy, management and information decisions too 

frequently lie offshore. 

 

My Government is aware that programmes to diversity the 

province’s economy will require the support and co-operation 

of all sectors. It is therefore its intention to consult widely on 

the establishment of specific defined targets for economic 

development and to encourage all citizens to take part and 

benefit. 

 

Labour unions will be encouraged to participate in the creation 

of new jobs through the Labour Venture Capital Programme. 

Women, who in recent years have played a major role in the 

development of new small businesses, will be assured equal 

access to credit. The province’s aboriginal peoples will be 

encouraged to become involved in main line economic 

developments in business, manufacturing and processing, 

through an enhanced Indian Economic Development 

Programme. Young people will be given the opportunity to 

obtain expertise and business experience through the 

establishment of a Saskatchewan Entrepreneurial Institute and 

the expansion of the youth Entrepreneurial Programme. 

Investors will receive credits through the Venture Capital 

Programme and the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Programme to 

encourage them to place their money in Saskatchewan. Finally, 

a major new department of government, The Department of 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment, will be created to 

ensure that, as the plans for the province’s economic 

development and diversification are discussed, the interests and 

needs of people are foremost. 

 

Equally important in the development of people will be the 

work of the Departments of Education and Advanced Education 

and Manpower. The education system has always had a role in 

the economic development of the province, providing skilled 

personnel, research to solve particular Saskatchewan problems, 

and extension services to ensure the application of new 

knowledge in the field. Today, more than ever, the provision of 

these services is vital to the province’s development. In an era 

in which our major export industries face stiff  

  



 

December 3, 1986 

 

4 

 

international competition, our educational system must be 

capable of performing research directed towards efficiently 

exploiting our resources, and development new uses for them. It 

must also be able to provide the ideas and the technologies 

which will ensure the province a place in the emerging 

information-based economy. Finally, it must provide the 

environment which helps to make Saskatchewan a desirable 

place for people to locate. 

 

In order to perform these roles effectively, my Government 

believes the province’s education system must be more than 

good. Incomplete adaptation of the province’s industries to 

changing international markets could spell their demise. Good 

hi-tech products could lose out to better hi-tech products. 

 

Accordingly, my Government will commit resources to ensure 

that excellence is the hallmark of its educational system. The 

curriculum will be revised to ensure that Saskatchewan students 

are obtaining the skills they need to compete both nationally 

and internationally. The kindergarten to grade 12 curriculum 

will concentrate on the acquisition of basic reading, 

communication and mathematical skills. The high school 

curriculum will add an emphasis on computer technology. Post 

secondary institutions will be asked to add yet a third emphasis 

on the foreign languages we use to trade, and on the 

encouragement of basic and applied research. 

 

My Government is committed to enabling each of the 

province’s educational institutions to play its role in 

development excellence. Because resources are scarce, this will 

involve determining areas of specialization and avoiding 

unnecessary duplication. The costs of administration will also 

need to be examined in certain circumstances. 

 

The tasks to which our educational system must respond cannot 

be achieved by the efforts of government alone. Continued 

consultations with students, parents, teachers, business leaders 

and administrators will be required. 

 

Protection 

 

Much of my Government’s preoccupation with economic 

diversification and the province’s ability to compete, results 

from its desire to ensure an adequate revenue base for the 

maintenance of the high level of protection which 

Saskatchewan citizens currently receive from their government. 

My Government is firmly committed to the protection of its 

citizens from forces beyond their control and intends to 

continue to back them in difficult economic circumstances. 

 

No group of Saskatchewan citizens have been more harshly 

affected by low commodity prices and unfair international 

competition than the province’s farmers. Accordingly, my 

Government will introduce legislation early in this session to 

extend ¼ The Farm Land Security Act 1/8 and ¼ The Farmer’s 

Counselling and Assistance Act 1/8 to ensure that they are not 

unreasonably foreclosed upon and that they receive appropriate 

counselling and loan guarantees. Payments on the principal of 

loans made under the production Loan Programme will also be 

delayed for one year in recognition of the poor cash flow 

position of many Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

 

My Ministers will continue to work with the federal 

government and other provincial governments to design a 

permanent mechanism to help farmers compete with unfairly 

subsidized exports our of the European Economic Community 

and the United States. They will also continue to press for early 

payment of the one billion dollar deficiency payment requested 

by the province and agreed to by the federal government. 

 

Another part of the Saskatchewan economy suffering from 

commodity price deflation is the energy and mining sector. My 

Ministers are currently reviewing the tax and fiscal regimes for 

the oil and gas, potash, and uranium industries with a view to 

establishing a system that will protect as many jobs as possible 

during periods of low prices while at the same time ensuring 

good returns to the taxpayers as prices rise. 

 

My Government played an important leadership role when in 

1982 it responded to the serious concerns of Saskatchewan 

home-owners that high interest rates would cost them their 

homes. My Government continues to believe that protection 

against unforeseen increases in mortgage rates is important, not 

only in providing security to home-owners, but also in creating 

jogs in the housing industry. Legislation will therefore be 

introduced at this session to guarantee to the people of this 

province that the effective rate for eligible mortgages on 

principal residences will not exceed 9 ¾ per cent for ten years. 

 

During the life of this Legislature, my Government will 

continue to review its social assistance and income support 

programmes to determine how they can most effectively 

combat poverty. Special attention will be given to methods of 

delivery and ways of encouraging transition to the work force. 

 

My Government remains committed to the provision of quality 

health care to all the people of Saskatchewan. As part of this 

commitment, it intends to review changing requirements for 

health services and the utilization of new technology to ensure 

that plans are put in place now to ensure first-class health care 

in the twenty-first century. It also intends to put a renewed 

emphasis on preventative medicine as a means not only to 

ensure lower health costs in the future, but also to ensure 

Saskatchewan citizens live longer and more productive lives. 

As the number of senior citizens rises over time, my 

government will devote appropriate resources to improve their 

quality of life and support their desire for independence. The 

costs of the administration of the province’s health care system 

will also be reviewed. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan established during the last 

session of the past Legislature will commence operation on 8 

December, 1986, offering, for the first time in Canadian history, 

retirement income security to part-time workers, home-makers 

and employees of small businesses who would otherwise have 

no access to a pension plan with a matched contribution. 

 

My Ministers have viewed with growing concern the increasing 

abuse, particularly by young people, of alcohol and drugs. They 

have recently established the first drug and rehabilitation centre 

for young people and  

  



 

December 3, 1986 

 

5 

 

their families in Western Canada at Yorkton, and they will be 

consulting with young people, parents, police, teachers, health 

care personnel and other interested groups concerning 

additional measures to stem the growing tide of abuse. 

 

Government Efficiency, Effectiveness and Reorganization 

 

My Government will address the problems of internal 

administrative efficiency and effectiveness. Government 

resource revenues have fallen. At the same time, demand for 

government support and services has risen. 

 

My Ministers will improve delivery of programs and services 

while constraining the cost to taxpayers. New legislation will be 

introduced to reorganize and consolidate provincial government 

departments and agencies to ensure maximum efficiency and 

effectiveness. 

 

At the same time, government programs and services will be 

reviewed to ensure Saskatchewan realizes the optimal economic 

benefit from the use of scarce provincial resources. Where 

savings are apparent, individuals and firms will be invited to 

compete for the delivery of specific government services. 

Impediments which preclude the effective delivery of services 

to the public will be identified and addressed. 

 

My Government believes that changes can be made to enable 

the Legislature to better meet the needs of the members and the 

people. Accordingly, it proposes to refer the matter of a revision 

of the Rules of this Legislative Assembly to a Special 

Committee of the Assembly. 

 

Consistent with its continuing commitment to high ethical 

standards for holders of public office, this Government will 

proceed with implementation of specific measures to deal with 

conflict of interest situations of the part of elected members. 

These measures will take into account recommendations 

flowing from public hearings on the White Paper on a proposed 

Code of Ethical Conduct for Public Office Holders which were 

conducted this past summer. 

 

When my government first took office, it stated its firm 

commitment to regulatory reform. My government intends to 

take further steps I this area to relieve small business and the 

public from unnecessary regulatory pressures. Steps will also be 

taken to ensure that those who are affected by regulations are 

made aware of them. 

 

It is recognized that there have been shifts in the population 

distribution within the province. A new Electoral Boundaries 

Act will be introduced to reflect these changes and to ensure 

effective representation of all parts of the province. 

 

Conclusions 

 

In conclusion, my Ministers pledge to work with Saskatchewan 

people to build a stronger and more secure future. Over the 

coming year, my Government will continue to improve the 

protection available to individuals and to increase the efficiency 

and  

effectiveness of government administration. 

 

Various other legislative measures will be placed before you for 

your consideration. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 

guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

2:41 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of 

the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral 

Officer lists of the names of such Members as have been 

returned to serve in the Legislature. 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I also wish to inform this Assembly that the 

pages for this session will be Gail Bitternose, Norma Miller, 

Gilles Pelletier, Marc Quinnett and Janita Thomson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

the Administration of Oaths of Office be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the Speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Thursday, December 4, 1986. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings in the Assembly 

  



 

December 3, 1986 

 

6 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 

after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do 

appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he 

shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

That Members McLaren, Gerich, Koskie, McLeod and 

Shillington be constituted a Special Committee to prepare 

and report, with all convenient speed, lists of Members to 

compose the Standing Committees of this Assembly, 

provided under Rule 86: 

 

That the said Standing Committees be severally empowered 

to examine and inquire into all such matters and things as 

may be referred to them by this Assembly, and to report from 

time to time their observations thereon, with power to send 

for persons, papers and records, and to examine witnesses 

under oath. 

 

That the said Special Committee consider the size of the 

Standing Committees and to report thereon with all 

convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Election of Deputy Speaker 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

That Lloyd J. Muller, Esquire, member for the constituency 

of Shellbrook-Torch River, be Deputy speaker of this 

Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

That William Neudorf, Esquire, member for the constituency 

of Rosthern, be Deputy Chairman of Committees of this 

Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before putting the adjournment motion to the 

House, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 

musical group you had the pleasure of listening to prior to the 

opening of the Legislature this afternoon. They  

are called the Regina Bell Ringers and were playing under the 

direction of Sandra Cosbey. They provided very enjoyable 

music, and we are delighted that they have been with us this 

afternoon. 

 

Also I would like to draw the attention of all hon. members and 

all guests to the wall immediately before me. There you will see 

replicas of the Saskatchewan Coat of Arms which has been 

recently adopted. 

 

I would also like to invite all our guests to attend a tea in Room 

218 which will be held immediately following the adjournment. 

Room 218 is to the left as you leave the main door of the 

Chamber. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 2:50 p.m. 

 


