


















































May 29, 1986 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 29, 1986 
 
 

1589 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Public Accounts Committee 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to report to 
you and to all members of the Assembly on proceedings in the 
Public Accounts Committee. Mr. Speaker, the comptroller has 
publicly stated to the committee on the record that the loss on the 
investment that the government had in Pioneer Trust was for the 
year ended March 31, 1985 — that is for the fiscal year 1984-85. 
In the annual report of the Provincial Auditor and in a separate 
report he has filed with the committee, he has stated that the 
provincial government sustained and recorded a loss on Pioneer 
Trust in the fiscal year 1984-85. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, members of the committee sought to 
examine the Department of Finance involvement in the events . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. State your point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that we are in 
routine proceedings, presenting reports by Standing, Select, and 
Special Committees, and my understanding is that there is no 
report coming from that committee of public accounts, Mr. 
Speaker. If the member has something to report . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Is the member making a 
report from the committee, or is it the member's own report? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It's my report on the activities of the 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Okay, one moment please. I would . . . 
 
I would refer the member to Beauchesne's, Fifth Edition, 
paragraph 640: 
 
It is the opinion of the committee, as a committee, not that of the 
individual members which is required by the House, and, failing 
unanimity, the conclusions agreed to by the (committee) majority 
are the conclusions of the committee. 
 
So there is no place here at this point for your report. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — With leave, such a report could be presented, 
and I therefore, Mr. Speaker, ask for leave to report on the 
activities of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe if you refer to Beauchesne's, you'll find 
that it cannot be a committee of one individual but must be a 
report of the majority . . . Order, please. I've just read to you what 
Beauchesne's says on the issue, and  

it says nothing about leave. It says a report of a committee must be 
the consensus of the majority of the committee. So it cannot be 
given now. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, it's my 
understanding that, with leave, the House can decide to do what 
business it would like to do. My colleague from Regina Centre has 
risen asking for leave to give a personal report as a result of things 
that happened in the committee this morning. 
 
I find it interesting that on Monday leave was granted to the 
member from Regina South; all the members on this side agreed 
to it, and now the Speaker isn't allowing that kind of a change to 
the agenda. 
 
My point of order is that by leave we can change the agenda to do 
whatever we want, and we're asking you to put that on the order 
right now and see if the Assembly agrees to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe that under this order of business it's not 
possible to move with a private report, but before orders of the 
day, if the member had leave, he could move it at that time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with a great deal of 
pleasure I rise in the House today to introduce some guests from 
my constituency. I realize there has been a tremendous amount of 
speculation on whether we would be here or not. I was fully 
confident that we still would be here because His House never 
recesses until Nora Sutherland and her class from Fairhaven 
School come to the Assembly. 
 
I want to introduce Nora Sutherland, along with Howard Sproat 
and Jim Longstaff, as well as the students that they have brought 
with them today — 78 in number. They are grade 7 students from 
Fairhaven School. And I would ask the members opposite to 
please give me the respect so that I can introduce my guests 
without carping and caterwauling from across the floor. 
 
Again, as I stated earlier, it's a great deal of pleasure that I have 
students once again visiting. This is the fourth year in a row that 
you've come. I'm grateful for it. I look forward to meeting with 
you. I will meet with you at 3 o'clock for pictures and 
refreshments and to answer any questions that you may have. And 
I would ask the members, the respectful and polite members of 
this House, to please greet you in a warm manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Collapse of Pioneer Trust 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Acting Premier. It deals with your government's arrogant and 
ham-handed attempt to cover up the events  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1590 
 
 

and decisions which resulted in the collapse of Pioneer Trust 
company. 
 
You have used the government majority in the Standing 
committee on Public Accounts to prevent questions from being 
asked there about the Pioneer Trust fiasco, the biggest business 
failure in Saskatchewan history. In effect, your members have 
slapped a gag order on this committee with the motion that says no 
questions may be asked about Pioneer Trust. 
 
In light of the fact that this gag order has clearly blow up in the 
government's face, will you withdraw your orders to government 
members to lift the cover-up on the Pioneer Trust affair, and will 
you order them to allow a full, public review of the events and 
decisions which led to this fiasco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I, of course, don't have first-hand 
knowledge of what goes on in public accounts since I don't sit in 
public accounts. My understanding is that as it relates to the public 
accounts and the auditor's report that was being dealt with in 
public accounts for the year under review, the latitude that is 
normally extended was extended . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
don't know what the hon. member from Regina North West is 
carping about. 
 
I also recall, Mr. Speaker, that a few days or maybe a week or 10 
days ago in this House, on a similar line of questioning to the 
Minister of Finance, you did, as I recall, extract an agreement to 
table certain documents once the wind-up was completed. 
 
I don't know what more the hon. member wants, but I believe . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Headlines. He wants headlines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Perhaps my colleague is right. Perhaps all 
that you do want is the headlines. But I believe that members 
have, in fact, treated you fairly generously. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you may take this matter lightly. I can assure you that members of 
this side of the House and members of the public don't treat this 
matter as a joke. They blame your government for badly 
mishandling the entire affair, and they demand, and have every 
right to, a full accounting of what happened, and how. 
 
This House has set up a committee to provide such an accounting. 
I remind the Acting Premier that the Provincial Auditor reports on 
losses connected with the Pioneer Trust collapse in his 1984 and 
1985 annual report. I remind him that the comptroller is on record 
as agreeing that these losses occurred in the 1984-85 fiscal year, 
the year under discussion before the committee. Finally, I remind 
you, Mr. Acting Premier, that all the major government decisions, 
which ultimately cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of 
dollars, occurred during that fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Acting Premier, how can you deny members of the 
committee, and ultimately the public, the right to ask these 
questions, and how can you suggest that these  

questions are none of the public business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have confidence in the 
members that sit on the committee of public accounts, and I will 
leave the business of the committee of public accounts to those 
members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Acting Premier, and I wish to point out to him that the mandate of 
the committee appointed by this House is in part as follows — 
supported, I may say, by all members of the Assembly in 
November of 1982 — and the date, I think, is important. And the 
mandate in part is as follows: 
 
. . . to examine, assess, report, on to the legislature, and follow up 
with the administration, the regard for efficiency in operations and 
the effectiveness of programs in achieving their stated objectives. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Premier, can you indicate why a fiasco like 
Pioneer Trust, which ended up costing Saskatchewan taxpayers 
many millions of dollars, is not a candidate for questions about the 
efficiency and effectiveness of your government? And if you agree 
with me that it is, would you suggest to the members, your 
members on this committee, that they open the committee for 
discussion on this very vital matter which the auditor has 
pin-pointed in his report to this legislature, which was referred by 
this legislature to that particular committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand, and as I 
said earlier, I don't sit on the committee, but as I understand the 
committee, it is operating under the normal parameters that have 
traditionally been the situation in this legislature. And of course, it 
being a committee of this legislature, this legislature can order it to 
examine anything at any time, I would expect. But that's a whole 
different question, and I would expect that that would require a 
substantive motion from the legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, at least, the normal 
parameters are being followed in public accounts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, you will know that the report in which this material is 
brought to the attention of this legislature, the report by the 
Provincial Auditor, has been referred to the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
And I ask you, sir: do you not agree that the function of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts is to review these 
reports? And do you not agree that it is appropriate, and indeed 
necessary, that the Public Accounts Committee examine into such 
an affair as this which has cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
millions of dollars, and which has been laid bare, at least in part, 
by the auditor, so that members of this House can do exactly that 
— examine into it in the Public Accounts Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I'm told, Mr. Speaker, that the committee, 
in fact, was allowed to examine the three specific investments of 
the government in Pioneer Trust. I'm also told that the chairman 
walked out in a huff and displayed some very childish behaviour 
and wasn't really interested in examining these things at all. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1591 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — My question to the Deputy Premier is simply 
this: is it the intention of your government to muzzle all 
committees when politically significant events do hit the floor of 
the committee, muzzle them with motions from members of your 
committee, on orders from cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I mean, that's the dumbest thing I've ever 
heard. But I don't expect it's the dumbest thing that I'll ever hear 
from that particular member, Mr. Speaker, because he breaks new 
ground in that particular arena every day. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it's absolutely asinine to think that that 
committee takes its orders from cabinet. That committee is a 
representative committee of this legislature; it reports to this 
legislature, and that's where it starts and ends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member did 
the same thing yesterday. He rose on a supplementary and then 
jumped a second time on a new question, and that's not the way to 
get the floor here. I'll take the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Premier, on a supplementary question 
to our leader. The motion that was passed in committee reads, in 
part: that this committee not now consider the affairs of the same, 
referring to — regarding Pioneer Trust. 
 
I'm quoting from page 197 of the Hansard, from our committee: 
 
. . . regarding Pioneer Trust, this committee not consider the affairs 
of same. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who moved it? 
 
Mr. Engel: — And that was moved by Mr. Glauser. My question 
to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, is: can your majority muzzle the 
committee on public accounts on questions that are raised by the 
Provincial Auditor, and referred to by Mr. Kraus, as saying that 
. . . What I was saying was: the actual payouts of the unsecured 
depositors didn't occur until '85-86; notwithstanding that, we did 
recognize the loss on the investment that the government had in 
Pioneer for the year ending March 31, 1985. In light of those two 
statements by the auditor, and in light of the fact that your majority 
tried to muzzle our committee, will you overrule your committee 
and say that the rules that the Public Accounts Committee can 
operate under will operate and will stay in force and not be 
muzzled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously, at least two 
members opposite don't understand what this committee is. This 
committee is a committee of the legislature. I can't overrule the 
committee. That committee reports to this legislature, and it's 
representative of this legislature. And I have no power to  

force it to do this or that; only the legislature has the power to do 
this or that. 
 
The only member that has real influence on the committee, I 
expect, is the Chairman, who is an NDP member, the member for 
Regina Centre, and he has far more influence as chairman of that 
committee than I do as a member of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to the original question. I think 
you failed to answer the question in an attempt to defile my 
personality. But I ask you sir: through your members of cabinet, 
through ministers of your government — and don't forget I was 
once a chairman of one of your committees, taking direction from 
some of your ministers — will you not admit that you have 
attempted to muzzle this committee through a motion by the 
member from Saskatoon, and have effectively stopped the debate 
on Pioneer Trust in this committee through that motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think anyone, 
anywhere, will believe that that member took direction from 
anyone or anybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. And I, sir, am a little bit different than him, but I want to 
ask you basically the same question. You go ahead and have all 
the laughs you like. I want to ask you again, seriously, and I was a 
member of your caucus . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Mr. Deputy Premier, I was a member of your 
caucus until late December, and I ask you sincerely: did at any 
time prior to today, and up until today, anyone in your cabinet or 
the inner circle of cabinet ever influence any committee or give 
them any direction, be it any of the standing committees, Crown 
corporation, and/or public accounts? And bear in mind, Mr. 
Deputy Premier before you answer me, that I was in fact a 
member of your caucus until December 28th of 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how the hon. 
member defines inner circle. I would expect that the Premier is 
included in that though, and the only time that I can recall any 
influence on members of that committee is when that particular 
member was removed from that committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hiring Practices of the Public Service Commission 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — A question to the minister in charge of the 
Public Service Commission. With respect to colour-coding job 
applications within his ministry, he suggests in the press yesterday 
that his never happens. 
 
I ask the minister: are you misleading the public of Saskatchewan 
intentionally in this matter? Will you discuss this matter with one 
Diane Martin, a constituent of mine who recently was accepted 
into a job position with the dental program and, after a 
colour-coding by a member of your government, was turfed out 
because her  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1592 
 
 

brother — I'm sorry I said yesterday it was her son — her brother 
is an NDPer? 
 
I suggest you're misleading the public. I suggest, sir, that you 
should try to construe the truth a little more considerably and 
consider the actions of your department when, in fact, 
employment of a constituent of any one of the members of this 
House is at stake. And I suggest to you, sir, that you admit that it 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have some facts that I would 
like to present to the Assembly today which I think all members 
will find very interesting and will call into question — will call 
into question — the integrity of the comments just made by the 
member opposite. 
 
The individual in question, that the member just mentioned, 
applied for part-time employment to job-share as a dental assistant 
with another dental plan employee, and she believed that she had 
been accepted. She was subsequently informed that a job offer 
would not be sent to her at this time, and here are the reasons. 
 
In April several applications . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
if the members opposite would like to hear the answer, I'm going 
to provide it to them. In April several applications were . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, in April several applications 
were received for part-time employment in which two part-time 
employees would job-share by working the equivalent of a 
full-time position. 
 
A review of the staffing levels required in the dental plan indicated 
the improved dental status of children would permit the plan to 
effect a small staff reduction without adversely affecting the 
program. This was identified when the Minister of Health 
discussed Health estimates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The reductions would be achieved by not 
filling certain positions when they became vacant. But no 
permanent or probationary employees will be laid off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with several in-service applications on file, and 
based on the department's obligation to those individuals, the 
decision was made to not consider any out-of-service applicants at 
that time. In this instance, part-time employment will be offered to 
two permanent dental assistants, presently employed, who have 
requested a job-sharing arrangement. If other vacancies occur 
which cannot be accommodated by present staff, then 
out-of-service applicants would be given full consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that indicates very clearly that appropriate 
personnel policies were followed concerning this particular 
position which the member opposite has been talking about. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member for Canora on his feet? Is it 
a supplementary? When you stand, if you're asking a 
supplementary, please state that. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — I so address my question also to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, I'm asking you, that if I provide to this 
Assembly, on Monday next, the names of several individuals with 
the documentation, are you prepared to stand in this legislature 
and give the same kind of an answer as you did today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not about to respond to 
hypothetical questions. I am prepared to respond to particular 
instances that are brought to my attention. 
 
Now one was brought yesterday by the member for Regina North 
West. He did not provide any specific information at that time. He 
made allegations in the newspaper . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 
Protection of Saskatchewan Jobs for Saskatchewan Workers 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
to the Minister of Labour, and it has to do with the protection of 
Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government owns 16 per cent share of Ipsco in 
Regina and, I assume, has provided government grants or 
incentives for the expansion now under way at Ipsco. 
 
In light of that, can you, Mr. Minister, explain why one of the 
major subcontractors on this expansion, which is held by an 
out-of-province company, has so far hired only out-of-province 
residents to perform the work in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question's rather 
vague, and I'm not sure which particular company he is referring 
to. But if he's referring to the Salem Industries company from 
Pittsburgh, which is installing the continuous slab caster, this is a 
specialized piece of equipment. And none of these casters have 
ever been installed in Saskatchewan before, so we don't have 
people who know very much about them. 
 
Secondly, I understand that this company has a union, and the 
people are hired through the union. And I've had some difficulties 
with inter-union jurisdiction with respect to where workers can 
come from. And I'm having that particular problem right now with 
the boiler makers where, at the P.A. pulp-mill, on some shifts 
seven workers are being hired from Manitoba and only four from 
Saskatchewan. And so I'm having quite a problem trying to get 
Saskatchewan workers into this problem, with all the 
inter-jurisdictional problems within union. 
 
Now if you could give us the name of the company, we could 
narrow it down. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I'm quite prepared to  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1593 
 

do that. The company is an Alberta company called Bramet 
Industries Ltd. It's a spin-off company of HMW (Constructors) 
Ltd., of Edmonton, Alberta. It is my understanding that this 
company has its employees working on a schedule of nine days 
on, five days off, so that the workers can go home to Alberta, and 
that this contract involves about seven months' work for up to 25 
people at the peak of construction. 
 
What I am asking is this, Mr. Minister: what guarantees do you 
have from Ipsco and the general contractor overseeing this 
expansion project that Saskatchewan workers will be given first 
crack at all the jobs on this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a country; 
Canada is not a sovereign province. 
 
First of all, you have to remember that our constitution and our 
charter of rights say that we are all Canadians and we can work 
anywhere in this country. And I tell that member to ask the Leader 
of the Opposition why he voted for that charter and why he 
implemented that, and now he can see what it's doing to this 
province. So you ask yourselves — you implemented that charter 
and you agreed to it. 
 
With respect to Ipsco, it is not a Crown corporation. And if you 
say our share is 22.5 per cent, I won't dispute that, but we can't 
control the company with 22.5 per cent. I will take notice of this 
company and look into it further. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan owns a substantial share in the company. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has provided some funding for the 
expansion, I understand. Therefore, you would think that the 
Government of Saskatchewan ought to have some influence on the 
policies with regard to this government's policy of Saskatchewan 
first. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you practise this policy of Saskatchewan first, as 
was assured to me last December by the minister who introduced 
the Bill on the upgrader, I ask you: why don't you enforce, at least 
by persuasion, this policy as it applies to Saskatchewan workers 
who have applied for jobs and have been told that no, there is no 
jobs available to them because the company can bring all its 
employees in from Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I've already told you I'll take notice of the 
specifics. But I also want you to know that according to my 
knowledge one Kim Thorson, the former NDP member for 
Estevan, is a board member. And I will be phoning him to check 
with him to what they're doing here. 
 
So we have certain problems because we are a province in a 
country, and there is freedom of movement of labour in this 
country. We will look into the matter further. And there is no 
direct control by this government over Ipsco. 
 

Employment of Terry Leier 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a new question for the Minister of Labour. 
Does the Department of Labour, or the minister's office, employ 
one Terry Leier, the PC party's official  

agent for the next provincial election and, if so, what are his duties 
and his salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Not to my knowledge. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, I have a question to the minister in charge of 
the Crown Management Board; he took notice with respect to Mr. 
Leier's trip and a trip to London, England. Is the minister able to 
tell the Assembly when this trip took place, and whether or not it 
was as part of Mr. Leier's government duties, or was it a vacation 
trip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I understand, that question was asked 
some weeks ago in here. I checked with Mr. Leier; I checked with 
the president of CMB (Crown Management Board). Mr. Leier's 
trip was a personal trip paid for personally by him, and I guess we 
can't stop a person from doing that. 
 
There was a further question to that particular question with regard 
to an AeroPlan. The AeroPlan did not apply in this particular case. 
He was not a member of the AeroPlan, and the AeroPlan was not 
used to buy his personal trips. So if he was going to Europe, or 
you're going to Europe, then I guess if you're going to take that trip 
and spend your own money, you're jolly well entitled to do that. It 
was not government money; no government involvement; no 
government work involved. 
 

Freedom of Debate in the Legislature 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Acting Premier. Mr. 
Premier, members of this caucus have expressed their opposition 
in the strongest possible way about your government's repeated 
attempts to stifle debate in the legislature. 
 
My question, Mr. Acting Premier, is: will you introduce, on 
Monday next, the legislation with respect to pensions so that there 
may be the fullest possible public debate and examination of this 
controversial legislation, or, as we suspect, is it your intention to 
introduce some legislation in the dying days of the session so that 
we won't have an opportunity to debate it, and the public won't 
have an opportunity to examine it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was hoping I would get some indication 
as to when the dying days might be. I understand that you have 
been quoted, or members of your caucus have been quoted, as 
saying that this session won't end until at least August. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, in our budget speech delivered by 
the Minister of Finance some weeks ago, there was an 
announcement of a home-makers' pension plan that will require 
legislative measures to be put in place. That legislation, I fully 
expect, will be introduced and passed in this session of the 
legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And the hon. member asks when? Well 
let me tell you, it will be soon. And I will . . . Just for comparison 
sake, Mr. Speaker, I think it was in 1971 — it might have been 
1975 — that the campaign literature of that party promised a 
home-makers' pension plan and we  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1594 
 
 

are still waiting for it. So ours is going to come on a whole lot 
faster than that. We're going to finally deliver on your promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day, and by leave of 
the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing 
of a member of this Assembly on Tuesday, and expresses its 
grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to this province. 
 
Bernard Joseph Leger Boutin, who died May 27, 1986, was a 
member of this legislature for the constituency of Kinistino 
from 1982 until his death. He was born at Cudworth, 
Saskatchewan, on March 29, 1953, and received his education 
in that area. He and his wife Lucie Marie were married in 1972 
and have five children. He was a farmer in the Domremy area 
of the province. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of 
the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few 
words to those of the Deputy Premier in extending our 
condolences to the bereaved members of the family of our 
colleague, the member for Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're here to recognize the work and to mourn the 
passing of this young member of the legislature who suffered such 
an untimely death. It's always a matter of sadness when one of our 
members leaves us by death. And some of us who have been in 
the legislature for some time recall a number of our colleagues 
who have died while in office. But I'm thinking of the last four or 
five that I can recall, and in each case they were people who had 
enjoyed some period of life — two-score years and ten or more in 
each case. 
 
In the case of Ben Boutin, where he was still in his early 30s, I 
think we all must concede or recognize that that adds an extra 
measure of tragedy. 
 
We have here a case of a young man who leaves behind him a 
wife, and I believe it is five young children. And we have here a 
family which has therefore been suddenly deprived, bereft of the 
guidance and support and comfort which a husband and a father 
can offer, and at a particularly crucial time in the upbringing of a 
young family. 
 
Because he was a young man, he had not had a full opportunity to 
develop a political career. He had served one term; had indicated, 
as my understanding is, that he  

would not seek re-election on this occasion; would devote himself 
to establishing his farm operation and to being the husband and 
father of his children; but that he reserved the right and the option 
to re-enter politics on another occasion when his family had grown 
a bit. That will not now be open to him, and it will not be open to 
the electors of Kinistino to re-elect him at some future time. 
 
Ben Boutin struck us here in the opposition as a quiet person. He 
was obviously of a somewhat pleasant and jolly disposition, which 
perhaps goes with red hair, I don't know, but at any rate, certainly 
was a pleasing person to be with and a pleasing person to meet. 
 
He had, understandably, as a new member, taken a relatively 
limited part in the proceedings of the House. But, as I say, that 
goes with being a new member. I know members opposite will 
make the point that the Premier made yesterday, that he took an 
active part in the caucus of his party and, as we know, was active 
in his constituency and serving his constituents. 
 
I know all hon. members — and I do in an official way on behalf 
of the official opposition — want to extend our deepest 
condolences to Mrs. Boutin, the children, and the extensive Boutin 
family, and to wish them the support of their faith at this, what 
must surely be a difficult time in their lives. 
 
I know that other hon. members will wish to add their voice, and I, 
in a personal way, want to extend my deepest sympathy to Mrs. 
Boutin, to the young children, and to other members of the 
bereaved family. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is not a very 
happy occasion. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go back, if I 
can, a few years ago when many of us were all elected to this 
legislature for the first time. Ben and I and many of my other 
colleagues were all of the same era. In April '82 we were all 
elected, and we all came to a room where many of us were 
strangers. 
 
I've best come to know Ben Boutin through a friend of mine, 
Louis Domotor, the member from Humboldt. We had spent many, 
many times discussing various things and maybe over-reacted, 
basically, because we were all green and we thought we were 
really going to change the history of the province in just a matter 
of a few days. And I guess Ben and I came to know each other 
through many of these discussions — discussions where we not 
always agreed on, but we always appreciated each other's opinion. 
 
There's never really, I guess, enough to say, Mr. Speaker, when 
one passes through this life. Such is the passing of Ben Boutin 
who represented his constituents well in the constituency of 
Kinistino. And well, I know, because my wife is from his 
constituency, and I have many relatives that live in his 
constituency. And I've had many discussions on the directions of 
our government and the stands that Ben had taken, which they not 
always agreed on, but still I would appreciate the fact that they 
were respected. 
 
(1445) 
 
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1595 
 

Ben's contributions, I guess, if you will, probably cannot be 
measured as an individual's contributions to Saskatchewan or to 
his riding. But maybe, as well, any of the contributions that are 
made through this Assembly cannot be measured by anyone's 
individual actions, but by team-work, team effort. And that was 
Ben's way. 
 
Ben was a strong individual. He was strong in body, strong in 
mind, and strong in heart. So when we talk about the markings of 
an individual, no matter, Ben was not the one to be concerned 
whether he was going to be remembered in history, or who was 
going to remember him. I know, in the many discussions we've 
had, his priorities were family, religion, and government. And 
with that, I think that's where it actually just lay, and that was his 
strengths. 
 
As a family, I'm reminded . . . and we still talked of it. My 
colleague here to my right — the member from Saskatoon East — 
when we were at a function and Ben had his wife here in Regina, 
and my colleague, Kim Young, from Saskatoon East, went up to 
Ben as he was away from his wife, and in a tone, Kim asked Ben, 
he says: who is that good-looking young woman over there? And 
he pointed to his wife. And Lucie was pregnant at that time, and 
Ben, as proud a husband as he was, looked at Kim with a smile 
and he says: that's my wife — a very proud, very proud husband. 
 
For the father aspect of it, it's hard for any of us to be able to 
imagine for the children. I know that in our conversations he 
spoke of his children many times and was wondering at times why 
he was here in Regina, why he took the step he did take. But it 
didn't hold him back. He tried to make the best of both worlds. 
 
Ben took life seriously, and probably the way life goes there's 
really no justice. I guess maybe God works in strange ways. I 
guess what we have to do is believe that there is a better world. I 
believe that Ben is in good hands. 
 
I would just like to say that I'm going to join along with my 
colleagues, and personally I would also like to send my 
condolences to Ben's family. We're going to miss him. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My comments will 
be brief, because Ben and I were extremely close. Over the last 
couple of days I've had the opportunity of speaking to Lucie over 
the phone a few times. I recently spoke to Ben. He had mentioned 
to me that he was coming down to this city as soon as the next 
time that it rained so we could spend some time together and get 
caught up on past events and future events. 
 
And I think that I am truly going to miss the man an awful lot. 
When he passed on and I first became aware of it, certain thoughts 
go through your mind, good and bad, and I can't help but think 
today as we mourn his passing, one of the things that I would have 
to concede to Ben, that he was a better man than me. 
 
And this, I hope, is not in bad taste. It goes back to the time he and 
I went shopping here in Regina and I purchased a new pipe. He 
was with me; he decided to buy one also —  

said that perhaps he should take up smoking a pipe. And on 
various occasions we smoked them. 
 
A week or 10 days later when he returned to the Assembly after 
being up to the farm, he had a small, circular container in his 
pocket and he said to me: as well as the way that you taught me to 
smoke the pipe, he said, I think that it's fair that you should learn 
to chew what I have here. And he passed this small, cylinder can 
to him, commonly known as snuff — passed it over to me. And I 
have to say, from that moment until this, I still concede he was a 
better man than me. I tried it; I turned green; I became extremely 
ill; and, Mr. Speaker, I do believe I missed the evening sitting that 
night. I was not able to be here on account of that small can. 
 
However, on a more serious point, over the last four years Ben and 
I became, as I say, quite close. We discussed a lot of things from 
farming to farm machinery to politics to family. He was very 
committed to his family and to his farm, and also a very 
committed Conservative he was. 
 
I think that his death is very untimely but we don't have any 
control over that. I also believe that of those that go is the will of a 
power greater than us, and we have to accept it. But I also want to 
express my condolences to Lucie, to the children, and to all Ben's 
relatives. And I thank them for giving me the honour of being an 
honorary pallbearer at the funeral tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I too would join with others 
in a few words with regard to Benny. I think we look at Benny in 
two ways: Benny as the man; and Benny as our colleague in this 
Assembly — a colleague of all members in this Assembly. Benny 
the man was probably known to many other members of this 
House better than he was know to me. Benny was part of our 
caucus, and others can speak far more eloquently and probably 
with far more emotion and conviction than can I. 
 
Benny did, obviously, reflect the importance that he held his 
family. He obviously reflected the importance that he held to his 
way of life as a farmer, as a citizen of rural Saskatchewan — the 
roots from which he grew and for the roots for which he found 
most of his life and where he wished to spend the days of his life. 
That individual, or any individual who is prematurely taken from 
this world and prematurely taken by tragic circumstances, 
obviously saddens, and saddens all. 
 
But I think we also must reflect as a member of this Assembly, an 
honour that I hold very, very important, and I think all who have 
served here hold important. And I think we reflect today because 
that is one characteristic or quality of Benny Boutin, that he is also 
a member of this Assembly and a colleague of ours — a colleague 
of 64 people. It's in that regard that I would wish to reflect upon 
Benny Boutin, and perhaps what Benny Boutin might hear, or 
certainly the way I understood Benny Boutin to feel with regard to 
this institution. 
 
Before I do that, I simply would joint with others in expressing our 
condolence, or my condolence and my family's condolence, to 
Benny's family who must surely in this time of mourning find it 
very difficult to cope. And I am advised and I am convinced that 
their inner strength  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1596 
 
 

will get them through that troubled time. I do wish them well — a 
young family with a great hurdle. I do wish them well in the 
future, individually. 
 
When a death like this happens or a tragedy like this happens, as 
members of the Assembly, when it happens to a person that is one 
of us, sometimes we then reflect upon this institution. And our 
reflections, as we remember Benny, reflect upon this institution, 
and we look inwardly, as perhaps Benny would have us do. And I 
think in doing that, I think it's important for Ben, for the years 
ahead for his family, as they reflect on their father and the history 
of their father and what their father had done. 
 
As the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd says, Ben Boutin came in 
with the large government change in May of 1982 and he, like 
many before him, came full of ideals, came with a perhaps 
ordinary person's view of what this institution was about; that he 
would be able to leave his mark, to make his changes, to reflect 
and respond to what he understood the people that he represented, 
the people from which he had come, would like to see and would 
like to see government do. 
 
And I think if we are to be fair with ourselves and fair with Benny, 
we could probably summarize that four years later Ben Boutin was 
probably frustrated and probably to a degree disillusioned by this 
institution. And I think that those who have talked to Benny would 
certainly be of that view. 
 
Benny Boutin was a private member, a back-bencher — call him 
what you will — as many before him. And many, I'm sure, share 
that save view. He found as a private member the difficulty to 
work in this institution, to perhaps work in the parliamentary 
system, in the political system of this province and of this country. 
And I think it would be fair to say that Benny started to have 
doubts as to the value of this institution. Again, that's not to be 
saying anything negative of Ben Boutin. I think it is probably what 
Ben would have said. 
 
Benny never professed to have the skills of a great orator. Benny 
did not master, nor did he seek to master, the skills of the 
30-second clip or the skills of the outrageous statement or the 
skills of being in the headlines on a daily basis. Benny rather 
spoke in the way that he was raised and the people that he 
reflected. He spoke the same way that people in his community 
spoke, and that was what Benny Boutin was. 
 
Benny Boutin never changed and this system never changed Ben 
Boutin. I think it would be fair to say from members on this side 
of the House that Ben often was frustrated with our cabinet form 
of government its complexities, its procedures that somehow 
frustrated him or disillusioned him; that it was too complex and 
complicated to get the things that seemed so simple and that 
seemed so simple to the ordinary person to get done. 
 
I think Ben was . . . These frustrations, I think, are probably and 
have existed long before Ben Boutin ever came to this Assembly. 
But those frustrations, while felt by many, were felt by Ben Boutin 
in a real way and felt in a way that, while others can write about 
them and speculate about  

them, only those that sit here and experience that can really 
understand them. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ben Boutin did not relate to the media. When I talked to Ben 
Boutin, perhaps as much as any person I've met in this Assembly, 
Ben Boutin had contempt for many of the media people — 
contempt in the sense that he felt that somehow his views were not 
important, somehow he did not have the mechanism, the vehicle, 
the understanding, to be able to say what he wanted to say through 
the system of media. And while that's maybe not why we should 
be critical of the media . . but certainly an ordinary member found 
that very difficult and very frustrating. 
 
I suppose in the end the best one can say of Ben Boutin is, Ben 
Boutin was a decent man. Ben Boutin was very interested in his 
family. Ben Boutin was very proud of his family. Ben Boutin was 
a religious man. Ben Boutin was an ordinary person, stood for 
office, very proud of the fact that he sat and was a member of this 
Assembly, frustrated by it — but I don't think a person that would 
be prepared to walk away and give up from it. 
 
Ben Boutin was a friend of everybody in this Assembly that ever 
met him and knew him. Nobody disliked Benny. Everybody, I 
think, tried to understand Benny. In the end, Benny Boutin will be 
remembered in history as a member of this Assembly — an 
honour experienced by few, but an honour that is only understood 
by those that sit here. Ben Boutin was frustrated by it, but Ben 
Boutin always tried to do what came naturally to him. And I think 
that is a stance, an important part, of any character. 
 
Ben Boutin was my friend. Ben Boutin will be missed. And I am 
sorry. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to join 
with other members in paying our respects on the occasion of the 
tragic and untimely death of one of our members, Ben Boutin. 
During the four years that he served as a member of the 
legislature, we all got a chance to know him and to respect him. 
We learned that beyond the sometimes shy and soft-spoken person 
we saw in public was a warm, friendly man with a ready sense of 
humour. 
 
Over the past four years, Ben Boutin and I became more than just 
colleagues from opposite sides of the Assembly; we became close 
friends. I had the occasion to spend some leisure time with Ben 
Boutin over these last four years. He would often tell me how he 
wished he could spend more time back home with his wife and his 
young family, and more time on his farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Benny Boutin made the decision not to seek 
re-election, it didn't come as a surprise to me, as I knew through 
the many conversations that Benny Boutin and I had, that he was 
wrestling with this problem for some time. And as I said, it didn't 
surprise me. 
 
I first met a member of the Boutin family many years ago, in 
Benny's brother, who was the parish priest at Carrot River at that 
time — Father Boutin. He came into the  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1597 
 

legislature a couple of years ago, and Benny and I slipped out of 
the House and went down and had a lengthy discussion with his 
brother, Father Boutin. And we spoke with each other for about an 
hour. 
 
And I can't help but reflect on that, Mr. Speaker, when I think of 
the two brothers sitting there. One was a parish priest and the other 
one was a politician, and both very proud of one another and both 
working for the same goals. It was an hour that I spent with the 
two Boutin brothers that I will always cherish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ben Boutin's tragic and untimely death has shocked 
and saddened us all, and I extend my deepest sympathies to his 
wife and to his children. We have lost a fellow member and a 
friend. They have lost a husband and a father. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to join in support of this motion of 
condolences to his family. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join condolences and 
say a few words about Benny. Ben was in the neighbouring 
constituency to mine, and I remember Benny just after he got 
nominated, and prior to the election, at a box social. He was proud, 
friendly, and concerned. Four years and a little bit later, tomorrow, 
he met his untimely death, and tomorrow we will bury Benny. 
 
The best think you can say about anybody is if you attend — to be 
there — and you look around his community, you can say: his 
family is proud of him; his community can be proud of him; and 
what else can you ask for? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, too, 
want to join in offering condolences to the family of Ben Boutin. I 
had the pleasure of knowing Ben before we came here in 1982. 
And in fact, back 10 years earlier, in 1972, I worked as parts man 
for the summer, and Ben Boutin would often come in with his dad, 
and they'd buy parts from me and the for the company I worked 
for. And one thing I learned about the Boutin family at that time, 
were that they were very, very strong and hard-working people, 
and we came to know that about Benny here in the Assembly. 
 
After we got elected I ran into Ben, and I said, by gosh Ben, are 
you one of the Boutins from around Wakaw-Domremy? And he 
said yes. And we kind of reminisced, and we figured out that we'd 
known each other 10 years earlier. And it was kind of nice to 
come in here, among all of the strangers and people that know and 
really knew who they were or much about them, and to know that 
there was someone there that you had known. 
 
Ben Boutin was the kind of man who would have a smile on his 
face, and he'd like to tell you a joke. And we don't have enough of 
that. The kind of reservation that we run into here as members, and 
we all run into it —it's usually being told that you can't do 
something that you wanted to do. And Benny would be the kind of 
guy who would want to not be told why he couldn't do anything, 
but rather he'd be the kind of guy who'd want to be told, when do 
we start? 
 

And I want to just make these few brief comments because in the 
history of the legislature there's a little book kept on each of us, 
and it will state our name and our religion and, you know, what we 
did here — we were elected on a give day and we served for a 
period of time. The book in the future on Ben will not really 
reflect what the man had to offer, and I would like to join with my 
colleagues in wishing the family well. 
 
Mr. Young: — I too, Mr. Speaker, have the honour claiming 
Benny as one of my friends. He would day after day and night 
after night, attend with us . . we would usually go out for supper 
together after the session. In the government members' lounge, 
when time permitted and quorum was in order, me and Benny and 
some other people that had things to do with agriculture, we would 
talk about our farm machinery and our cultivators and all of the 
nice thoughts, the pleasurable thoughts, that we had looking 
forward to putting the crop in in the spring or taking it off in 
harvest. 
 
And I can remember looking at Ben with a lot of envy. I viewed 
him as a big, quiet, honest many, and barrel-chested. I'll never 
forget his big hands, the freckles on his big hands, and the body 
that he was blessed with; and the values that I guess aren't 
hereditary like the body, but the things that go with you 
throughout your life like your body — his ideas towards his family 
and to his farm. 
 
I'm a third-generation farmer on my farm, and it becomes 
something where you don't really claim ownership to it; you're just 
passing through. And I know Benny's family were farmers, and I 
think that he hoped, like I do, that his kids would be farmers. And 
it becomes a way of life in every sense of the word. And with 
Benny, farming was a way of life. His family was a way of life. 
He had a very nice wife and lots of kids, a nice farm; and a lot of 
people in this province would be envious of the life that Ben had. 
 
His contributions here in this House were many, in my opinion. I 
have always been of the opinion, and I've stated it on many 
occasions, that a government cannot be composed of pin-stripe 
lawyers; and when it gets to that stage, it will fall. And unless it's 
representative of the people of the province . . certainly you need 
your pin-stripe lawyers and your executive types for some 
functions, and you need the heartbeat of the province as well in 
order to be a full caucus and a full government. 
 
And Benny certainly brought us to sobriety on all sorts of points 
dealing with agriculture and common sense issues. And as far as I 
was concerned he brought us a long ways in the formulation of our 
policies which came from caucus and eventually were 
implemented into the laws of this land. 
 
You can't feel sorry for Ben — he's dead. But with respect to his 
wife and his children . . . I know my father died in 1981, and I had 
the benefit of his upbringing and the memories that you have of 
your father. His kids are going to be left with pictures and stories 
and possibly at the best a few foggy memories of what their dad 
was. There's no bringing that back. But I think that, Mr. Speaker, 
Ben died in the process of providing for his wife and his children, 
and that's a very noble task, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1598 
 
 

(1515) 
 
Mr. Petersen: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to join 
in passing along my condolences to the family of the member who 
has just passed. Ben was a friend of mine and loved farming. And 
a lot of his energy in the Assembly here was put into agriculture 
issues, and he was a member of my agriculture committee. 
 
He was what we called our "French Connection," if you would. 
He had a good command of both the English and the French 
languages and, when speaking to federal members who came from 
Quebec, we sure wowed them when he stood up and spoke to 
them in the language they knew the best. And the he really shook 
them up when he threw in a few words of Ukrainian, to boot. 
 
He was a proud Canadian — proud of his heritage, proud of his 
family, proud of his farm — and we'll miss him greatly. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I also rise to 
add a few words to those that have already been stated by several 
of my colleagues in the House today. 
 
I first met Ben in 1982. And I was like he — I came into this arena 
as a rookie, and had the good fortune to sit not too far from Ben. I 
think for a while he thought perhaps it was his good fortune, too. 
 
Ben had certain ideas and beliefs and principles. But, more 
importantly, he had a very clear vision of how this system should 
work. He did not like the system. If he said it once, he said a 
hundred times: it needs cleaning out — very clearly. And he never 
quit saying it for the four years that he was here. 
 
He had no time, absolutely no time, and no patience for the 
political games and the rhetoric. And he had even less time for any 
kind of bureaucratic red tape that one might have to go through to 
get something done for one's constituency. He only knew what 
had to be done and what should be done. And he would often say, 
"don't talk to me about when it might be done; just do it." 
 
He did not like the process of politics. And I suspect it was one 
reason why he ran; he wanted the process changed. He didn't think 
of himself as a politician. and when I would say to him, "Ben, 
you're a politician like everybody else in here," he would say, "No, 
I'm not." 
 
And over the four years that he was in here, he retained what I 
consider to be a fairly healthy cynicism towards politics. And that, 
perhaps, is what kept him with his priorities straight and a very 
honest manner. 
 
If you were a minister, Mr. Speaker, that fit into Ben's priorities, 
you very quickly learned of what those priorities were and the 
goals that he had set for his constituency. Early in our first year, in 
'82, Ben began laying down his desires for the Kinistino 
constituency senior citizens — I very quickly learned where 
Middle Lake was on the map, and Birch Hills. 
 
And today, I remember attending a sod-turning  

ceremony. In fact, it was one of the most unique that I've ever 
attended in the four years that I've been in here, and it was at Birch 
Hills. And when I got there, we went out into a field where this 
nursing home was going to be, and there was Cubs and Brownies 
and a lot of people from Birch Hills and around there. 
 
And in the middle of the field was a great big green tractor, and 
there was no shovel to turn the sod, and I said to Ben, "Ben, 
where's the shovel?" And he said, "right there." And here was this 
nice, big, green, shiny tractor. And I said, "But Ben, that's a 
tractor, that's not a shovel." And he said, "I know, but this is Birch 
Hills and we are the twin to Texas." And I have never forgotten it. 
 
I soon learned that in Ben's goal a lot of other people mattered. 
And when it came to our young people, Ben wore his heart on his 
sleeve, and I very quickly learned that education and schools were 
as important to him as any other institution within the 
constituency. And it didn't matter of the location if it was some 
little thing that needed fixing at Cudworth, or once again, Middle 
Lake or Birch Hills, it was important to him. He used to say to me, 
"It is important what we put our children into. If we can spend a 
lot of money on office buildings, the Legislative Buildings," he 
would say, "for adults, is it not equally important to put the same 
kind of moneys for our children?" 
 
He was very proud of his French heritage, but he held very strong 
and vocally his views on French education, and he would often 
say to me, "No segregation." He would say, "That's bad. What's 
wrong with this world? It's big enough for all, and we all have to 
live together. Why can't we do it?" 
 
Besides his strong views on French, Ben was one of the few 
members in this Assembly that used to quietly spend some time 
telling me and asking questions on some other issues such as 
women's issues. And he would often say to me: "You know, I 
don't pretend to understand it all." He says, "You know. Lucie can 
throw a bale of hay as well as I can." He said, "She can probably 
farm better than I can; I don't quite understand it." But he wanted 
to understand it, and he cared about the women within this 
constituency. 
 
Along with his strong views, it was perhaps tempered with a sense 
of humour. And with the red hair also came, every once in a while, 
a sense of a temper. Ben's priorities were, very clearly to each and 
every member in this House, his family, his faith, and his farming, 
and there is absolutely no question or doubt about that. 
 
When politics looked like it was to be set aside from the farm or 
his family, he had the good wisdom and the strength to know it, 
and then to make a very difficult decision: family and farm first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pain of death and of losing a family member, a 
loved one or a friend, is never easy to accept. In this particular 
case it is extremely difficult because it is early in life, and it leaves 
behind him five children and Lucie. Lucie and the children have 
some very difficult days to face. I have no doubt that Lucie will be 
able to it from what Ben has spoken of her. And I'm sure with the  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1599 
 

support of the family — Ben comes from a very large family — 
and the support of the community, that they will, indeed, in time 
be able to face them squarely again. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I, too, add my regrets to the death of Ben 
Boutin. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — On behalf of my friend and colleague, Louis 
Domotor . . . I can't recall his . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you . . . the member from Humboldt. I'm 
sure you'll understand if we don't get things straight today. 
 
Louis, I know, had a great deal of respect for Ben, and I most 
certainly had. And I think that we judge success in different terms. 
And then there's a day like a few days ago when Ben dies and 
reminds us what really our values are. To say that Ben was not a 
politician, Ben was not one for the double deal and the secret 
agenda and for wheeling and dealing, but you can say that Ben 
was always a friend. 
 
And I'm sure with the sincerity that is expressed around this room 
on all sides shows that Ben was a friend to everybody. And few of 
us can say that we have the kind of personality that people say: 
that person is an honest person, and that person cares; and if there 
was differences, the person still knew what was important. 
 
Ben was a very generous person, and he was very concerned about 
the small things. If I forgot to bring money to the cafeteria or 
whatever, if Ben was there, not only would he give it to me, but 
he'd give it to me without, you know . . . and be embarrassed if I 
thought that I shouldn't have come to him and just asked for a little 
care about that. I'm sure he really cared that way about his 
constituents. 
 
But there was one way in which Ben and I enjoyed some 
competition, and I think it shows Ben's basic values and his love 
for children. He would always come up to me and say, well, the 
Boutins are keeping track of the Caswells. We just about have as 
much children as you, Gay. And he was very proud of his family; 
and his children are about the same age as mine. And I often 
thought, since we don't have a farm, that we should take the 
children to play at the Boutins and they can enjoy each other. 
 
People often have said to me, oh, you have now five children, or 
six, children, and that's a lot. It must be so hard on you. And I 
would always answer, oh no, it's not hard; I have a husband. But 
Lucie can't say that any more. And I think about my mother who 
had her ninth child after my father died, or my father went out of a 
home into a hospital, and the child was born . . . my last sister 
never saw her father. And my mother called her daughter, Faith. 
And I don't understand what it's like to be left without a husband. 
But I hope Lucie will remember that she does have her God, that 
she does have her faith. He's looking after Ben, and He will look 
after the children and her. 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add a few words of 
condolence to the family of Ben Boutin, added  

to the words that have already been said this afternoon by his 
colleagues here in the House. 
 
Ben and I got to know each other in 1982 after he was elected to 
the House, and in the last few years I have grown to respect the 
values and principles for which Ben Boutin stood. 
 
As other speakers before me said, Ben Boutin's main loves were 
his family and farming. And he loved to talk about both, and he 
did. And him and I spent a good amount of time discussing both 
these topics. We would naturally talk about farming, and, me 
being a farmer as well, we had much in common in that area. And 
we would talk about the crops we would grow, about the 
machinery we had — and we would compare — and the 
innovative practices followed by him. 
 
And even though I don't have a family, Ben Boutin spent much 
time talking to me about his family. He talked and he said that the 
family was the corner-stone of society. And he talked about his 
love for his wife and his family, and the hopes and dreams he had 
for them. 
 
I recall about a year ago Ben and I were at a CPA convention, and 
as fate would have it, we roomed together for a few days. And as 
you sometimes do, you stay up most of the night at these 
conventions, and we talked about these things towards the early 
hours of the morning. One thing that stands out, and I will 
remember, is the unique plan he had to get to know his children 
real well. Benny told me that they had already discussed this plan 
as a family, and they had all agreed to it. 
 
(1530) 
 
And he said that the plan was simply this. Because of the rush of 
the our society and the busy-ness, and because this did not allow 
— especially on farms, perhaps, more than cities; I don't know — 
him to spend as much time as possible with his children, they had 
made a deal. And the deal was this: that when his children quit 
school, regardless of whether it was high school or university or 
whatever, each of them, whether they were male or female, would 
spend one year at home with him, not just with the mother, but 
with him. Each of them would have to spend one year working 
with him, and this would give him the opportunity to get to know 
them and to talk to them on a very personal level before they went 
out into the world as adults. I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, remembering 
this, that Benny will not have that opportunity, and his children 
will not have that invaluable opportunity. 
 
His constituents, Mr. Speaker, were also well-served, and we 
discussed the many things you had to do as an MLA. And I 
remember Benny telling me that the hour of the day or night didn't 
matter if a constituent needed help. For example, he told me about 
getting up at 4 o'clock in the morning to go out with a farmer who 
was complaining about a road that was being flooded —just one 
example of the dedication he had to his work and to his 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I would just like to state that I believe 
that Benny Boutin was a man of honour and integrity. In a world 
that is sometimes jaded with  
  



 
May 29, 1986 

1600 
 
 

cynicism and a lack of trust between individuals, Benny Boutin 
was a man who rose above this. The four years he spent in this 
legislature did not ruin his principles of honour an integrity; 
indeed, they enhanced these values which he so believed in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ben Boutin is a loss, not only to his family and to his 
constituents, but to all of Saskatchewan. We will all miss him. 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to 
join with my colleagues from both sides of the House in extending 
my condolences to the Boutin family and expressing our sorrow at 
the untimely passing of our colleague. 
 
Ben Boutin was a member that I got to know very well personally 
because, together with our colleague, the member for 
Shellbrook-Torch River, Lloyd Muller, we formed a bit of a car 
pool and rode together from the Prince Albert area to Regina. And 
that presented an unusual opportunity to talk to one another in a 
way that isn't often available to us in our busy lives, when we have 
three or four hours together in a car to discuss things. 
 
I found Ben to be an individual who did hold convictions very 
deeply, particularly religious convictions, and discussed them 
freely. And that's an attribute that's not too common in this day 
and age in our pluralistic society. But he had no reservations at all 
about discussing his convictions and his philosophy, and he was 
very proud of them; and he was proud of his heritage; he was 
proud of his community; and he was proud to be an MLA and 
serve. 
 
But of course, most of all, as has been mentioned, he was proud of 
his family. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that all of them are 
proud of him, and they have good reason to be because he was 
always one of them. 
 
And as has been mentioned, he wasn't a politician in the ordinary 
sense of the word. He was one of the folks and retained a very 
close contact with his people. His devotion to his family — and it 
wasn't just the immediate family, but the extended family, which 
was his community and his constituency and the whole province, 
was really the basis of his political philosophy. And, of course, in 
that sense he wasn't an ordinary politician, but kind of a 
representative of the people and he believe he could do his job best 
by always being one of them. And I think that his contribution in 
this Assembly is a significant one, but one that will be appreciated 
as time passes, because of values that he stood for, and the 
principles that he stood for are things that are sorely needed in our 
society, and we will appreciate them more as time passes. 
 
The member for Shellbrook, Lloyd Muller, and his wife have been 
with the Boutin family since yesterday, and I know that he would 
want me as well to express his views here today, and that he 
would wish to be able to join us in extending condolences to the 
Boutin family. So on behalf of my colleague and my family, and 
all of Ben's friends in Prince Albert, I want to express our 
condolences to Ben's family and extend our offer to help in any 
way that we can, both to his family and to other members of his 
community. Thank you. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would move, seconded by my colleague the Minister of Health, 
the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 
That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of oral 
tributes paid on May 28th and on May 29th, to the memory of the 
deceased member, be communicated to the bereaved family on 
behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:42 p.m. 
 
 


