


















































May 5, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 5, 1986 
 
 

1071 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. On behalf of the 
member for Regina North West who is not present today, I want 
to introduce 27 students; they’re grade 5 students at Al Pickard 
elementary school, accompanied by their teacher, Ms. V. Taylor. 
Regrettably the member is not present, and I will not be able to 
attend with the students. I do hope, though, that their period here 
during the question period will be enlightening and they’ll come 
to have some understanding of how democracy operates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
While I’m on my feet, if I might, Mr. Speaker, introduce another 
group, also on behalf of the member from Regina North West 
who are also from Al Pickard elementary school. This time 
there’s 26 students in grade 5 and grade 6, accompanied by their 
teacher, John Lukomski. I would ask all members to welcome 
them here, and I hope their stay is enjoyable. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
also, on behalf of the member from Regina North West, welcome 
a group of students from St. Peter’s elementary school here in 
Regina who are seated in the east gallery. It’s good to see them 
here. They’re accompanied by Ms. Bolen, their teacher, who I 
want to extend a special welcome to — I worked with Ms. Bolen 
on the Regina Catholic School Teachers’ Association — as well 
as chaperons Mr. and Mrs. Herman, Mrs. Ritco, and Mr. and Mrs. 
Wylie who, I am informed, are from Australia. It’s good to have 
them here. I hope that the students and their chaperons enjoy the 
proceedings of the legislature here this afternoon and go away 
having learned something about how our system of government, 
our parliamentary system, works. And if I am able to, I would be 
only too pleased to say hello to them afterwards when they leave 
the gallery. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
members opposite and, on behalf of the members from the 
government side today, welcome the students from Al Pickard 
elementary school, in particular, since this school is located in 
that part of the city where my riding is also located — and I’m 
sorry that the member from that particular area was not able to 
be here today — but I certainly want to join with those who have 
already spoken and welcome the grade 5 students from Al 
Pickard, and also the grade 5 and 6 class as well from Al Pickard 
elementary school. 
 
I’m sure that you’ll have a very interesting day today. And I 
certainly would look forward to the opportunity of meeting with 
you after question period, and certainly want, as well, to welcome 
on behalf of the government  

members the students from St. Peter elementary school which, I 
understand, borders very closely the riding of the member from 
Regina North. So perhaps all members could join once again in 
welcoming these students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Staff Cuts to Public “Watch-dog” Agencies 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to introduce the question, in the absence 
of the Premier and the Deputy Premier, to the Deputy Deputy 
Premier. And the question, Mr. Deputy Deputy Premier, deals 
with this. It deals with your government’s attempts to basically 
undermine the independence of the public “watch-dog” agencies 
such as the Ombudsman, the Provincial Auditor, and the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. I want to ask you, can 
the Deputy Deputy Premier explain why his government has cut 
the staff available to the provincial Ombudsman, to the 
Provincial Auditor, and the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that same 
question had been asked of the Premier a week or so ago. And 
the Premier indicated at that point in time that the government 
looked at priorities, that they have placed their priorities on the 
areas of education and health care, as well as agriculture and the 
creation of jobs, and that various other departments of 
governments had to perhaps have a smaller increase, or be held 
at the same as they had last year. 
 
I think, if you go over the last four years and look at the office of 
the Ombudsman or the office of the Provincial Auditor or the 
office of the Human Rights Commission, that they are in fact 
well-funded, well-funded relative to virtually any other province 
across the country. I can recall only from previous discussions on 
this, for example, that the office of the Ombudsman in 
Saskatchewan receives in excess of twice the amount that the 
similar position of the Ombudsman in the province of Manitoba 
receives. 
 
And I that is . . . you know, I think that demonstrates that in fact 
that this government has in fact treated those groups, that they 
have their opportunity to function and, I think, are functioning 
reasonably well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, are you aware that since you took 
office that the staff of the Provincial Auditor has been cut from 
72 to 63 people? And the basic function of the Provincial Auditor 
is to supervise the spending of the government of over $3 billion 
of taxpayers’ money. 
 
I ask you: what do you see as more important than the job of 
making sure that you’re spending the public taxpayers’ money 
efficiently? When you cut the auditor’s staff that was designed to 
make his work more effective, how can you support such an 
action with such a flimsy excuse as what you’re trying to put 
forward in this Assembly today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, again I go back to the  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1072 
 
 

suggestion that we, as a government, made a conscious decision 
that there had to be more money put into the field of agriculture. 
And we don’t apologize for that. We made a conscious decision 
as well, Mr. Speaker, to put money into the fields of both 
education, universities, and in health care — and the increase in 
health this year is in excess of 11 per cent. We see that as a 
priority, Mr. Speaker. As I see, the Provincial Auditor in fact 
does his reports, gets his job done, and I haven’t heard any great 
loud screams from the Provincial Auditor that he doesn’t have 
enough people that he can’t get his job done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, isn’t the real reason for the various staff cuts really to 
reduce the ability of these “watch-dog” agencies — the 
provincial Ombudsman, the auditor, the Human Rights 
Commission? It prevents them from investigating the work and 
decisions of your government on behalf of the people of this 
province. In effect, do you not agree that what you’re doing is to 
muzzle the investigation ability of these agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think that’s absolutely wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. The Provincial Auditor’s job is to audit the various 
departments; to audit some Crown corporations, and that 
particular job is being done. It seems to me that he’s getting his 
work done. The Ombudsman, as I indicated to you, there were 
years prior to this year where the increase to the Ombudsman was 
in fact twice as high as the average group. The reality is those 
agencies have been increased in their funding this year. They are 
doing their job. They are not as important, as far as we are 
concerned, as agriculture, health care, education, and the creation 
of jobs. And I don’t think we apologize for that. 
 
The members opposite seem to be bent on priorities of creating 
larger bureaucracies and more people working for the 
government. And that’s not what we see as the important focus 
at this point. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the deputy House 
Leader. Mr. Minister, when you were in opposition you 
complained endlessly about the treatment accorded the 
Provincial Auditor at a time when he had 13 per cent more staff 
than he does now. Since you’ve taken office, government 
expenditures have increased by 33 per cent. The Provincial 
Auditor has filed the longest report he’s ever filed, indicating a 
growing number of administrative problems with this 
government, and you have cut his staff by 13 per cent since you 
took office. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is: will you admit, Mr. Minister, the 
reason why you’ve cut staff for the Provincial Auditor and the 
Ombudsman, in the face of a growing work-load, is that you 
people simply don’t want to hear what they’ve got to say, and 
you don’t want the public to hear what they’ve got to say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think that’s foolish to say that. I 
think if you go back in time in the last eight years that I’ve been 
in this Assembly, the Provincial Auditor has made small 
comments with regard to his staff. They’ve been made in four 
years when I sat on that side, and he’s  

probably made the same statement four years since I’ve sat on 
this side. 
 
The Provincial Auditor gets his job done. The Provincial Auditor, 
if he has fault with this government — and I’m sure has got every 
possible forum that he wants to speak and be critical of this 
government; I haven’t heard a whole lot of that coming out of 
him — I think the Provincial Auditor should be no different than 
any other department of government, and I think the funds that 
are provided to him are satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, you state that 
the Provincial Auditor has every opportunity to state his views. 
As an officer of the Assembly he has no opportunity and no 
forum to make his views known. Apart from some comments 
which have preceded the odd budget, it would be inappropriate, 
Mr. Minister, for the Provincial Auditor to publicly attack the 
government. 
 
Will you admit that the Provincial Auditor has no means of 
adequately responding to your comments, and that it is, therefore, 
incumbent on you, as a member of the government, to provide 
adequate staff so that the public may know whether or not their 
tax dollars are being efficiently spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many departments of 
government are down, but let me go back. The member from 
Quill Lakes made comment that somehow we’ve underfunded 
the Ombudsman, and that doesn’t seem to me to stop the 
Ombudsman from being public with regards to the government 
that he hasn’t got his funding. 
 
Now with regards to saying that the Provincial Auditor has no 
vehicle by which he can attack the government is absolutely 
ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. He’s got the same power here as a 
Provincial Auditor, the auditors general across this country. If he 
chooses to be critical of the government, then he has every right 
to be critical. All he has to do is call a press conference and the 
folks up there in the gallery would be rushing to him to hear what 
he has to say. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that he is interested in 
doing that. He’s not interested in making headlines. I haven’t 
heard him. Perhaps the Minister of Finance has heard that he is 
somehow crying because he doesn’t have positions. In my view 
the Provincial Auditor in this province does a good job; the 
Provincial Auditor in this province gets his job done, does it in a 
proper way, and does not seek the public notoriety that perhaps 
the members opposite would like him to. Be that as it may, that’s 
the way he likes to approach things. 
 

Choice of Power Plant Site 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I have a new question to the deputy Deputy 
Premier. In the absence of the Premier and the Deputy Premier, I 
address the question to the deputy Deputy Premier. My questions 
deal with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m not sure what 
else we’re supposed to do in the absence of the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier in the same day. You people may complain 
about the style of our questions. We complain about the 
attendance in the House during question period. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1073 
 
 

My questions also deal with this government’s arrogant 
determination to hide information from the public. My question 
is with respect to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. More 
than a month ago in this Assembly, the minister in charge was 
asked to table the environmental and economic studies done by 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation prior to your government’s 
decision to build a 5 — $700 million power plant in the Premier’s 
constituency. At that time, you claimed the decision was not 
related to politics, and you claimed that SPC management had 
done extensive economic and environmental studies which 
supported the decision. Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, when the 
public will get to see those studies, and whether we’ll get to see 
them before, or after, the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question was 
posed to the Deputy Premier and the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. As I recall, he announced that 
day that the location of that particular project was chosen because 
of the ability to make an agreement with the state of North 
Dakota and deal with the Rafferty dam project, and that the 
reason it was chosen in that location is because that’s where the 
Souris River was, and that’s where the choice was. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — About the only thing that you’ve said that is 
accurate is that the Souris River does go through the Premier’s 
constituency and the Shand is on it. Mr. Minister, I’ll grant you 
that the question was asked of the Deputy Premier a month ago, 
but our complaint is that the studies have not been forthcoming, 
and the taxpayers have no more information about this gigantic 
project now than they did a month ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is apparently admitted that SPC has done a 
detailed economic comparison between the Estevan projects and 
other options, and it’s claimed that SPC has done engineering 
studies comparing the costs and problems associated with the 
various power options. If those studies exist, and if they, as the 
Deputy Premier claimed, support your position, why don’t you 
table them so that the taxpayers of this province can know why 
you based your decision as you did? Why are you so determined, 
Mr. Minister, to hide this information from the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
— one day they go through a diatribe, Mr. Speaker, of these 
projects that aren’t going to be built, that they’re simply paper 
press releases that you’re going to do; they say, no, it’s not going 
to be built; and now they turn around and say, why are you 
building it here and not building it here? You can only have it 
one way. 
 
I can tell the members opposite that we’re going to build the 
power station where the Premier announced it, and we’re going 
to build Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert; they’re going to build 
the bacon plant in North Battleford; they’re going to build . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, this 
government has two kinds of projects: the kind that are  

never going to be built, and the kind that should never be built, 
and that’s the total category. Mr. Minister, I asked you to deal 
with the Estevan power project, the questions which we’ve been 
placing you, and the issue is where this government can get the 
best deal. You claim that the Shand, in the Premier’s 
constituency, can produce power cheaper than all other options. 
I may, now that the Deputy Premier’s returned, actually, if I 
might be allowed, Mr. Speaker, I’ll address the questions to the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
We’ve been attempting, Mr. Deputy Premier, to get some 
information with respect to the Estevan power plant. We’ve 
asked your colleague for the studies. Everyone in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Premier, knows that the SPC needs to build an 
additional power generation plant; the issue is where the SPC 
customers can get the best deal. You claim that Shand, in the 
Premier’s constituency, can produce power cheaper than any 
other options, yet you won’t produce the studies to prove that. If 
it’s such a great deal, Mr. Minister, where are the documents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this 
before on more than one occasion in this Chamber. And the fact 
is, from an economic point of view, comparing the Shand project 
to the Coronach project — and there were several options 
available to us including a buy from Manitoba, including a hydro 
project on the Churchill River, including one at Gravelbourg, I 
think called the wheatland project — there were several options 
available to us. 
 
Based on the economics of the projects that were options for Sask 
Power, there were two that were clearly leaders as it relates to the 
economics and the benefits that flow to the consumers. And there 
was virtually no difference in the economics of Shand over 
Coronach or vice versa — virtually no difference. 
 
Now I know that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was 
running off at the mouth, Mr. Speaker, on several occasions, 
trying to convince the world that that particular project could be 
built for 150 or $200 million. And it’s absolutely preposterous — 
it’s at least $500 million, Mr. Speaker. And of course, coming 
from that particular member, we should expect that we have to 
question everything that he says because he hasn’t touched on the 
truth in 20 years on any issue. And I get a little annoyed with him 
because of that. 
 
The fact is, because of other benefits that flow from the Shand 
project — such as irrigation opportunities; such as, Mr. Speaker, 
industrial water use; such as water management; such as flood 
control; such as recreation. That, coupled, Mr. Speaker, with an 
$82 million saving because of technology coming that will save 
us $82 million on scrubbers at Coronach when we go into there 
down the road, I think was a very responsible decision. 
 
We’ve made the decision. We’ve got about 57 or $58 million 
Canadian coming from the Americans for that particular project. 
I think the people of Sask Power deserve a whole lot of credit, 
Mr. Speaker, for the efforts that they’ve put into pulling this 
particular project together. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1074 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Deputy Speaker, having 
strolled casually into question period 20 minutes late . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is on his feet to ask 
questions and is making statements, and has been for a while 
now. I’m going to ask you to get directly to your supplementary. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, if I did not say “new question,” 
I intended to. I wanted to point out to the Deputy Premier that he 
had misunderstood the question. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, was not whether or not it’s a good 
project but whether or not you’re prepared to give the public the 
studies which they paid for, which you claim support your 
position. 
 
SPC has asked for increases of 24 per cent over the next three 
years. Saskatchewan people want to know how much more their 
power rates will be going up for the Premier’s little project. Will 
you province, Mr. Minister, that it is the best project by giving us 
the supporting studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I invite the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, to raise those very same questions in Crown 
corporations when we deal with it in the traditional way. 
 
Now to support my suggestion of a few minutes ago, Mr. 
Speaker, that the members opposite have trouble dealing with the 
facts, I have here a pamphlet that has been . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well it has a whole lot to do with it. This is a 
pamphlet that has been circulated throughout the constituency of 
Regina North, where it says, Mr. Speaker, that Allan Blakeney 
and the NDP bought share in Ipsco but that the Devine 
government sold all those shares, and that’s the reason for Ipsco 
being . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

Sale of Prince Albert Pulp Company 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company. Since both the Crown Management Board and 
Weyerhaeuser Canada’s parent company have given final 
approval to the memorandum of understanding announced in 
March with respect to the Prince Albert Pulp Company, when 
will the taxpayers of Saskatchewan see all the documents relating 
to this deal and to this expenditure of hundreds of millions of 
dollars of public funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the documents the member 
refers to, as it relates to the agreement being worked on between 
Weyerhaeuser Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan, 
those documents are being worked on and in fact being finalized. 
And there will be information forthcoming once those documents 
and once the final agreement is in place. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since final 
approval has been given by both the company and  

the government, can the minister assure the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers that all contracts or agreements related to this sale will 
be presented to this Assembly as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I say, Mr. Speaker, as I have 
indicated to you and to the House just a moment ago, is that the 
documents are being worked on; the legal documents are being 
prepared now for the agreement which will be put in place in the 
very near future. 
 
I find it very interesting, however, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
of the NDP opposition on one hand, and just last week and the 
week before that, are against the project and saying that the 
project will never go forward — and this is what their position 
was as short a time ago as one week ago — and now are saying 
they see that the project is going ahead, and where will the 
documents be? 
 
I give the House the assurance, Mr. Speaker, that those 
documents are being worked on; the final agreements are being 
drafted, and those documents will be available when the time is 
right for them to be available. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, no one on this side is against economic activity. 
However, this government, and particularly this Premier, have 
made it a habit to jump first and think later. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — When it comes to such deals such as the 
Pioneer Trust fiasco and the Peter Pocklington deals, the 
taxpayers of this province want to know exactly what your 
government has committed to that project. If this is such a great 
deal as you claim, why are you afraid to make the documents 
public? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, I have 
indicated to the member that the legal documents are now being 
prepared. This, Mr. Speaker, is the same member who said in this 
House that the Weyerhaeuser Canada deal to build a paper-mill 
in Prince Albert for the good of the forest industry across 
northern Saskatchewan, that announcement was a black day in 
Saskatchewan, if I recall his words properly. That member said, 
it’s a black day in Saskatchewan when the paper-mill was 
announced, and now he stands in this House, because he’s visited 
the North and he’s visited the people who are involved in the 
forest industry who all say that it’s a great day for Saskatchewan 
when that was announced, he’s now changing his position, as are 
all of his colleagues across there, and now they’re saying it’s a 
good project. Well I’m glad to see them onside. 
 
As I’ve said to you, Mr. Speaker, and as I’ve said to this House, 
when those legal documents are prepared, those documents will 
be available, and they’ll be available at the proper time. 
 

Loans Made By Sedco 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government in its 
arrogance feels they can keep and give the answers  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1075 
 
 

later; well, we want them now. 
 
My question is to the minister responsible for Sedco, and it deals 
with Sedco’s arrangements with Alberta millionaire Peter 
Pocklington. Has the Government of Saskatchewan signed 
contracts or agreements with respect to the commitments 
announced late last fall? And since those commitments deal with 
the expenditure of millions and millions of dollars of 
Saskatchewan’s taxpayers’ money — not your money, 
Saskatchewan’s money — when will all these detailed 
documents be tabled in this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that same member 
asked this question about a month ago in this House, exactly the 
same question. At that point in time, Mr. Speaker, I indicated that 
Sedco has a policy, and a proper policy, that we do not make 
public every loan that Sedco makes. Now Sedco could make a 
loan to some person in your constituency. Should that be public, 
should that be public? Because there’s thousands of loans that 
Sedco has made over the years, are we to determine that every 
one of those loans, Mr. Speaker, should be made public so that 
the members opposite can review them; can twist the facts, Mr. 
Speaker; can slander a person in business that seeks to have 
financing arrangements through Sedco? That is shameful, Mr. 
Speaker. That is something that was not done by their 
administration; it’s something that’s not done by this 
administration or any other administration across the country that 
has a Sedco or a similar type government financial institution. 
 
We indicated to the press and to the public the nature of the 
Pocklington deal, through the normal channels, that Sedco 
advanced X number of dollars. We should not have to go through 
those details, because to go through those details, Mr. Speaker, 
means that every small business that borrowed from Sedco, if the 
member opposite does not happen to like their politics, will want 
to have that loan made public. 
 
The next thing he will do is every loan through the ag credit 
corporation should be made public. What kind of security has he 
got? Mr. Speaker, those things have always been treated as 
confidential in governments over the last 25 and 30 years and 
should continue to be treated so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Birth Announcement 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to make one 
announcement to the House. Our Deputy Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, 
has been away on leave for a little while. And I just want to 
announce to the House that she has a new son, the name of Keith 
Alexander, born on Friday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Multiple Sclerosis Week 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the  

day, I rise to draw awareness to this week of May 4th to 11th as 
National Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Week. 
 
As you well know, Mr. Speaker, the carnation is the floral 
emblem for the multiple sclerosis society, and they’ve been 
provided to all members of the Chamber, and I see they’re 
wearing them today to help draw awareness with the society to 
the people of Saskatchewan of the recognition of this disease so 
they can learn more about this most common crippler of young 
adults. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as the Minister of Health in this province, on 
behalf of the government, I would like to commend the Multiple 
Sclerosis Society of Canada, the Saskatchewan branch, for their 
activities in bringing about more public awareness of this very 
crippling disease, public education, and of course the long-range 
goal which we hope we can all achieve some day, and that would 
be a cure for this disease. So with that, Mr. Chairman, on behalf 
of the members on this side of the House, I would like to 
congratulate the society on the very good work they are 
providing. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. The minister’s 
statement was not a claim that the government had particularly 
done anything. He was congratulating a society. We join with the 
minister in those congratulations, wish them all the best in this 
week. 
 
We all hope that multiple sclerosis is a disease which we soon 
conquer. I’ve had, in some ways, the honour of having an 
opponent one time who had this disease. He ran against me, did 
so very bravely, and I cam to understand something about the 
disease. It is a very difficult disease. So we all wish the society 
the very best. 
 
I’m going to entirely refrain from making any partisan comments 
about the inadequacy of this government’s funding of health 
research, Mr. Minister, because I don’t want to bespeckle this 
with a partisan comment. So I’ll leave it at that and again 
congratulate the MS society. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting the Provision of Home 
Care Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Home Care Act. This is a very 
forward-looking piece of legislation that reflects a growing role 
and importance of home care in our health care system. 
 
At the present time, Mr. Speaker, there is no explicit legislative 
base for the operation and funding of home care services in this 
province. The need for such legislation has become increasingly 
apparent for a number of reasons. For one thing, clear legislative 
authority for the program is needed to ensure continued cost 
sharing by the federal government under the Canada  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1076 
 
 

assistance plan. The federal contributions amount to over $5 
million a year. The Provincial Auditor has also expressed 
concern about the lack of an adequate basis for government 
funding of home care. But, Mr. Speaker, the most important 
reasons relate to the program itself. 
 
Home care has the potential to play a much broader and more 
substantial role in our health care system in the years ahead. A 
clear basis is therefore needed to allow appropriate and orderly 
program development. As well, the 45 home care districts in the 
province are run by autonomous local boards. It is therefore 
important to clearly define the relationship between these boards 
as the service providers, and the provincial government as the 
funding agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to outline the main provisions of 
the Bill. Sections 2 and 3 provide a definition of home care 
services and the purposes for which these services may be 
offered. 
 
Sections 4 and 5 provide for the establishments of home care 
districts. 
 
Section 6 provides authority for agreements between the 
government and the home care boards, and sets out various terms 
and conditions that may be attached to these agreements. 
 
Sections 7 and 8 set out the powers and responsibilities of home 
care district corporations. 
 
The Bill also provides for the making of grants to boards and 
other individuals and for various routine matters. That is the 
overall framework of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, but I would like to 
highlight a few significant features. 
 
First, the definition of home care services goes well beyond the 
original four basic services of nursing, home-making, meals and 
home maintenance. In particular, the Bill emphasizes the role of 
volunteers and places a responsibility on local boards to promote 
volunteer services within their district. 
 
As well, the Bill emphasizes the need for boards to co-ordinate 
their services effectively with other health care services in the 
community through mechanism such as the district co-ordinating 
committees. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides a basis for home care 
to play a greater role in providing services such as respite care 
and services to individuals with a high level of care needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall I released a public discussion paper entitled 
“Home Care — Future Directions.” That document has received 
a broad and very positive response, and it has served in many 
ways as the basis for this legislation. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, the Bill reflects a new face for home care 
and provides a solid foundation for the effective development of 
home care services in our province in the years ahead. 
 
I am therefore very pleased to move second reading of Bill  

31, An Act respecting the Provision of Home Care Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. My comments are 
going to be relatively brief, and then I’m going to move a motion 
of adjournment on this Bill. My colleague, our critic, the member 
from Shaunavon, is unavoidably absent today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, as I may not get back into the debate 
on this Bill, I want to make some personal comments. One is that 
I gather this is a legislative framework for the home care system. 
In and by itself, there’s perhaps nothing wrong with the Bill. The 
program no doubt needs a legislative framework. 
 
The problem we have with home care relates to the funding of it. 
One of the reasons why the minister has such severe problems 
that he does with the hospitals is that the hospitals, in many ways, 
are being used as nursing homes, and one of the solutions to that 
is a much better system of home care. 
 
If we had an adequate home care program, Mr. Speaker, we 
would be able to keep a goodly number of people in their homes 
rather than in hospitals or nursing homes, and I think that’s 
something we all want to achieve. People are healthier, both 
mentally and physically, if they’re at home, and we would be able 
to solve, at an affordable cost, part of our problem with respect 
to hospitals. 
 
In talking to various groups around the province connected with 
health care, whether it be nurses, doctors, the administrators, 
everyone agrees that (a) we need more nursing homes to assist 
those senior citizens whose degeneration is fairly severe, but for 
those who aren’t as that bad off, we need more and better home 
care. And it’s an affordable way to solve an equally serious 
problem, and that is, our problem with the hospitals. So I want to 
make those comments to the minister. 
 
And at this point in time I want to adjourn the debate to give my 
colleague from Shaunavon an opportunity to make some 
comments on it, Mr. Speaker. So I move this debate to be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 
reading of The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 1986. 
 
The purpose of the reciprocal enforcement of maintenance orders 
Acts across Canada is to provide mechanisms for enforcing 
maintenance order made in other jurisdictions. This legislation 
applies when one of the parties to the order, either the party to be 
benefited by the order or the person requested to pay 
maintenance, is in Saskatchewan, and the other party is in another 
province or state. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1077 
 
 

The Act has now been in force for over two years, and certain 
minor problems have been identified in some of the procedural 
sections. In some cases a practice has developed with respect to 
processing of reciprocal maintenance orders which is better than 
the practice described in the Act. This necessitates changing the 
legislation so it’s consistent with the practice that’s developed. 
 
Other changes are required to accommodate the role of the 
maintenance enforcement office established under The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, which was proclaimed 
in force on March 1, 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1983. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I think we can 
indicate to the minister that we are essentially in agreement with 
the provisions and the amendments of The Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 
 
I want, however, to take a look at it. We are having a review of 
the implications of the amendments. I haven’t got that back as 
yet, a legal analysis of it, and therefore at this time I would beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second 
reading of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1986. These amendments are 
required to improve the effectiveness of the Act which came into 
force on March 1, 1986, and which involves changes to a number 
of Saskatchewan statutes to make them consistent with The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 
 
The objective of these amendments is to clarify existing 
provisions to ensure that the intended effect is achieved, plus a 
change being made to The Pension Benefits Act, because it is not 
clear from reading the present section whether payments into, as 
well as payment out of, a pension plan can be garnisheed for the 
purposes of payment of a maintenance order. It is intended to 
attach only payments out. Thus, this section is being amended to 
achieve the desired effect. 
 
(1445) 
 
In addition, the consequential amendment to The Labour 
Standards Act is necessary to protect an employee from being 
fired as a result of garnisheed proceedings in the course of 
enforcing a maintenance order. Such protection has existed prior 
to this legislation, and it should be continued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting  

from the enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I want to take a 
look at the minister’s comments, and to take a look at the impact 
of the amendments. And accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 6 — An Act 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the Convention on 
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I made a few comments 
the last day, and I only want to add a few other comments in 
respect to Bill 6, and that is to say that, as we said before, the 
objects of the legislation and the objects of the convention, 
certainly we agree with, because in article 1 it indicates that the 
objects of the present conventions are to secure prompt return of 
children wrongfully removed or retained in any contracting state, 
and to ensure the rights of custody and access under the law of 
one of the contracting state are effectively respecting in other 
contracting states. Those are the basic premises or the basic 
objects of the convention which are being adopted in the 
legislation. 
 
As I say, we are in agreement with it. I also . . . as the minister 
has indicated, there are some exceptions to it put out in article 13, 
which I think make eminent sense. And accordingly, we will be 
supporting this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 27 — An Act 
respecting the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered Accountants Act and 
The Certified Public Accountants Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I want to make just a few 
comments. I note that when the minister introduced this Bill, The 
Chartered Accountants Act, Bill No. 27, that he did not indicate 
to what extend he had reviewed the Bill with the chartered 
accountants association; and certainly, as the Assembly will 
know, that very extensive hearings were held by the Regulations 
Committee of which I chaired about a year ago. We reviewed the 
proposed Bill set forth by the government at that time. 
 
There were a large number of recommendations that were made, 
and I would have thought that the minister would have, in more 
detail, outlined to what extent the amendments that were 
recommended by the Regulations Committee had been adopted 
within the legislation, and also, in putting forward the Bill here, 
whether, in fact,  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1078 
 
 

proper amount of input has been received from the chartered 
accountants. 
 
If he took time to look at the review, there were certainly some 
independent chartered accountants who were somewhat sceptical 
of giving too large an amount of power to the association. 
Certainly I hope that those individual and private accountants 
that came forward and expressed their concern, that the minister 
will be able to indicate when we get into committee of the whole 
what extent he has communicated with the various groups that 
had input into the report that was brought forward by the 
Regulations Committee. 
 
Basically, in principle, we feel we will in essence be supporting 
the legislation. We want to follow up our determination of what 
input the minister has had with the association, and accordingly 
we’re prepared to allow it to move through second reading, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Since the minister is going to respond, I 
want to particularly emphasize what my colleague from Quill 
Lakes has said. We dealt with a name change last session when, 
in fairness, the member from the Battlefords was not the minister. 
We changed the name of the registered industrial accountants to 
the certified management accountants. I think — did so. And I 
had expressed to me, Mr. Minister, a good deal of dissatisfaction 
from the certified general accountants, some of whom at least 
felt, Mr. Minister, that the RIAs (registered industrial 
accountants) were trying to trade on their name by adopting a 
very similar name as the CMAs (certified management 
accountants). So I hope you do deal with it in detail. I would think 
nothing less, Mr. Minister, than sending them a copy of the Act, 
giving them a reasonable period of time to respond, would suffice 
in these circumstances. 
 
The field of accountancy is a very complex one. Unlike other 
groups — doctors, lawyers, engineers — the accountants are 
different. There are a number of groups who are competitive, 
both for the same work and, in some ways, for the same 
legislative powers. 
 
So I hope, Mr. Minister, you’ll deal with that in detail because 
unless I’m assured that you have fully and adequately consulted 
with all the other groups, of which there must be half a dozen at 
least, I’m going to be very sceptical about this Bill. So we do ask, 
Mr. Minister, that you deal with it in detail. If you can table the 
covering letters when you’ve sent that to the other groups, that 
would be so much the better. 
 
I fully expect I’m going to get some calls on this once we pass it. 
That’s been my experience with all the other times we’ve dealt 
with this. So I do ask, Mr. Minister, you to deal with the question 
in detail. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
briefly to close the debate, I’ll be happy to deal with any of the 
questions that the members raise, in detail in committee. But 
generally speaking, we did have discussion with the CAs. And 
the member from Quill Lakes indicated that there was a 
Regulations Committee that looked at it. That committee raised 
a number of concerns — in the area of 20, I believe. They’ve all 
been  

addressed by the chartered accountants group. I believe that that 
committee had some valuable input on the original Bill. 
 
Essentially the chartered accountants surveyed their members; 86 
per cent, I believe, were in favour of the changes as proposed. 
Since then the work that we’ve done with them, it’s my 
understanding that they’re virtually in unanimous agreement 
with them. And we anticipate . . . There were a couple of firms 
from which the areas of concern came in particular, and we have 
had both the chartered accountants association and our own staff 
deal with them in order to make sure that all concerns were 
allayed, and people were going to be very satisfied with the Bill. 
 
So with those brief comments, I would close debate and look 
forward to the discussion in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motion for Interim Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $584,619,920 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 
of $584,619,920 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $143,831,160 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 
of $143,831,160 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1079 
 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $156,920 be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 
of $156,920 be granted out of the Special Projects Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move the resolutions be now read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and resolutions read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 
resolutions be now read a second time and agreed to. 
 
By leave of the Assembly, the said resolutions were read a second 
time and agreed to. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 37, An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty 
Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year Ending March 31, 1987, be now introduced and read 
the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 
Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second and third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as you will remember 
when we recessed that Thursday night, we had been listening to 
a rather lengthy presentation by the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in which he raised a number of items 
that I think need some response. I won’t attempt to respond to all 
of them at this time, but I think there are some that really need to 
be commented very briefly on. 
 
One of the things that the member raised had to do with  

business bankruptcies and some argument that in fact 
Saskatchewan was not doing very well. I should give him some 
statistics that are in fact the true statistics. I’m not sure what his 
source was. 
 
In Saskatchewan ’85 over 1984 there has been a 2.3 per cent 
decrease — and I repeat the word decrease — in the number of 
business bankruptcies. That is less than 1 per cent of the 
businesses in the province, and that is one of the absolutely 
lowest rates in Canada today. And I would point out that in 
neighbouring Manitoba there was a 52 per cent increase in 
bankruptcies in January 1986 compared to February ’85. So there 
seems to be some very real inconsistencies in the numbers that 
the member opposite was using, and I would simply point out 
that in fact, year over year, there has been a decrease in 
bankruptcies in Saskatchewan and that in fact less than 1 per cent 
of Saskatchewan businesses fall prey to that rather unfortunate 
situation. 
 
A couple of other general comments. The member made 
reference to grants. One of the very clear messages that my 
colleague, the member from Regina North got, when this 
department was established, was that business people view grants 
oft-times as the finger of doom, if you will — that to start a 
business because there’s a grant available really is not good 
rationale for going into business, and that business people are 
much more interested in accurate information. 
 
And he made reference to the main street program, why it had 
ended. I could simply indicate that the NDP while in government, 
when the program was introduced, set the sunset date at which 
time that program would end. The program has been completed, 
and it might interest him to know that we have had absolutely no 
request to re-institute such a program. 
 
I think the reason is because most communities and most 
business men in Saskatchewan realize that it was superfluous, 
very irrelevant, and not a program that was of much benefit. For 
instance, there was a $500 limit per business, and I’m curious 
today what the member thinks you could accomplish with that. 
However, the message is that no one has indicated any interest in 
resuming that program, and I think that’s indicative of the type 
of vast acceptance it had. 
 
Another comment that simply has to be emphasized had to do 
with regional offices. The member opposite indicated that their 
administration set up what he rightfully referred to as regional 
offices. I want to emphasize that those are very, very different 
from today’s business resource centres. 
 
The business resource centres that we have in Saskatchewan are 
probably the first of their kind in North America, although they 
will be copied and are being copied. The old regional offices are 
usually located on an upper story of a government building. Their 
sole function was to assist grant applications. They had no 
business information; they had no consulting services; and for all 
intents and purposes they had no interaction with the business 
community. 
 
The new business resource centres, with one exception  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1080 
 
 

which we will be correcting very shortly, are main-street, 
store-front locations. They’re one-stop shopping on all the 
programs that are available in government — and I emphasize 
these are not grant programs. They have a tremendously wide 
selection of useful business information, including some 
computerized information that makes it very accessible for 
business people. They have trained consultants in all of them, and 
they have a broad range of joint activities with business groups. 
 
And I could go on commenting on some of the other things he 
said, and I’m sure we’ll come back to them in time. He mentioned 
some statistics. I have a tremendous number of statistics, and we 
can get into these, but indicate just a couple: that employment has 
increased by 13,000 people, and the employment rate has fallen 
slightly in the small-business sector; restaurant receipts are up 
3.9 per cent; retail sales are up, and so forth. But we can get into 
all those at a future time. 
 
He did talk about some lumberyard that had closed in his 
constituency. I have here, Mr. Chairman, a few, and I emphasize 
the word “few,” clippings from around the province — and I 
direct the attention to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
to this — some clippings from around the province on new 
businesses that have been opened of late. And if the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg wishes, I could send these over and he 
could spend some time studying these. Clearly the gloom and 
doom attitude that he has been attempting to purvey is not shared 
by the business community of the province. And so, if this would 
help the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I’m certainly 
prepared to share these with you, sir — a lot of business openings 
around the province that maybe can engender a little enthusiasm 
in some of your remarks as we go through this whole episode. 
 
(1515) 
 
Finally some information which was requested on the 
department. You requested the salary of the people who work in 
my office. You will realize, of course, that in my office I have 
responsibility for Tourism and Small Business, Supply and 
Services, Employment Development Agency, Science and 
Technology, and the potash corporation, so the people in my 
office are spread around those. 
 
I’ll give you the entire office complement so you can share it with 
your colleagues when we come to the estimates of the other 
groups . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can’t see that paper, so 
I’ll pass this over and you can be clear. Tourism and Small 
Business are basically three people on staff, and I’ll send this 
over. 
 
As far as ministerial travel, again I’ll send this. I have been on 
one trip as the Minister of Tourism and Small Business. I 
attended a federal-provincial economic development and small 
business conference in Banff, Alberta. I was accompanied, I’m 
not sure that’s asked for, but my deputy minister accompanied 
me on that trip, and I also went to Edmonton on the way back on 
that. I can send that information over. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you visit Peter Pocklington? 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Yes, I did, in fact. It’s on there. The 
other information you wanted . . . I also have a page with senior 
officials’ travel which I’m prepared to share with you. I’m not 
sure you asked for that, but I’ll send that along as well. We have 
. . . I’ll send this over and he can study on those while . . . 
 
Consulting contracts. There are a number of those here. We’ll 
send those . . . And I think that was all that was asked for if I’m 
not mistaken. Oh, advertising and agency fees, and I believe 
those are here as well. So we’ll send this across and you can detail 
it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I believe when we were talking about the salaries 
for your personal staff, and the other answer was the increase 
over last year, I was wondering if you would do an comparison, 
or do we have to look that up ourselves? 
 
The other areas that I was asking for . . . and I think I’ll review 
the information I got before I go through those. You mentioned 
that I was trying . . . I don’t remember the words you used but 
you weren’t too happy about when we discussed bankruptcies. 
 
The stats I used was nicely put together in the Leader-Post and 
this is for ’85, Mr. Minister, and the source is the federal 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs. And I would like to give you a 
list from 1972 to ’81, the business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan. 
I added them up just while you were talking, and if you take an 
average of the years that are there, there’s 83 bankruptcies a year, 
is what it averages out to. I could go through the numbers: in ’72, 
there were 70; in ’73, 51; ’74, 51; ’75, 38; and I could go through 
that list up to ’81, of 167. And then along comes three years of 
your government: 280, 314, and 309, for an average of 307. Now 
if you think 307 is less than 83.4 — you know, for equal terms 
of office, taking an average into account . . . You try and explain 
that out on the campaign trail. I don’t think we need to go into 
further arguments here. 
 
But business activities are risky and frequently end in failure, 
according to Roger Sauve in this Leader-Post article . . . about 
Saskatchewan’s, although they drop slightly from ’83 to ’84. and 
I don’t have the numbers for ’85. But I know that your record 
isn’t good, Mr. Minister. Your record isn’t good because if you 
take any indicators into account at all . . . Business failures is a 
reflection on what’s happening in the economy. And the point I 
was making, Mr. Minister, you can talk about all the new 
openings you want. What would you indicate and what is your 
department . . . What do you basically feel is a reasonable and 
objective economic indicator? What is a good source to measure 
the business climate? What should we use as a thermometer to 
compare your administration to the former one? 
 
You don’t like the bankruptcy rates. You say that 307 a year 
average, since your term of office, is acceptable and is better than 
83 a year average during our term of office. Now if that isn’t a 
good economic indicator, what would you say is a better one? 
What do you think is a good economic indicator as to how do we 
measure how good things are in Saskatchewan? And let the good 
times roll, are some things I hear from your people and your  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1081 
 
 

supporters, particularly in your party. What are these good times 
you’re talking about? Who’s experiencing them? Give us, I 
guess, a short breakdown as briefly as you can on what you feel 
are some objective economic indicators that would indicate that 
things are going great. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again I would 
emphasize the statistics that I indicated before, that in fact 
bankruptcies are down 2.27 per cent, ’85 over ’84. I could point 
out, as far as positive indicators go, that the total new 
incorporations from 1982 to 1985 were 12,686, which is roughly 
10.5 times the number of bankruptcies which the member 
opposite seems so intent on dwelling on. Studies show that the 
rate of business failure is not the primary determinant in 
economic development. What is critical is the rate of business 
formation, and again we are forming businesses at a 
tremendously high rate, in fact again one of the best. There are 
any number of statistics that I could use to indicate that, in fact, 
there are some very positive things happening. And I will take 
the time to go through a few of them. 
 
Employment has increased in the small-business sector by 
13,000, and the unemployment rate is actually down very slightly 
in that period, this ’85 versus ’84, year over year. Preliminary 
figures show an increase in retail trade of roughly 7.7 per cent. 
Restaurant receipts have increased 3.9 per cent. Investment in 
primary manufacturing, trade, finance, and services — that’s 
investment in those areas for new construction, for machinery 
and equipment — has increased 5 per cent, 4.9, 5 per cent. 
 
The number of Saskatchewan incorporations has increased by 3.9 
per cent, and the number is 1,114. I could go through the tourism 
sector, but I’m sure you’ll want to deal with that separately. We 
could compare again the ’82 period to ’85, the number of 
Saskatchewan non-agricultural, self-employed entrepreneurs has 
increased by 3,900 — an increase of 14.4 per cent from ’82 to 
’85. And I think there are any number of statistics that we can 
discuss which indicate that, in fact, the attitude in the 
small-business sector is very positive and certainly very different 
the attitude you would like to portray. 
 
However, I’ll go back to this sheet, rather than a statistic, an 
attitudinal change. Here we have a number . . . a few of the many, 
many businesses that have started in Saskatchewan have held 
openings. And I will send this over to the member because I think 
he should take the time to read through some of these. As I 
indicated, only a few from our clipping service of the many small 
businesses that have started. 
 
And I think it’s that spirit that exists amongst the entrepreneurs 
of this province, the small-business men who are prepared to 
invest their money, who believe in this province, who are 
prepared to create jobs that will be of great benefit to us, and 
possibly if the member took the time to peruse some of these, he 
might get a better feel for what is actually happening there. So, 
Miss, if you would take these across. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think the true  

measure of success in your department would reflect on what the 
people of Saskatchewan are doing, and how many people are 
working. Now you suggested there’s a few more entrepreneurs; 
that’s great. But how come the annual average unemployment in 
1981 was 21,000, if you take the whole year into account, and 
the annual average in 1985 was 40,000 — twice as many people 
looking for work? What’s your rationale for that? How do you 
explain that since your government took office that 
unemployment in Saskatchewan has doubled — literally 
doubled? And I can tell you that a big part of that and the main 
reason . . . And we could go on to cover off the areas like some 
of my colleagues are going to talk about and the people that . . . 
employables on the unemployment line. 
 
But let’s just take central mortgage and housing stats for housing 
starts. In 1984, Newfoundland had a 4.9 per cent increase; P.E.I. 
had a 22 per cent increase; Nova Scotia had a 50 per cent 
increase; New Brunswick, 44 per cent increase; Quebec, 14 per 
cent; Ontario, 34 per cent; Manitoba, 23 per cent; Alberta, 14 per 
cent; B.C., 11 per cent. Where was Saskatchewan? Where was 
Saskatchewan in housing starts in the change between ’84 and 
’85? 
 
And I expect that the member from Moosomin will be very silent 
on this one because Saskatchewan rated 10th — behind 
Newfoundland, Mr. Member, behind Newfoundland. How come 
you discouraged housing starts so badly that Saskatchewan 
would only have a 2.5 per cent change from ’84 to ’85? 
 
Fifty-three hundred and fifty-four housing starts is all 
Saskatchewan could muster. Manitoba had 6,500 from 5,300 the 
year before. Ontario went from 48,000 to 64,000; Quebec from 
41,000 to 48,000. Everywhere else, Canadians were building 
new houses; they were enthused about the jobs; they had the 
employment opportunities. But the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman, that should have been building a new house — where 
were they? They’re on unemployment, thanks to your 
government’s policies. They were drawing unemployment. They 
weren’t building houses. They weren’t working. 
 
And I think that’s a reflection on the small-business attitudes of 
this government. Great for Peter Pocklington. Great! Give him a 
$10 million grant. Don’t give us the numbers in the House. Sign 
a deal with Weyerhaeuser but don’t tell the public of 
Saskatchewan the sweetheart deals you make with him. But when 
it comes to people working, the numbers are there. The 40,000 
are unemployed, and I think that’s the economic indicator that 
Saskatchewan people are talking about. That’s the housing start. 
 
Look at a graph. It shows it nicely. And you go from Nova Scotia 
right down the line to Saskatchewan, and you only see a 2 per 
cent increase when you had a 50 per cent increase, even, in Nova 
Scotia. And in P.E.I., where they were sitting at 22 per cent . . . 
And you know, their government was turfed out, even at 22 per 
cent. Just imagine what’s going to happen at 2.5 per cent. You 
know, a tenth of what P.E.I. did, Saskatchewan was able to 
muster. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1082 
 
 

I think it’s a poor performance record when you look at the stats, 
any way you want to measure it. You’re not doing it. The people 
just haven’t got the opportunity, and if you have any indicators 
that would indicate that the people are happy about this kind of 
performance . . . And these are records from the central mortgage 
and housing states for the year ’85 over ’84. And I think that’s 
bad news. And I’d like you to comment on just what’s your 
solution. What’s your solution to these 40,000 people that would 
love to work . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 47,000? Well, I was 
giving him the benefit of the doubt and only saying 40, but even 
at that, Mr. Minister, that indication indicates it’s bad. 
 
Saskatchewan . . . In a survey that was done — and I have this 
from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix — on the seventh month in 
1985; according to a survey that was done amongst business men, 
“Tax burden worries small-business men the most.” Instead of 
doing these guys a favour, instead of helping them, the top of the 
list was their total tax burden . . . 58.9 per cent responded saying 
that the tax burden was the thing that they worried — the most 
signified problems in small business — and I think that is a bad 
reflection on this government. You’re taxing them right out of 
business. 
 
(1530) 
 
They go down the line and say government regulations and red 
tape and paper burden is 48 per cent; high interest rates are 44 
per cent; business slower than normal is 43 per cent; unfair 
practice by big suppliers and competitors, 24 per cent; shortage 
of qualified labour is going down to 15 per cent; availability of 
financing, 12 per cent; high wages rates 11 per cent; inflation, 11 
per cent and others only 4 per cent. 
 
So if you look at that, 60 per cent of the people are worried about 
the tax burden that you’ve foisted on them. The largest tax 
increases in Saskatchewan’s history were foisted on small 
business by people that say they stand up for the business man, 
people that say you stand up for the business man. When you add 
the flat tax and the tax increases, the paper load that you put on 
them, the extra taxes because they have to pay their property 
improvement grants — those kinds of things are bothering 
people. And that’s why they’re saying to you, Mr. Minister, when 
are you going to call the election? 
 
I think the economic indicators we’re talking about indicate loud 
and clear that you’re on the wrong track. You haven’t tuned in to 
what business men are saying. I think it’s evident that you 
haven’t had experience in the field. You should be listening to 
your staff and listening to people that know what’s going on and 
start looking at and putting a little salve on where people and 
business men are hurting, rather than making it more painful for 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, obviously there are a 
number of points there. Maybe I can try to work backwards. 
 
I think as he was finishing he was talking about the election call 
and being in touch with small-business people. I can tell the 
member opposite that small-business people are telling us, yes, 
call it because  

you’ll have no problem; you will be successful, and we can carry 
on with what is already started, and in which we are very 
satisfied. 
 
He asked as well, I believe, about the tax burden, which was 
indicated. I believe that if you break that down there are various 
components to any tax burden, and I don’t think that inference 
was to provincial taxes for the most part. However, the question 
I think I got out of that was: what has been done for small 
business in Saskatchewan in terms of the tax load? And I will 
name a few of the things that have been done, and maybe he can 
take some notes and he would understand. 
 
This government has taken steps, first of all, to reduce the tax 
burden through targeted measures, including the initial venture 
capital program and the recent expansions of it which we 
discussed very briefly in this House. There is the elimination of 
the small-business manufacturing and processing deduction; the 
elimination of sales tax on research equipment; the elimination 
of provincial income tax for new businesses recently announced 
by my colleague, which, I think, has been very well received; and 
the provincial sales tax change relating to clothing and footwear. 
 
And I think all of those things indicate attempts, very serious, 
very realistic attempts to help the small business sector continue 
to do the tremendous job they have done in this province in terms 
of developing businesses and creating jobs. 
 
Now there was some long discussion about housing starts. A 
couple of numbers that might be of interest in terms of total urban 
dwelling starts by provinces; in Saskatchewan, ’85 over ’84, we 
had a 19 per cent increase in housing starts — urban dwellings 
— a 19 per cent increase. 
 
Looking down the list, I compare that to neighbouring Manitoba, 
where they had only a 15 per cent increase; Alberta had a 16 per 
cent increase; British Columbia, 17 per cent increase. As a matter 
of face, Saskatchewan had the highest rate of increases of urban 
dwelling starts in western Canada. So possibly the member 
would like to consider those numbers. 
 
I believe the other portion of his . . . the first thing he talked about 
was the unemployment rate, asked why . . . In fact, I would point 
out that in 1981 the labour force in Saskatchewan was 446,000 
people; in 1985 the labour force was 491,000. I think a little quick 
mathematics will show roughly a 45,000 increase in the labour 
force in the province, and that is the primary reason. 
 
We have created jobs at a rate unparalleled by any other province 
in Canada. And in the last year, despite the problems that 
everyone understands with drought, significant problems to the 
agricultural sector, we had a year-to-year increase of 17,000 jobs. 
And 13,000 of those 17,000, roughly speaking, are in the sector 
that we’re discussing here in these estimates, the small business 
sector. So I think it’s safe to say that the small business  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1083 
 
 

community does not share the doom-and-gloom attitude of the 
members opposite. 
 
In terms of building starts, in Saskatoon, I know 1986 will be a 
record year in terms of commercial industrial building permits 
and, in fact, I indicated the 19 per cent increase in urban housing 
starts last year, over the previous year, which was the highest in 
western Canada. In fact this year it’s estimated that housing starts 
in Saskatoon, which is the municipality I’m most familiar with, 
will in fact double over last year, so we’ll be looking at a 
significant increase in that area. So I think it’s safe to say that 
things have gone well. 
 
It bothers me a little bit to have the members of the party opposite 
stand in this House and talk about people’s homes when, in 1982 
when people were suffering under 20 per cent interest rates, their 
party, then in government said, sorry folks, there is literally 
nothing we can do; to suggest interest rate relief is totally 
irresponsible. The people of the province indicated what they 
thought about that attitude at that time, and I don’t think that that 
attitude has changed significantly. They expect their government 
to provide them protection in those types of times, and I think 
they appreciated it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would indicate that in terms of the numbers I’ve 
indicated, once we get this next election out of the way, there 
really is so much more we can do in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I want to go into this wonderful economic climate that 
you have here in Saskatchewan, and I want you to expound on it 
a little more so the people of Saskatchewan can hear it. Because 
I’ll tell you that every indicator that there is does not indicate that 
things are booming in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d like to ask you this, Mr. Minister: my colleague has 
asked you for some of the indicators which you would put 
forward as having a strong economy in Saskatchewan. And I ask 
you, in respect of retail sales I ask the minister whether you think 
retail sales is an indicator of fairly strong, active economic 
conditions. And I ask you, during the past year, if you could 
indicate how the retail sales ranked in Saskatchewan vis-à-vis the 
other provinces in Canada. 
 
So let’s deal with that one indicator, the retail sales. And I ask 
you, first, whether you believe that retail sales is a fairly good 
indicator of economic activity; two, I ask you to indicate where 
Saskatchewan stood vis-à-vis other provinces of Canada in terms 
of the percentage increase in retail sales; and thirdly, I ask you 
what is your projections for the current year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, very quickly, in 1985 
over ’84, which of course are the most recent statistics, 
Saskatchewan’s retail sales increased 7.8 per cent. While I don’t 
have province-by-province numbers, the Canadian increase, the 
national increase, was 10.6 per cent. 
 
I think it’s safe to say, Mr. Chairman, that in Saskatchewan the 
effects of the problems in the agricultural sector,  

effects which I think have been felt in all communities across the 
province, were greater than in other provinces. Certainly the 
drought impact in Saskatchewan was greater than either of our 
neighbouring provinces east or west. Obviously it has a much 
larger effect than it would in British Columbia, for example, or 
in eastern or maritime Canada. 
 
So with the Canadian average being 10.6 per cent increase, retail 
sales ’85 over ’84, our average being almost 8 per cent, I would 
suggest that, well, things have been very difficult agriculturally. 
And we have had considerable debate in this legislature based on 
the fact that things have been difficult. We have talked about 
various governments’ efforts to help them. I think that the rural 
folks understand that this government has certainly been 
working, and announcements last week would indicate the 
federal government, as well, has come to their aid. The fact that 
we have an increase of almost 8 per cent speaks very well for 
retail sales and the optimism that exists in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We’ve gone through one of the indicators, and 
as you have confirmed, Mr. Minister, rather than speak in 
generalities of saying that everything is wonderful here for the 
small business community, you have confirmed what we have 
been saying is that, in fact, the economy has not been operating 
in high gear. 
 
As you indicated the retail sales increased only by 7.8 per cent 
here, ’85 over ’84, and in Canada it was 10.6 per cent as you 
indicated. We had the lowest increase in retail sales last year of 
every other province in Canada other than Prince Edward Island. 
That’s how active it was for the business community under the 
economic conditions which you say are so good that all you need 
to do, in your arrogance, as you said, is to let us get on and call 
another election and we’ll continue on. Well I’ll tell you, the 
business community that we’re talking to are not very enticed 
with the economic performance of this government. 
 
Let’s take a look at another indicator and see whether or not 
people of Saskatchewan are doing pretty well. And let’s take a 
look at some of the provincial government and management of 
the economy, and let’s take the consolidated fund. Would you 
agree, Mr. Minister, that during the four years of your operation 
that not only have you created a deficit, the largest in the history 
of this province, accumulated history of the province, a deficit in 
excess of $2 billion, that’s what you have created for the business 
community and the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Do you realize, Mr. Minister, that under the stewardship of your 
government opposite, that in four years that the accumulated 
annual interest alone is $200 million annually, just to pay the 
interest on the debt that you people have accumulated, and let it 
not be disguised. 
 
When we go across the province, people are saying, when the 
Tories and the government offer new programs . . . Do you know 
what the public are saying, Mr. Chairman? They’re saying, so 
what. So what; they’re promising more. They aren’t paying for 
it. They haven’t put their financial affairs into shape, so they’re 
not paying  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1084 
 
 

for it; so they promise a new program, try to buy votes. 
 
(1545) 
 
But you know what the people of Saskatchewan who own 
business and own farms and are successful . . . Do you know 
what is happening, Mr. Chairman? There’s a mortgage being 
placed by this government on the property of the successful 
people in this province by a $2 billion debt. And these birds 
across the way are saying, what a wonderful time we’ve been 
having in the last four years, business men. 
 
And every one of us . . . And if you take a look at the total debt 
of the province, Saskatchewan’s debt nears $9 billion mark — $9 
billion in debt — $8,500 for every man, woman, and child. That’s 
what you have here in Saskatchewan — $9 billion mark. Do you 
know what it was when the Tories took office, when this 
government opposite took office? The total accumulated debt in 
this province was $3.4 billion, and the Consolidated Fund had 
been balanced for 11 successive years. That’s what was the 
record of the previous government. 
 
And this guy, this minister stands here and he says to the business 
community, everything is wonderful. We’re having a great party. 
Do you know what we’re doing? We’re throwing a party for the 
voters for the next election. But he doesn’t tell them that he has 
their credit card, and he’s charging up this little party that the 
Tories are putting on, promising to the voters, that he’s charging 
it up to the business men and the farmers and the successful 
people across this province. 
 
And what is more, Mr. Chairman, do you know what he’s doing? 
He is mortgaging the future of our children. Because with a $9 
billion debt, just think of what the next generation is faced with. 
Do you think that they will have the opportunity for innovative 
programs? Of course not. Do you know what the next election, if 
these people get in for another four years, will be? Elect us now 
that we can get rid of the debt that we created. That’ll be the next 
campaign. 
 
And what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, and I want to ask you: do 
you think that an economy that is operating at a very high level, 
as you have been indicating, would indeed have increased the 
debt, gross debt, from 3.4 billion to almost 9 billion; that would, 
in fact, have four, five, successive deficits — $2 billion in the 
Consolidated Fund alone? That’s what you’ve had — $200 
million of interest alone. And you say that you have an 
environment which is stimulating the small business and that 
they’re really booming. 
 
Well the business people of this province are not fooled. Do you 
know what they’ve said? They said, we’ve got to get rid of this 
government. They don’t know what they’re doing. They’re the 
worst managers in the whole of the Canada. We have never seen 
a government who so mismanages the affairs of this province as 
is evidenced by the party across the way. And they’re saying, 
we’re not socialists, we’re not members of your party, but I’ll tell 
you, call an election and we’ll get rid of them so we get some 
management. And that’s the problem, Mr. Minister. 
 

And so I ask you, first of all, retail sales, the worst in the country. 
I ask you, a rising debt, the magnitude which . . . The minister 
shouldn’t smile at the magnitude of that debt — $9 billion placed 
on the backs of Saskatchewan people; $2 billion in the 
Consolidated Fund. And they’re going around now and they’re 
saying, let us make some more promises because, you know, 
these people out there are foolish. They don’t pay attention to 
deficits and not balancing budgets. We can fool them. We’ll go 
and promise some more initiatives and then we’ll try to get 
elected. Well I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan are aware 
of what’s happening. 
 
And I want to ask you then, Mr. Minister: how can you say that 
the economy of this province is operating in high gear if, in fact, 
you’ve had such mismanagement of the Consolidated Fund, $2 
billion deficit; that you’ve had massive debts in respect to the 
total debt of the province; that indeed you have sold off many of 
the assets that the people of Saskatchewan owned? 
 
You sold off a coal mine, Mr. Minister, and you’ve blown the 
money. You’ve sold off mining equipment, and you’ve blown 
the money. You’ve sold off the highway equipment; you have 
blown the money. You have taken retained earnings from the 
potash corporation, and you’ve blown the money. You’ve 
created a dividend at a time when there was a deficit. That’s what 
you’ve done. And I’ll tell you, this economy is not booming, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: stand up and tell me why such a dismal 
management of this province’s financial affairs if indeed, as you 
say, it’s booming for the business community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of comments, 
first of all on the retail sales which I believe, if I can remember 
correctly after all of that, was where he started that discourse. 
 
It’s important to note that while retail sales have increased 7.8 
per cent in Saskatchewan, and nationally it’s about 10.8 per cent, 
to put that in perspective you have to include the inflation rate 
within that. In fact, in Saskatchewan the inflation rate has been 
in the area of 3.5 per cent, and when that is considered and the 
whole story is taken into consideration, it’s clear that 
Saskatchewan, despite very difficult times, has done very well. 
 
Just a couple of comments. I couldn’t begin to respond to all of 
that . . . whatever. First point, the Minister of Finance, very 
clearly in the budget speech which initiated this estimates 
discussion, pointed out what most of the people in Saskatchewan 
already knew; that in fact it was the activities of the ’70s that led 
to the deficit of the ’80s. And had the government of the day 
simply taken the money that they spent to purchase the potash 
mines, put it in Co-op Trust, we would have a surplus today. 
 
Not only that, that purchase, that money was then taken to New 
Brunswick and mines were opened to run in competition. It was, 
as many people have indicated, one of the blackest days in this 
province’s history, and certainly something that no thinking 
people are prepared to accept. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1085 
 
 

However, further to the deficit, and I think this is really the 
important part in what we have just heard, the Premier of this 
province indicated very clearly that he was prepared to open the 
treasury — I believe was his term — to support the agricultural 
sector in this province. And I think that the actions that have been 
taken have indicated very clearly that he did that. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, when you look at the deficit numbers and 
follow through the drought problems that we have faced, it’s very 
evident where that came from. I think that the member opposite, 
today in this House, has very clearly said to every farmer in 
Saskatchewan, if we ever become government again, you can 
forget the kind of support that farmers have experienced of late 
under this administration. 
 
And I would say as well, Mr. Chairman, that small-business 
people, business people in this province, know how important the 
continuing agricultural sector is and, in fact, support the efforts 
of this government to try to keep that agricultural sector healthy 
and alive and, in fact, operating. And when the member opposite 
talks about business people being against the moves that have 
been taken and he tries to play the business man against the 
farmer, I can assure him that the majority of the people in this 
province don’t accept that line of argument, and will not. 
 
I suppose only one other thought, Mr. Chairman. I find it strange 
that the member, who less than three weeks ago when he 
somehow got the idea that there was going to be an election and 
their party was prepared to offer more than a billion dollars of 
vote-getting program, can now stand in his place and say that 
these things are not important. It’s the old NDP flip-flop, 
depending which side they can operate. 
 
But I believe most business men — and I think we are doing 
small business estimates — understand very well how important 
it is to keep the agricultural sector alive in this province. I think 
they accept what has happened and understand the numbers that 
we’re discussing, number one, flow from the NDP activities in 
the ’70s and the resource sector; and number two, have resulted 
in the efforts of this government to keep the agricultural sector 
operative in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I hope the business community are 
listening with that defence because certainly it’s evident, Mr. 
Minister, as we go around the province, that the mismanagement 
by your government is a major concern and will be, in fact, one 
of the major items in the next election. 
 
We’ve dealt with retail sales, Mr. Minister, and you admit it, that 
that is an indicator as to how well we’re doing in small business 
in the province. And you agreed that it’s less, the retail increase 
in Saskatchewan was less than the average in Canada, so it was 
slower here in Saskatchewan. You also agreed that the mounting 
debt here is a fact of the lack of stimulation in the economy. 
 
I’d like to ask you one other indicator. I wonder if the minister 
would agree that new investment in the  

province’s economy might be also another indicator as to 
whether or not there is, in fact, growth taking place. And I ask 
you whether, in real terms, there has been an increase in the new 
investment in the economy of Saskatchewan vis-à-vis a 
comparison of 1981, when it was $5.1 billion, and in 1985 it was 
4.2 billion. 
 
So I ask you: would you agree, first of all, that in respect to the 
growth of the economy, that new investment would certainly be 
an indicator as to whether or not there is a very vibrant economy 
and active economic conditions? and what the statistics show, 
Mr. Minister, is that that new investment has not increased in 
Saskatchewan from 1981 — over 1981 figure in fact, in real 
terms. The investment in 1985 was lower. 
 
So I ask you again then: would you agree that new investment is 
an indicator of economic activity? And if you had a 
small-business community that was as what you’re purporting, 
then I would assume that there should be certainly new 
investment. And so I ask you: would you agree that that is an 
indicator? And secondly, can you confirm that in real terms there 
has not been any substantial increase in new investment during 
the past four years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again I want to 
re-emphasize the reference to retail sales and tie the inflation 
number with it. When you consider the 8 per cent increase, or 7.8 
per cent increase in retail sales and combine that with a 4 per cent 
inflation rate, I think that Saskatchewan’s increase in retail sales 
year over year, despite what everyone in the province accepts as 
a very difficult situation in the agricultural sector, is in fact 
certainly competitive. It doesn’t lead the country, but it’s 
certainly competitive, and I think is a reasonable — let’s use the 
term reasonable — indicator of activity in that area. 
 
In terms of investment, there have been some changes in 
investment patterns, and I think those are important to note. 
Between 1982 and 1986, new private investment — I emphasize 
that term “private investment” — as a share of total new 
investment has increased from 63 per cent to over 66 per cent, 
with public investment declining from 37 to 33.8 per cent. This 
indicates that much of the new investment activity in 
Saskatchewan is being done by the private sector. And I think if 
there’s a significant difference is what’s happening in recent 
years in the investment sector in this province, it’s in that relative 
involvement of the private and the public sector. In other words, 
private sector is becoming more involved; government is 
becoming less involved. 
 
Total new investment from ’84 to ’85 grew by 5.2 per cent, and 
over three-quarters of this increase can be attributed to private 
investment growth, while the remaining one-quarter was public 
investment. So now the increase last year was 5 per cent — 
possibly, again, not a leader, but I think, reasonable. And the key 
element is that the increase has been taking place from the private 
sector with less government involvement. 
 
And I really believe that that was a message that was clear in 
1982, that the public of this province were saying to the people, 
to their government: we don’t want as much. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1086 
 
 

(1600) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We’ve run through a couple of indicators here, 
and I think we have agreed here that retail sales last year was one 
of the poorest in the country, second last — only better than 
Prince Edward Island; that the accumulation of the debt indicates 
that government has either mismanaged, or do not have the 
revenues from the growth of the economy, and as a consequence 
you have a huge deficit. 
 
And we deal with . . . so far as investment, the figures indicate 
that there has not been an increase in private and public 
investment in the province in real terms, 1985 over 1981. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, as Minister of Tourism and Small 
Business . . . I think also that there are other indicators that your 
performance in your portfolio to work with the small-business 
people clearly indicates other indicators that show that things 
could be a lot better. 
 
And let’s take a look at the youth employment. And do you 
realize that in youth, employment is down; that there are 7,000 
fewer young people working in 1985 than in 1981. And 
unemployment among young people are about 18,000 — almost 
16 per cent, Mr. Minister. I ask you: is that not an indicator as to 
how well small business is doing when, in fact, we find that 7,000 
fewer jobs for young people in ’81 over ’85? That you find, in 
fact, that there’s some 18,000 young people unemployed, at a rate 
of almost 16 per cent. I ask you, Mr. Minister: is that not an 
indicator of economic growth, and isn’t it an indication that your 
policies in conjunction, working with the small business 
community, have failed? 
 
And, in fact, is it not true, Mr. Minister, that when you assumed 
office your government adopted a policy of not working with the 
small business community of Saskatchewan, but rather an open 
for big business operation? That was the emphasis that you 
placed, and that was the conference that you held. 
 
And so I ask you: would you agree that if the small business is 
booming under the direction of your government, or the 
assistance of your government, that we wouldn’t have an increase 
in youth employment? Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have a 
break-out of employment numbers by age categories. I think all 
of us on this side of the House have learned some time ago not to 
accept the numbers provided by the members opposite at face 
value, and I don’t think we’ll do that here. When we bring in the 
Employment Development Agency, we can get into that kind of 
detail on employment. 
 
I think there are a couple of key things though that have to be 
remembered. First of all, it’s important to remember that 
consistently over the last four years this province has led the 
nation in unemployment rate and in new job creation. I think our 
record is very clear on that. We have been the national leader in 
job creation. I think to try to then bridge to an argument that 
somehow youth employment in this province is out of control . . . 
Youth  

employment is a national, in fact it’s a continental, in fact it’s an 
international problem, and it’s one that is going to take a great 
deal of time and effort on the part of governments and one the 
part of everyone involved in it. 
 
We have adopted several, and I mean, well, many programs, 
concepts, things to improve. We believe that the way to improve 
youth employment is to work very hard in the Department of 
Advanced Education as far as technical training, retraining 
programs. Get these young people who primarily are people who 
lack skills, who have left school early, get those people into some 
training programs that can be of benefit to them and can put them 
in a position to actually acquire meaningful work. 
 
I think that while I certainly will not stand here and down play 
the problem that exists with youth employment, I will not accept 
that it is unique to the province of Saskatchewan. And I would 
suggest to you, and I’m sure you will accept, that many things 
have been attempted. I think of our summer programs, 
Opportunities ’83-84-85, and of course now Opportunities ’86; I 
think of the federal government’s Challenge ’86 — these 
programs last year the most successful in history in terms of 
applicants and money put out. I think we’ll see that again this 
year — obviously responding to a very real need. 
 
We look at our winter works program; same types of things. You 
can go through them, some programs my colleague, the Minister 
of Social Service — youth employment program, the YES 
program, I believe it’s referred to — has brought in, attempting 
and, in fact, succeeding in dealing with some of the problems you 
indicate. 
 
But I think it’s very unfair to suggest that the problems of youth 
employment are an indicator that the provincial economy is 
somehow operating at a lower degree than other provinces. 
Because the youth employment problem is in fact an 
international problem and one that we are committed to working 
very hard to attempt to resolve. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to continue just a couple of other further 
indicators which I think clearly demonstrate that the direction of 
your government, Mr. Minister, was wrong at the start, and 
continues to be inadequate. I say that you started off with a great 
celebration here in Regina — open for big business — and that 
has been the direction of this government, is to work towards the 
assistance of outside multinational corporations at the expense of 
the small-business community. 
 
And it’s rather interesting, you know, because if you look and see 
and you ask how are the people of Saskatchewan, generally, not 
alone just the young people that are in dire straits under the 
policies of this government; but if you look from January ’82 to 
January of ’86, Mr. Minister, the able-bodied fully-employable 
care-load of the Saskatchewan assistance plan increased by 
10,000 people. 
 
In other words, the unemployed employable, there was about 
4,500 of them in 1982. And do you know how many there are 
today, Mr. Minister? There’s almost 15,000 unemployed 
employables. And you stand here and say that you and your 
economic activities have made  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1087 
 
 

such great inroads here in Saskatchewan. Ten thousand more 
people, unemployed employables, on welfare. Do you realize, 
Mr. Minister, that the welfare cost to this province has increased 
a hundredfold, from about $97 million when we were in office in 
1981-82 to over $206 million last year; that you have over 60,000 
people on welfare? But more sad is the fact that many people who 
want to work, the unemployed employable, have increased 
drastically under the mismanagement of your government 
opposite, and the policies. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I had some confidence when 
the previous minister, the member from Regina North, now 
attempting to be the member from Regina South — when he was 
the minister, at least he had some knowledge, and he worked 
within the field of small business. But what they have done now 
is to take and put someone who has absolutely no knowledge of 
the business community, as you admitted to my colleague from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you in fact say that your 
policies . . . And let’s face it, small business is the economic 
generator in this province. It creates the majority of the jobs, 
always will, and in fact of the 30,000 in small business 
throughout this province, if you could get them to employ one 
and a half more people, each of them, you’d do away with your 
unemployment. But what you have done is gone around and look 
through . . . Your government has spent a great deal of time 
travelling the world, looking for the high rollers, and you spend 
your time bringing in the former campaigner for the leadership 
of the Tory party, Pocklington, from Edmonton. And you have 
neglected the business community, the base and the strength of 
this economy. 
 
And so I ask you again, if indeed you think that your economic 
strategies are working so well, that small business which is the 
prime employer of people is going well, then I ask you: why have 
the number of unemployed employable increased from 4,500 to 
around 15,000? Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, obviously a number of 
points that need to be made. First of all the member opposite 
questions my qualifications to hold this portfolio. If in fact it 
required some business acumen on the part of the opposition to 
carry on these estimates, we could close the books and go home 
today because there’s nobody over there capable of discussing 
business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — He talked about SAP (Saskatchewan 
assistance plan) recipients. We have been over the problems in 
the agricultural sector. We have been over the problems in your 
employment and how they impact internationally. We have 
talked about concerns of drought, and so on. And we have also 
talked about increases, substantial and significant increases, in 
the labour force. I would say to the member that probably the 
more significant statistic of all that is that, in fact, in terms of 
SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan) recipients, social assistance 
recipients, today we have hundreds fewer on those benefits than 
we had a year ago. And I think it’s the trend that is important, 
and we are  

responding and we’re seeing some positive differences. 
 
He talked at some length about the open for business conference 
that was held in Saskatchewan in 1982, shortly after we came to 
government. I think it’s important, Mr. Chairman, to point out 
why that conference was important. It’s the fact that it had to take 
place that should be considered here. 
 
Under the previous administration, business people, I would 
suggest the world over, looked at Saskatchewan askance — I’ll 
use that term; they certainly did. There was no desire on the part 
of the private sector world-wide to make investment in this 
province. The experience of the potash industry in this province 
is one that scarred the opportunity of this province to acquire 
investment for years to come. 
 
And in fact that conference was necessary to say to the world: the 
people of Saskatchewan have seen the problem; they have 
eliminated the problem, and Saskatchewan now wants to join the 
rest of the world in bringing in investment, in bringing in money 
and creating jobs, in having some excitement, and in making 
some things happen. And in fact that has happened, to date. And 
following the next election, when we are returned to office, we 
will see far more significant investment flowing into this 
province, and I think that’s clearly safe to say. 
 
The members somehow argue against the Gainers plant in North 
Battleford. I think it would be a great deal of interest, certainly a 
great deal of interest to this committee, and I think to the people 
of the province, if one of the members opposite would stand up 
and say what side of that issue their party is on this week. They 
have . . . Their leader has publicly said they will not continue the 
project. He’s gone to North Battleford and said they definitely 
will continue the project. I wonder if there’s anything on which 
they have a clear, concise statement. And I would invite a clear 
statement on that project. If, in fact, the party is against it, I would 
like to hear it. If, in fact, they are in favour of it, I would also be 
very interested in hearing that. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Chairman, further to the point of investment dollars flowing 
into the province, it seems to be the position of the party opposite 
that money that comes in in investment from large corporations 
somehow doesn’t benefit small business. I would point simply to 
the upgrader project that is here in Regina, that is currently under 
way. Contracts are being tendered, and these are being tendered 
in packages that will allow small Saskatchewan businesses to 
take part in that program. 
 
And I don’t think that the business men of Saskatchewan . . . I 
know that the members of the chambers of commerce that I have 
talked to do not believe that that project out there is something 
for big business, despite the fact it is the largest project 
undertaken in this province. It is a significant project that will 
impact greatly on many, many small businesses throughout the 
province. I think business men, small-business men, understand 
that and are appreciative of it. 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1088 
 
 

The member talked about small business as if somehow they had 
been forgotten. In 1982, when we came . . . in fact, a year later, 
actually, when this department was formed . . . And I think the 
fact that we are here today doing estimates on the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business more than anything else indicates 
the emphasis that this government places on small businesses. 
There was no such department under the NDP. And I think that’s 
an important factor to remember. There was no department of 
small business under the . . . no department of small business, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
And when my colleagues, I believe first of all the member from 
Meadow Lake and then more recently the member from Regina 
North, toured the province and talked to business men, talked to 
business men, they pointed out some of the problems that they 
had with the previous administration. They said they wanted 
several things. They said they’d like a stable business climate. 
And with the NDP in power, their finger was so deep in the 
economic bowl that there was no way to establish a stable 
business climate in the province. They made that very clear. 
 
They said they wanted a reduction of red tape, that they were 
tired of the paper blizzard. The fact, Mr. Chairman, that to date 
— to date — we have eliminated over 16,000 useless, out of date, 
irrelevant regulations that were here under that government, 
indicates that we have taken some steps and we are continuing to 
take steps to reduce that paper burden that under their 
administration was so overbearing to small business. 
 
The said as well — and this is a very telling comment — they 
told us clearly that they wanted an advocate within government. 
They did not see the department of industry and commerce, as 
the member has indicated, as small businesses’ advocate. And the 
creation of this department whose estimates we are working on 
today indicates that this government did in fact respond. 
 
They said as well that they wanted to be able to sell to 
government. Small-business men in Saskatchewan wanted to be 
able to sell to government. When you look at the Buy 
Saskatchewan programs that have been instituted in the Crown 
corporations, and I think Sask Power is probably the most 
pre-eminent example of that, where their percentage of purchases 
within the province has risen dramatically over the last three 
years; when you look at the government practices and policies 
that we’ve instituted, where we are going out of our way to make 
sure the benefits of government involvement in whatever, flow 
to Saskatchewan folks, it indicates that we have — and business 
men tell us that they see — very positive changes in the attempts 
or their opportunities to sell to government. 
 
They indicated that they wanted government policies and 
programs that promoted small community economic 
development. And, Mr. Chairman, that is very, very important, 
the economic development of small communities. Under that 
previous administration, small communities were literally 
withering on the vine. 
 
And when we looked . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think 
we’ve hit a nerve this time, Mr. Speaker. When we  

look at the venture capital program, the venture capital program 
which was targeted at small communities and allowed small 
communities to form venture capital corporations and to bring 
businesses to their main streets — obviously, a very important 
element. 
 
When we look at the community development program where we 
go out and form volunteer committees within the community; we 
give them counselling and advice and training on how to attract 
businesses; and we look at almost 125 new businesses and 
services that have been attracted to Small Town Saskatchewan, 
by those committees — that’s just by those committees — we see 
a tremendous improvement. And that is not to indicate that that 
is still not a crying need. Work by this department will continue. 
 
We have talked in this Assembly during these estimates about the 
changes we’re making in our business resource centres where we 
are going to purchase vans for the various centres, and those vans 
will on a regular basis tour the small centres in those 
communities and bring business information to those 
communities. And that is something that has never happened in 
this province. Until recently they never had the opportunity to get 
business advice. Now they will be able to get it in their own 
business sector, certainly in their own community. And that is a 
significant departure from the previous grant application 
assessment programs that existed. And I think that is something 
that’s very positive. 
 
I think lastly, and probably as important, business men that we 
met with in the ’82-83 era indicated that the biggest problem they 
faced was uncertainty with interest rates. And I think the nine and 
five-eighths program — I’ll use that term which is the common 
term for it; it will now become known as the 8 per cent program 
— which gives business men some security on what their 
interests rates will be on their operating moneys over a period of 
time, has probably been one of the most popular and most 
important programs to small business. 
 
Small-business men told us exactly what home owners told us, 
that when they went to the previous government and indicated 
that interest rates were a problem, the hands went in the air and 
the answer was: we don’t control interest rates; we can’t help 
you; there’s nothing we can do; sorry guys, it just won’t work. 
Then they came to us and we built on the success of the 
residential mortgage program — the thirteen and a quarter 
program. When we introduced nine and five-eighths, as I 
indicated, we’ve had 6,000 businesses apply for that program and 
realize the benefits. Almost $1 million have been paid out in 
benefits in that program. And with that program now being 
reduced to 8 per cent, with the automobile dealers and the farm 
implement dealers now being eligible, that program, I think — in 
terms of response, in terms of reacting to what we were told — 
indicates that this government does in fact respond to the needs 
of small business. And I think that clearly we were given some 
messages, clearly we have acted, and clearly those were 
messages that the previous administration had not listened to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1089 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, make a 
few comments in respect to the remarks of the minister. And he 
indicates and he defended, if you could believe it, he defended 
their approach, their big-business approach of their government. 
And do you know what he said? He said we needed that approach 
of attracting big business and having those big conferences and 
spending taxpayers’ money, because it really helped the 
small-business men. 
 
Well let’s take a look at what really has happened, because I don’t 
think they’ve changed the attitude of people investing here, 
because private and public investment hasn’t increased. And if 
you look at some of the enterprises that the government have 
been announcing on the verge of . . . on preparation of going into 
an election; first of all, you have an upgrader here in Regina 
which has been announced on three or four occasions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Four times. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Four times. And I ask the minister: how much 
private money is in the upgrader? Six hundred and fifty million 
dollars in the upgrader, and it’s all guaranteed by the taxpayers 
of the province or the taxpayers of Canada — $650 million. 
There’s not one single cent of private money going directly into 
the upgrader at the present time. 
 
But what is more interesting still is that, you know, they try to 
run this province on press releases. And not only have they not 
started to build the upgrader, but they thought they were going to 
have an election in April, and so they announced a fertilizer plant 
which was going to be attached to this non-existent upgrader. 
And they said, we’re going to have a fertilizer plant built on 
adjacent to this here non-existing upgrader. 
 
Well the election didn’t come. The had problems within the ranks 
and they couldn’t call an election. And you know what happened 
now, from the announcement that the Premier made? Well the 
deadline has run out. By April 30th, they were going to have a 
decision as to whether or not there was going to be a 
memorandum of agreement signed to look into the feasibility of 
going ahead with the fertilizer plant. So now what have they 
done? They’ve extended the time. 
 
So this is one of the things they’re holding up and saying, oh we 
needed to be pro big business because we needed investment. 
Well private and public investment is down. One of the major 
economic development industries, the upgrader, is all public 
money. The fertilizer plant — they’ve forgotten about it, I guess. 
Then if you take a look at Gainers, well what they’ve done there 
is to guarantee about $10 million of taxpayers’ money to help out 
a candidate for the Tory leadership from Alberta. And what has 
happened here? It hasn’t helped the small-business man because 
what he has done is gone to North Battleford . . . And what has 
he done? He’s hired Alberta contractors. He’s hiring Alberta 
business men to come in, using taxpayers’ money. No tenders! 
And that is supposed to be helping the business men who have 
built this province, letting people of that calibre come in here, 
and then to not give any contracts to the people of this  

province. I say it’s unfair. 
 
And then if we look at Prince Albert, they’ve made another 
announcement, Mr. Chairman — oh, the big announcement, 
because, you know, it was on the eve of the election, as you 
know. They were just about ready to call that election and they 
had to have some more announcements, Mr. Chairman. And they 
announced that there was going to be a paper-mill in Prince 
Albert. Well so far all they have done there is to transfer over the 
plant, which the people of this province own — $248 million, 
they own — and they gave it over to a multinational corporation. 
And you know what they say to the multinational corporation? 
Well boys, you can have this plant and you pay the price, the 
$248 million, to the people of Saskatchewan. But I’ll tell you, 
we’ll give you a good deal. You just pay for it if indeed you have 
profits. You know, it’s a multinational corporation, and that’s the 
terms. Well I’ll tell you, if you’d give the business community 
the opportunity and the hand-outs that you’re giving to these 
birds that are coming from outside the province, I’ll tell you, the 
Saskatchewan economy would be booming. 
 
You’re not giving any tax holidays to the local business men. 
What you’ve done is, you’ve taken the property improvement 
grant away from them. You’ve increased taxation; that’s what 
you have done. So don’t stand there and say that you’ve worked 
on behalf of the small-business community, because if you gave 
the small-business community even a fair deal, they’ll make it. 
And the laugh of all is this minister standing up. He obviously 
hasn’t been around the province very much because he is saying 
that now what we’re doing is putting manufacturing and small 
business into the small communities throughout the province. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, in the constituency of Quill Lakes under an 
NDP government, we had more manufacturing industries per 
capita than anywhere else in Saskatchewan. And I’m going to 
name some of them, Mr. Chairman, to demonstrate how well we 
were doing and diversifying and taking to the small communities 
manufacturing industries. A little community of Englefeld, 
Doepker Brothers, manufacturing steel boxes for transport trucks 
and cultivators and other types of farm equipment, employing 
some 50 to 60 people year-round, sometimes double-shifting. 
That’s the little community of Englefeld. and you ask, Mr. 
Chairman, when was that started? And I’ll tell you, it didn’t start 
under this government. 
 
(1630) 
 
And you go to the community of St. Gregor and I’ll tell you, 
you’ll find there Michel’s tarps, preparing and manufacturing 
tarps for farm trucks. And in the same industry they’re 
manufacturing windows for construction of houses. And if you 
stay in the little community of St. Gregor, you have Western 
Industries, building steel trucks all across this province. Those 
were . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well when did they start, 
Mr. Chairman? I’ll tell you, they were there before these birds 
came to office. They were there, employing 50, 100 people and 
also in St. Gregor, a major trucking firm. And I’ll tell you, that 
major trucking firm was there before this government  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1090 
 
 

came into office. 
 
And let us go into another community, in Watson. There we have 
Kerpan Industries which manufacture and rebuild farm 
equipment. If you go north of Watson you have another plant that 
was started under the New Democratic Party . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? And if you go around the constituency, 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, there you find a nucleus of 
manufacturing and small businesses brought to the local 
community. 
 
And if you go into the community of Muenster, there’s Al’s 
Welding. Many of you will know Al’s Welding, and what is he 
doing? He’s building hydraulics and doing very well. I’ll tell you 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s all right, but I’ll tell you 
those industries were there and I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you 
haven’t encouraged or increased the number of businesses 
throughout the province. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, obviously you’re going . . . 
You’ve been in now your fifth year of the term, and one of the 
very important things I think that is necessary — and I’m sure 
that if you’re working with Tourism and Small Business and 
particularly Small Business, that what you would be interested 
in, in conjunction with the government, is to determine what is 
the projected economic growth for this province, say, in the next 
10 y ears. Can you indicate to us whether the small-business men 
and the people of this province . . . Have you any projection as to 
what type of economic growth that is being projected for 
Saskatchewan to the year 1994? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again I’ll try to 
work backwards. The member spoke at some length about small 
manufacturing. I think it’s . . . the only statistic I will provide 
there is that in ’85, total manufacturing shipment are up 8 per 
cent over 1984. I think manufacturing starts in this province are 
increasing, are moving forward. And to indicate that they 
occurred only previously is simply not borne out by facts. 
 
However, what we have heard here has been a clear, unequivocal 
denunciation of a number of projects in this province that have 
the people of this province very excited. He indicated that the 
upgrader being built at the Co-op Refinery here in Regina was 
not under way. As usual, the member, and I suppose his party, 
was not in attendance at the recent Saskatchewan manufacturing 
opportunities conference which was held here in Regina not 
many blocks from this very building. 
 
The Co-op had a booth at that particular conference, Mr. 
Chairman, and they had two albums full of pictures of the 
progress that has been made at the Co-op Refinery to date, in 
bringing that project on. Tenders are being let. That project is 
moving ahead. Labour agreements are being worked on. That 
project is in fact moving ahead very clearly. And the member 
opposite indicates that he doesn’t believe in upgrading. 
 
When you consider the opportunities, if we are going to have an 
energy industry in the province of Saskatchewan in the future, it 
will be in heavy oil and in medium oil. And it seems to me to 
make very little sense to pump our heavy  

oil and then work against the problems it has to ship it to Alberta 
or to eastern Canada to be upgraded and refined. And I believe 
that the concept of upgrading heavy oil here in Saskatchewan at 
the Co-op Refinery in Regina and at the Husky facility in 
Lloydminster make eminent good sense, both economically and 
both as a policy effort. And I’m very, very disappointed to hear 
that the member opposite doesn’t share that view with me. 
 
He indicates as well — and I’m sure there’ll be many farmers 
surprised, very surprised, to hear him indicate that their party is 
against the establishment of a fertilizer plant here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have done some feasibility work. It has been indicated that 
it’s reasonable and it’s economically viable to tie a fertilizer plant 
to that upgrader; that the natural gas that is used, that the 
ammonia that is used will be a very — there will be great 
synergism; that those will go together well. We have an investor 
that is very interested in pursuing that. And to stand in his place 
and say, no, the NDP are against that, must come as a significant 
shock to an awful lot of farmers in this province who find those 
fertilizer input costs one of their big problems. 
 
He has indicated as well, and this I find strange, that they are 
against the Weyerhaeuser project, the paper-mill in P.A. I know, 
Mr. Chairman, that the candidate in P.A. has clearly indicated 
he’s not against that mill. And yet down here, we hear the 
member from Quill Lakes, the member from Assiniboia, and the 
member from Regina North East, railing against that project. 
Someone should tell their candidate in P.A. I hear the Leader of 
the Opposition in North Battleford suggesting that possibly this 
bacon plant is not that bad; it’s a reasonable project. We come 
down here and they speak against it at every turn. 
 
I think it’s important, Mr. Chairman, that the people of this 
province . . . I know that when I challenge them they won’t stand 
in their place and say what their position is, but I think it’s 
important that the people of this province get a clear indication 
from this party, where they stand on these major projects. 
Because regardless of what the member from Quill Lakes thinks, 
these major projects will have significant benefit for 
small-business men in Saskatchewan — the people in North 
Battleford who sell homes, who sell groceries, who sell shoes, 
who sell clothes, who provide the service to those people that will 
work on that project and then who will work in that project. The 
people in Regina will do the same thing. 
 
Prince Albert. The business community in Prince Albert is — I’ll 
use the word “ecstatic” about this project that has been 
announced and that will continue. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, I think it is very, very important that 
going into an election, which may be months away yet but which 
is not that far away, it is important that that party opposite stand 
and establish a clear statement of what they really do believe 
about these major projects which can have such significant 
impact to the province of Saskatchewan and significant impact to 
the small-business community. And I really believe that’s 
something that should happen. 
 
I believe, Mr. Chairman, the last part of his speech  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1091 
 
 

was a statement or a request for forecasts on a 10-year economic 
forecast. I think trying to project a 10-year economic forecast is 
like trying to project oil prices. Someone once said they’d like to 
hire a one-armed economist so he couldn’t say, “on the other 
hand.” However, all independent forecasts that we have been 
able to uncover show a strong economic growth forecast for the 
province of Saskatchewan, providing — and I emphasize this — 
providing that the major projects that are now under way 
continue to go ahead. 
 
And so I think in terms of looking at economic growth in this 
province, it is very important that those projects do in fact move 
forward, and again, consequently makes it even more imperative 
that the people of this province learn once and for all what the 
position of the opposition is on these projects. And I think it’s 
been clearly stated here by the member from Quill Lakes that he 
is against all of them. And I would be very interested in hearing 
other members of their caucus, or even their leader, state that they 
are as categorically opposed to those projects as the member from 
Quill Lakes appears to be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, all I can say, armed with no 
facts and no statistics to support your dismal performance and the 
dismal performance of this government, I must say that you 
would rate A for effort, but not for facts. I just want to indicate, 
Mr. Minister, in conclusion here of this aspect of it, that the 
business people of this province are indeed very concerned. And 
they are desperately concerned with the direction of this 
government, the lack of management in this government, in all 
of the indicators which indicated a decline rather than a growth 
in the economic well-being of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no doubt that the retail sales have not increased as 
rapidly as other places in Canada. We find that in retail sales last 
year was the worst, other than Prince Edward island, with only a 
7.8 per cent increase, and the average in Canada was 10.6. 
 
We find that in respect to housing starts, if you had . . . you know, 
if you had growth in the working labour force, you’d think you’d 
have a growth also in housing. Well do you realize that last year 
there was only 5,300 new housing starts in this province — the 
lowest since 1971, if you can believe it. 
 
You look at the new investment, and you find that in relative to 
1981, new private and public investment is down in real terms. If 
you look at the welfare rolls, you find, Mr. Chairman, that the 
welfare rolls have increased. You find that one in 10 in this 
province are either on welfare or on unemployment insurance — 
47,000 people on unemployment last month; 16 per cent of our 
young people unemployed; 18,000 young people walking the 
streets of the cities looking for jobs, and this minister is bragging 
about how he has increased the generator of the small business. 
 
And I’ll say to you, if you take a look at the amount of those 
unemployed employables, I think that tells the story. Here are the 
people who want to work, desperately want to work, and in 1981 
there was 4,500 and today there’s about 15,000 — just about 
15,000, and that’s the  

economic conditions that we have in this province. We have 
more money spent on advertising, promoting what’s pretended to 
be going on, rather than concrete efforts of economic 
development. And let there be no mistake. 
 
And certainly I want to say, Mr. Minister, that you don’t have to 
speak for me. I’ll speak for myself. And I’ll tell you that in 
respect to the upgrader, I don’t need you putting the position, my 
position. Because my position is that you have failed. You had 
an open for big business, and they looked at your management. 
It was so bad they said, we wouldn’t even touch them. And that’s 
what’s happened. You got an upgrader. And if you had big 
business come rolling in here, investing under this new climate, 
where is the private money? And that’s what the small-business 
men are saying. 
 
On the contrary, what you see, what has happened under the 
administration, is small business after small business failing in 
Saskatchewan. And what I want to say, Mr. Chairman, is that if 
the minister will in fact put forward what the projection is for 
Saskatchewan, then I want to, to the people of Saskatchewan and 
the small-business men who indeed may be watching today . . . 
because they’re interested in the performance of this minister. 
And I’ll tell you, they aren’t very impressed. They watched you 
the other night, and they say there’s nothing there. 
 
But I’ll tell you what the economic forecasts are for this province. 
You know what? And this is their friend, the friend of the 
government; in fact, the chief adviser who practically wrote their 
election campaign last time, the Royal Bank. 
 
(1645) 
 
You know the Royal Bank, Boyd Robertson and gang. The big 
donators to the Tory party. Do you know what they have said? 
Well they say that Saskatchewan’s economic growth will lag 
behind the national average. And that’s from 1984 projected to 
1994. 
 

The bank’s Econoscope forecast predicted Saskatchewan 
economy would grow on an average of 3.1 per cent from 
the year 1984 to 1994, compared to the national average of 
3.3 per cent. 

 
And you know what the Royal Bank goes on to say? Do you 
know who’s going to lead all of Canada, which province? Well 
there are only 10 of them. But I’ll tell you, a province that has 
been certainly reducing the unemployment and has involved the 
small-business community is going to lead, and that’s Manitoba. 
“Manitoba is expected to lead in the nation in economic growth 
during the 10-year period.” That’s what the Royal Bank says. 
That’s what your friends say: that Manitoba is going to lead in 
economic growth. 
 
And you know, this here diatribe that is put forward by the 
minister indicating there was no economic growth before — why 
doesn’t he stand up and give some of the indicators which we 
have reviewed? Why wouldn’t they be positive if indeed your 
economic strategy was working? 
 
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1092 
 
 

All I can say to you, and I repeat, Mr. Minister, if you take a look 
at it: “Bank says provincial growth will trail national average.” 
And I just want to read that to you again. “Saskatchewan’s 
economic growth will lag behind the national average,” it says: 
 

The bank’s Econoscope forecasts predicted Saskatchewan 
economy would grow an average of 3.1 per cent a year from 
1984 to 1994, compared with the national average of 3.3 per 
cent. 

 
Manitoba — I repeat — Manitoba, under the New Democratic 
Party . . . It doesn’t say that but I’m just putting that in. 
“Manitoba is expected to lead in the nation in economic growth 
during the 10-year period.” 
 
So that’s what the Royal Bank has indicated. And obviously there 
are factors which will determine, you know, the success of a 
given economy, and we recognize that. But the thing that . . . 
What has happened here, Mr. Minister — and I know that you 
haven’t been in this portfolio very long, and so it’s unfair to really 
put the blame on you — but the economic direction of this 
government has been made on false premises. Because if 
Saskatchewan is going to develop, I’ll tell you, you have to build 
on the strengths of Saskatchewan. And the strengths of 
Saskatchewan are Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan small 
business, Saskatchewan agriculture, and Saskatchewan working 
people. And that is how Saskatchewan built its strong economic 
base in the ’70s into the ’80s. We didn’t put on big conferences, 
open for business — big business — and desert the small 
business. 
 
I’ll say to you, Mr. Minister, that the small-business community 
are concerned. I’ll tell you, I was on a tour of this province, Mr. 
Chairman, and I was talking to some business men. And let me 
tell you what their concern was. They said, you know what, under 
the New Democratic Party we had Sedco, and small-business 
people were able to get loans from Sedco; Sedco would provide 
us with loans. 
 
And this business man . . . I believe it was . . . Well it was in the 
Kelsey-Tisdale constituency, which is looking very good, by the 
way, for us. And I was talking to this business man and he said, 
you know, in this area we have MacMillan Bloedel, MacMillan 
Bloedel — that’s what they said. In this community — that’s the 
Hudson Bay — they had MacMillan Bloedel. And you know 
what? Sedco, in one year, the second year of administration, 
under their loan portfolio, do you know what they did? They gave 
75 per cent of the total loan portfolio to MacMillan Bloedel — 
one multinational company, one multinational corporation. 
 
And you know what this small-business man said to me? He said, 
we used to be able to get help from Sedco. But he said we can’t 
now under this government because what they’re doing is turning 
it over to the MacMillan Bloedel companies. They’re getting 75 
per cent of the whole loan portfolio. And they say that’s not fair, 
and I agree with them. 
 
And certainly I say to the small-business men of this  

province that the New Democratic Party will, in fact, again 
reinstate the privileges and work in conjunction with the 
small-business community of this province. We have in the past 
and we will in the future. And I’ll tell you that we’re going to 
build on the strengths of Saskatchewan, and the basic strength of 
Saskatchewan has been the small-business men that have 
generated the majority of the jobs. 
 
And certainly your policies, Mr. Minister, have been a dismal 
failure. And you ask the business men around here. You laugh. 
Oh, the Minister of Justice laughs. Well I’ll tell you, be better go 
talk to some of the small-business men and they’ll laugh him 
right out of their premises . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Because. I’ll tell you. Because I’ll tell you. the business 
community today is not doing well. They are not doing well 
today under this type of government. 
 
And part of the problem is that you have not set your priorities 
straight. You deserted the small-business community of this 
province. That’s what you did. And then suddenly near the end 
of your term, when you’re about to get turfed out, you try to 
reverse that procedure. That’s what you’re trying to do. I’ll tell 
you, it’s too little too late. You had nine and five-eighths you 
were going to give them. You were going to give the 
small-business men nine and five-eighths money. 
 
Well I’ll tell you how much you’re working for the 
small-business men. Why wouldn’t you have brought that in 
immediately to help the small-business men? But you sat on it 
and you waited until the interest rate was almost as low as the 
program which you introduced. 
 
And so I think it’s very clear, Mr. Minister, that your policies 
have failed. Your emphasis on big business has not created a 
benefit to the small business. It hasn’t created a benefit to the 
treasury of this province. It hasn’t in fact gave jobs to our young 
people. It hasn’t cut back on the welfare roll. It hasn’t increased 
the development or investment of private or public funds. 
 
So all I can say, Mr. Minister, is that while you have been in there 
only a short time, the overall strategy of the government, for 
which you have to take responsibility, has in fact been 
detrimental towards the small-business men of this province. 
 
And we can go further, and we will when we get into Supply and 
Services — the very nature of unfairness of contracts to business 
people. The lack of the tendering process is evident under this 
government. And contractors and small-business men are 
coming to us and saying, will you guarantee when you’re 
re-elected that you will in fact reinstate the fair policy of 
tendering that you had during the 11 years? And we say, of 
course that’s the way to go. And they say, do you realize that this 
government doesn’t give us an opportunity? It’s hand-outs; it’s 
who’s closest to the minister or to the government or to whoever 
contact he has. That’s what it is. They’re saying it’s not fair. 
There is no tender process. And I’ll tell you, they are annoyed by 
that. 
 
And you know, you talk about this government wanting 
economic growth. And do you know what they’ve done,  
  



 
May 5, 1986 

 

1093 
 
 

Mr. Chairman? You think if you’re going to have economic 
growth, at least the former premier of the right-wing government 
had the right idea. He said, we’ll have a good transportation 
system; we’ll build the highways; and we’ll put in four lanes 
from Regina to Saskatoon. Well he never got economic 
development under that right-wing government, the former Ross 
Thatcher. 
 
But this outfit here are going around talking about great 
economic development. And do you know what they abandoned? 
They abandoned building highways. The highway system in this 
province has deteriorated to the lowest level it has since the ’40s. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The highway system of the province 
is not related to Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I would wonder how the chairman . . . I’d 
like to ask the chairman: how would a tourist get into 
Saskatchewan if he didn’t go over the roads, other than fly? 
Surely the roads are an integral part of Small Business and 
Tourism. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what I was saying, Mr. Chairman, when I 
was interrupted . . . We’re dealing here with Small Business and 
Tourism, and someone had the audacity to mention that we can’t 
talk about highways when we’re talking about tourism. Can you 
imagine? 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What I want to say, Mr. Chairman, is another 
very integral part of tourism and small business is a good 
transportation system. And there is no doubt that the highway 
systems of this province have deteriorated to the extent that 
they’ve never been seen before. We had a highway system that 
was admired across Canada. We had one-seventh of all the paved 
highways in Canada. 
 
And what I’m saying is here, a minister who has failed in respect 
to supporting and giving an atmosphere conducive to small 
business and the growth of small business, also has failed 
miserably in so far as tourism is concerned, in that he has allowed 
the roads to totally deteriorate here in the province. 
 
If you look . . . Not only that, what has happened is in respect . . . 
Not only has he allowed them to deteriorate, but he has also 
prevented the small-business men of this province from building 
and constructing those roads. 
 
So basically what we have then, Mr. Minister, is all of the 
economic indicators which indicate a lack of economic activity. 
We have a projection which is made by a reliable source, your 
friend the Royal Bank, indicating that future economic growth 
will be small. And we find that in respect to small business, we 
have had closures of small businesses the like of which we 
haven’t seen before. And I really think, Mr. Minister, that you 
have an obligation, if you can give a massive conference to sit 
down with the outside investors of other parts of the world, that 
I think it  

would be incumbent upon you, and I would urge you, to sit down 
with the small-business men of Saskatchewan and allow them to 
have some input and to give you some direction. Because 
certainly this government opposite needs direction. 
 
I’ll tell you, if you don’t do it, Mr. Minister, you won’t be 
arrogantly standing over there predicting that come another 
election, that you’re going to be in government again. Because 
that’s not what the polls are saying and that’s not what the 
small-business men are saying. They’re saying that this 
government has so mismanaged the economy of Saskatchewan 
that it’s time to turf them out. They say to us, regardless of 
philosophical differences, it’s time that Saskatchewan got back 
to a management of the economy. They say that, we are not going 
to tolerate any longer a government that will rack up a total debt 
of the province of $9 billion — $8,500 for every man, woman, 
and child. That’s the future; that’s the legacy of your government. 
 
That’s what your policy has given the people of this province — 
high unemployment, high welfare, massive debt, increased 
taxation, decrease in public and private investment. That’s the 
record of your government. And I think that you should be 
ashamed of yourself, and I think that this is the reason why this 
government refuses to call an election, even though their 
four-year term has run out. I say that they’re hiding; they’re 
afraid to go to the people and allow them to evaluate the 
miserable record of this government. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: have you, 
since you have . . . I know that you have toured around from 
community to community. Have you had an opportunity to call a 
conference of business people of Saskatchewan in order that they 
could give you some directions so that in fact the dismal efforts 
that you have been putting forward up to this time could in fact 
be reversed, and indeed you could . . . What’s your problem? And 
indeed get some policies which would be of the benefit to those 
people, the small-business people of Saskatchewan, which built 
this province. That’s what I want to ask you. Are you prepared to 
reverse your policies, put into place a priority of small business 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, I do now recess 
this House until 7 o’clock later this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


