


















































May 6, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 6, 1986 
 

1095 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, some special guests today with us who are seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. I would like to introduce to all members of 
the legislature His Excellency Roger Denorme, Ambassador of 
Belgium, in Ottawa; and as well, Mrs. Ingeborg Kristoffersen, 
Counsel General of Belgium, out of Toronto. 
 
It is the Ambassador’s first visit to Saskatchewan. We’re very 
happy that you chose a stop here in Saskatchewan to become 
more familiar with our province. And based on the numbers of 
meetings he’s had with departments such as Agriculture, and 
Energy and Mines, and Science and Technology, and Economic 
Development and Trade, to discuss very important cultural and 
trade ties that we have with Belgium, he’s had a very busy 
schedule, and I’m certain has learned more about our province. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 
giving them an especial welcome here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Public Hearings on Pricing of Domestic Wheat 
 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question for the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Weyburn, and it has to do with 
today’s public hearings in Saskatoon of the special parliamentary 
committee on the pricing of domestic wheat. Can you explain 
why Saskatchewan government’s position was presented by the 
Minister of Rural Development and not the part-time Minister of 
Agriculture or yourself? Why was the part-time Minister of 
Agriculture unavailable to make his presentation on behalf of 
Saskatchewan’s farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan was ably represented by Minister Hardy, who also 
chaired, along with other members of caucus, a cabinet 
committee on farm inputs and prices. I think nobody really, Mr. 
Speaker, has been closer to the views of the Saskatchewan farmer 
than that minister as a result of those meetings in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think from the 
Saskatchewan farmer’s prospective that it matters who presents 
the government’s view in that there was one presented — and it 
was presented loudly — and it came down firmly on the side of 
Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I suppose that depends on whose view  

you are listening to. I looked at the government’s presentation, 
Mr. Minister, and there was no mention of the need for the federal 
government to provide a deficiency payment to Canadian grain 
farmers. Some may argue that this is outside of the committee’s 
special mandate, but it is a point which all members of parliament 
need to be told about and need to be lobbied on. The real problem 
out there for a farmer is the low price they are getting on 91 or 
93 per cent of their wheat, not on 7 or 8 or 9 per cent of their 
grain. 
 
Can you explain why the government failed to make a pitch on 
behalf of Saskatchewan farmers for a deficiency payment? Is 
your government in favour of a federal government deficiency 
payment, especially in light of the fact that one of the Tory MPs 
asked you — your group particularly — about their position on 
a deficiency payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier some few 
days ago addressed the issue of deficiency payments in this 
House. He has said he is in favour of them. He said he has 
already, prior to this hearing, raised the issue with the minister in 
charge of the Canadian Wheat Board in Ottawa, saying at that 
time that although many of the initiatives that Prime Minister 
Mulroney has undertaken, as well as our own government, have 
gone some ways to making sure that (a) farmers get the crops in 
the spring, more needs to be done, and that is the context in which 
he has raised it with members and ministers in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. Why didn’t you 
mention, and why didn’t your party that appeared before the 
committee mention deficiency payments? They avoided and 
side-stepped the question. 
 
The second point, and a new question now, Mr. Speaker, the 
second point that wasn’t mentioned, and the committees out there 
hearing and asking for the issue on parity pricing legislation. 
Your government’s presentation failed to take a position on 
parity prices, and that’s why the committee was there. 
 
Parity pricing would guarantee farmers their cost of production 
plus a fair return on their labour for a number of different 
products, including wheat. What did you tell these members of 
parliament about your government’s position on parity pricing: 
are you for it or against it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the committee’s 
mandate was much broader than just a look at the concept of 
parity pricing, as the hon. member well knows. But then we 
shouldn’t be surprised at the kind of rhetoric coming from 
benches opposite when these are the kind of members, Mr. 
Speaker, who on an occasion prayed for drought and prayed for 
grasshoppers and prayed for disasters to befall Saskatchewan’s 
farmers so that they could make political gain out of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our track record in terms of the co-operation that we have 
enjoyed with the federal government speaks for itself. For years 
and years and years, Mr. Speaker, farmers, and members of this 
legislature when they were in government, asked the federal 
government for the  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1096 
 

removal of capital gains tax, for the removal of the federal taxes 
on . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The question 
was simple: are you in favour of deficiency payment, and why 
didn’t you make a position on parity pricing because the Bill was 
there to listen to parity pricing? Those two. Are you in favour of 
deficiency payment, or aren’t you? And are you in favour of 
parity pricing, or aren’t you? You’ve never made either one of 
those positions this morning . . . and no wonder you talk about 
everything else under the sun. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we’re in favour of 
keeping all options open that would help farmers in 
Saskatchewan. Our track record is clear. We are behind 
Saskatchewan farmers. We have stood up for Saskatchewan 
farmers in the past, and that’s in sharp contrast to the kind of 
co-operation those members got with the federal government in 
Ottawa when the federal government then said to Saskatchewan 
farmers: why should we sell your wheat? 
 
We’ll take co-operation over confrontation any day, Mr. Speaker, 
any day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Travel — Frequent Flyer Plans 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Deputy Premier. 
 
The Public Accounts show, Mr. Deputy Premier, that last year 
your government spent more than $1.138 million on air travel 
through one airline, Air Canada. And this is just the total for 
government departments, not including Crown corporations. 
And that means that the PC cabinet members and senior civil 
servants travelled more than 5.5 million miles on Air Canada 
flights alone last year. And so I ask you, will you . . . The Acting 
Premier will know that Air Canada and other airlines now offer 
frequent-flyer plans which provide free trips and other benefits 
to those who fly a specified number of flights or number of miles. 
My question, Mr. Deputy Premier, is: can you explain what the 
government’s policy is with respect to the use of these 
frequent-flyer plans by cabinet ministers and senior civil 
servants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 
the policy is that there is no personal gain as it relates to any of 
those kinds of plans, and I understand that many airlines have 
those kinds of plans. My understanding is that the policy is: it can 
only apply to gain reflected on government and not to the 
individual cabinet minister. Speaking for myself, I don’t belong 
to any such plan, and I have never used any such plan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplement. Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that 
based on Air Canada mileage that was put on by cabinet ministers 
and other civil servants last year alone, that the Air Canada 
frequent-flyer plan would have given out the equivalent of 80, 81 
free round trips to anywhere in Europe; 176 free round trips to 
anywhere in North  

America? And so what I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is it the 
policy — I want to ask you clearly — is it the policy of your 
government to allow cabinet ministers and senior civil servants, 
who have made their original flights at taxpayers’ expense, to 
claim these free benefits for their own personal use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, those benefits are the 
benefit to the benefit of government. That was made clear in the 
previous answer and I make it clear again. You know, the broader 
question, Mr. Speaker, is the amount of travel. And I think the 
travel can be well justified in taking a look at some of the projects 
that have come to Saskatchewan because our cabinet ministers 
have gone out and about and sold Saskatchewan to people like 
Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, and to people like Phillips Cable, 
and to people like Shackleton Industries. 
 
And these people, Mr. Speaker, are becoming a more and more 
important part of the Saskatchewan economic structure. We 
appreciate that they’re here, and we appreciate that our cabinet 
ministers have gone out and sought these people, along with the 
co-operation of the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to get the minister’s full assurance here, 
and I would ask you to check into the various frequent flyer plans 
by Agdevco. And will you report back to the Assembly on 
whether or not any employers in Agdevco has recently used any 
free trips to any parts of the world, other than on government 
business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ve told you what the policy is, Mr. 
Speaker. As it relates to Agdevco, I’d be more than pleased to 
entertain those questions in the committee of Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New supplement. I want to advise the minister 
that I am here, Mr. Speaker, talking about a very instant situation. 
And we cannot, in fact, ask these questions in Crown 
Corporations. So I’m asking the Deputy Premier: will you in fact 
bring back to this Assembly an answer to the question of whether 
or not any employees of Agdevco did in fact use for personal 
services these free flights provided at the taxpayers’ expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already stated the 
policy . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m asking you a specific question . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Will you listen to a specific answer? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, well you won’t give him one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to the specific 
question, I would be more than pleased to check out the question 
that Agdevco and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you take notice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Is that what I have to do? Do you want 
me to take notice? I’ll take notice, and I’ll provide the member 
with that information. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1097 
 

Delays in Answering Written Questions 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Government 
House Leader, and it deals with this arrogant government’s 
difficult time in giving information to the opposition, as we have 
just seen in the previous question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of background, we are now day number 34 
of the legislative session and we still have a number of written 
questions to be answered from almost two years ago that deal 
with the very issue we are talking about today, that is, 
government travel. I have here a list of a number of questions that 
were put on the order paper, orders for return, by the legislature, 
1983-84 session as well as ’84-85. 
 
And some of the questions that we have put on the order paper 
were of interest to the taxpayers of the province. They dealt with 
government employment arrangements with the former PC 
candidate, Terry Leier. That question goes unanswered. 
 
Another one — money paid out to various law firms by the 
government departments and Crown corporations. This is 
taxpayers’ money going out to law firms that we have asked for 
and haven’t received an answer. 
 
Another question which is relevant, the out-of-province travel 
expenses of cabinet ministers such as the Premier and the former 
minister of Economic Development and Trade. 
 
My question to the minister and the Government House Leader: 
these written questions — some of them are almost two years old 
— when do you suppose you would get around to getting answers 
to the Assembly on some of these important issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the 
members. I’ve been away for the most part of the last two weeks, 
and I don’t know what has been tabled and what hasn’t. I will 
undertake to find out where these are in the system and undertake 
to bring them on as quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would have thought that members opposite would have been 
dealing with the real issues of the day, and that is the problems 
in agriculture, the job creation that’s going on in the province, 
and so on. But they choose not to, and I suggest at their peril, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. As the Government House Leader, we know that we 
will be dealing with the rule 16 that talks about Expo as the major 
issue in the province of Saskatchewan in a few minutes. But he 
will try to get off of the issue of answering questions that have 
been on the order paper for two years by saying he hasn’t been 
here for two weeks. But we have been fortunate to have a 
Government House Leader of different descriptions on different 
days. But if he wants to find out which questions haven’t been 
answered, I could go through the list. I have them here if he’s not 
aware of them. But I ask the question of the minister, we have 
issues like return no. 76 for . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member is making 
statements. I believe that you’ve raised the question and, if you 
have a different question, we’ll take that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I do have a new question to the minister, 
and it deals directly with questions that have been on the order 
paper and have been called for by the Assembly. And I say again 
to the minister, the taxpayers have been waiting for between 18 
months and two years for some of these answers. Can you tell me 
why you haven’t taken the time to put these questions to the 
Assembly, tabled them, and given them to the taxpayers? What 
is the reason that it’s taken two years to get the answers back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s 
anything terribly unusual about the way that the questions have 
been answered. I can remember sitting on that side of the House 
. . . And, Mr. Speaker, since the member also raised the question 
about the issue of Expo, I would like to respond to that as well. 
 
I know that not only members opposite, but, in fact, a government 
of their stripe in Manitoba chose not to participate in Expo. We 
take Expo as being a very important part of the selling of 
Saskatchewan. And we are very, very proud of our presence at 
Expo ’86, Mr. Speaker — very proud of our presence at Expo 
’86. We see that as an opportunity to put Saskatchewan before 
the largest market on the face of the earth. The Pacific Rim will 
be there. It . . . 
 

Distribution of InfoCentre Network Materials 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct 
a question to the Minister of Supply and Services. And, Mr. 
Minister, the question deals with the InfoCentre Network which 
we have raised in this House before. Your government’s plan to 
distribute $85,000 a year to a former PC Party employee to 
distribute government brochures and other Conservative 
propaganda throughout Saskatchewan, grocery stores and 
shopping malls, is what I want to ask the question about. 
 
You have already admitted, Mr. Minister, that this $85,000 a year 
contract was awarded to this former employee of your party 
without calling public tenders. So my question to you, Mr. 
Minister, is this: where did the idea for the InfoCentre Network 
originate, and who approved this $85,000 contract to Associated 
Business Consultants? How was the decision to award the 
contract made, and who made the choice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that the 
member isn’t reading from Hansard. However, I’ll go through it 
one more time. Once again in his preamble he indicated that there 
was something other than information regarding government 
programs being disseminated through these centres. I would say 
categorically, that is not true, and once again challenge him to 
demonstrate some example of something that could be termed 
propaganda that is being disseminated through those centres, or 
possibly reconsider the statement. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1098 
 

The two proposals were considered, and we chose the proposal 
that was least expensive, and that is the way the decision was 
made as to how to proceed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, how can you know whether 
you had the most economically beneficial one if you didn’t 
tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure there’s . . . 
Mr. Chairman, there seems to be some difference between a 
proposal and tender in the member’s mind. I am telling him that 
we considered the two proposals and chose the most economical. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, what was the other proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, there’s so much noise 
coming from the opposition benches, I couldn’t hear the 
question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s unfortunate 
because the noise was coming from those benches, and the 
minister knows it, on his side of the House, the people sitting 
around him, so he couldn’t hear the question. If he would pay 
attention, he would know the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, who made the other proposal for this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again I would 
emphasize in terms of the economy of the program, as I indicated 
last year in this House, that we will be disseminating this 
information at a cost of less than 2 cents a written piece of 
information. 
 
The information I have had from my department is that there 
were two proposals; that we chose the most economic. If it is 
important in the mind of the member opposite to have the name 
of the other proposal, I will take notice and bring it back. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. It is really 
interesting that the minister who has been asked this question for 
some almost two weeks now, yet does not have the information 
available when the question is asked. I think that tells us 
something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you refuse to answer the previous question, 
will you answer this one: can you confirm that this firm has also 
done work for the Department of Tourism and Small Business, 
and can you explain what that work involved, and can you tell us 
the amount of that contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I take a little 
difference. I provided considerable information and always very 
immediately on this. If it is the contention that I should have the 
information on the contracts awarded by the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business, his colleague has the complete list 
of consulting groups we used. I submitted that yesterday 
immediately after I was asked for it. I don’t have at my fingertips 
information on all the people who have worked under contract at 
one time or another for the Department of Tourism and Small  

Business, but I will review that again if that is the wish and bring 
that back as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, since you have taken notice, will you also 
undertake and take notice to tell us whether that contract with the 
Department of Tourism and Small Business was awarded 
without tender as well, and if so, who chose this consultant over 
others, and on what basis? Will you take notice of that as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated I will 
bring back information regarding any alleged contract and how 
it was awarded, and I will return with that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplement to the 
minister, and it deals with the contracts that have been given out 
to Associated Business Consultants. But while you take notice to 
see whether or not they have had any contracts in the area that 
was referred to by my colleague from Regina North East, will 
you also find out for us whether they did any consulting work for 
the Department of Health in the past three years? Will you find 
out that information and bring it back to the Assembly as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, we have the Department 
of Tourism and Small Business in estimates. I think the 
opposition had my colleague, the Minister of Health, in his 
estimates for in excess of 30-odd hours. If there are questions 
regarding various contracts at the Department of Health, I think 
it’s irresponsible to ask me to provide that information, and I’d 
suggest you redirect your question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister in charge of government Supply and Services. This 
would be a contract that would have been done for your 
department, but work done for the Department of Health. And I 
would like if you could take notice of the question, and bring it 
back to the Assembly, whether or not this group or this company 
did work for your department which was done on contract to the 
Department of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I provided yesterday the 
complete list of the contracts, the consulting work, that was done 
for the Department of Tourism and Small Business. I am fully 
prepared to do the same in Supply and Services when that 
department comes forward. As I indicated, those are the extend 
of my responsibilities. I am prepared to provide any information 
at all about any contract that any of my departments have 
provided; I can’t provide more. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Getting back to the original contract, I ask the 
minister, did he copy the Alberta NDP who recently put out a 
15-page document, propaganda document, and distributed it to 
all the homes in Alberta? And my sources indicate this was paid 
for by the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order, order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure I 
shouldn’t take notice of the question, but I can’t respond for the 
NDP in Alberta or what they’ve done. However, I  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1099 
 

can assure you on a very serious note that the information 
disseminated through those centres will be information relating 
directly — directly — to government programs. And if anyone 
on opposition benches has an indication or proof of anything 
different, I would be very interested in hearing it. 
 

Federal Contributions to Crop Insurance 
 

Mr. Engel: — I have another question for the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture, and I’m sorry our part-time minister isn’t here. But 
currently the federal government contributes 50 per cent towards 
the premium of the insurance coverage of crop insurance, while 
farmers pay the other 50 per cent through their premiums. Can 
you inform this Assembly today, and confirm that Ottawa has 
served notice on the province that it wants to cut back on its 
contribution to crop insurance to as little as 25 per cent of the 
total cost, from the current 50 per cent? And if so, what has your 
government’s response been to that request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My most recent understanding of that 
issue is that it was raised in the Nielsen reports. I have no 
knowledge that we’ve been served formally with that position 
because, as I understand it, the Nielsen task force was just that, 
to put forward proposals. Obviously we would not be of the view 
that we want to get into cost sharing it in any new mechanism. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Are you telling Saskatchewan farmers and this 
Assembly that the federal government has not suggested any 
changes in the funding of crop insurance, or can you guarantee 
that Ottawa’s contribution to crop insurance will continue to be 
50 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, I have no 
knowledge that we’ve been served formally. I have at this point 
in time no knowledge, but I may not have the most recent 
knowledge. Certainly I have no knowledge at this point in time. 
I saw it raised as part of the Nielsen task force proposals, but, Mr. 
Speaker, it would not be in the best interests of this government 
or Saskatchewan farmers; hence, we simply oppose it. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Rural Underground Electric Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have the honour, Mr. Speaker, of 
announcing details of Sask Power’s rural underground electric 
program which is under way in various parts of the province. As 
part of a 20-year, $630 million program announced last fall by 
Premier Devine, Sask Power will be rebuilding single-wire 
power lines . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the statement being given by 
the minister deals with an issue that was announced by the 
government a year ago dealing with Sask Power’s underground 
cable program, which I think everyone in the province already 
knows about. I think clearly the rules of the Assembly state that 
the statement has to be relevant, it should be current, and it should 
be of new interest to the public of Saskatchewan. And I think if  

you look at it, Mr. Speaker, you will find that this has been 
discussed in the Assembly. Everyone in the province knows 
about it, and what we are seeing here is a pre-election campaign 
and the Assembly being used for that purposes. And I want you 
to rule on that point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of 
order, what the member says is quite true. And I don’t object in 
any way, shape, or form that a ministerial statement should be 
current and of new interest. That’s why I believe that the 
communities that are going to be affected this year would love to 
hear this ministerial statement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, if I could speak to the point 
of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry. The member did speak to the point 
of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment made by the 
government was that the program would apply to every town and 
every area of the province when it was made. We obviously know 
that it’s going to apply to all the communities in the province 
over the next number of years. And I would just say to you that 
this use of the Assembly and ministerial statements to run their 
pre-election campaign, I think is a blatant misuse of the 
Assembly, and I feel that it’s not warranted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s very difficult to rule whether or not the 
member’s statement is in order or not when we haven’t even 
heard it. He just rose to his feet to begin to make a statement . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. When a member rises to 
give a ministerial statement, you can’t expect me to judge that 
statement before I hear any of it. And it just started, and there 
was nothing but yelling in the Chamber, and I would ask 
members . . . Order, order. Order, order! When I’m on my feet, 
there’s to be silence in this Chamber. 
 
When the member rose to make his statement, I was listening. If 
there’s a problem with the statement, then I’ll rule it out of order, 
but I cannot rule it out of order before I’ve heard it. So I give the 
member the opportunity. 
 
Order, please! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why can’t I speak to the point of order? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — You can speak to a point of order before I do, 
but not after. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll just raise a new point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The minister, in answering the point of order, 
indicated the content of his ministerial statement which was 
outlining the towns and villages which will be applied under this 
year’s program, so that you do know the content. Can you rule 
on that situation, sir? 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1100 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I did rule on it. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the 20-year, $630 
million program announced last fall by our Premier, Sask Power 
will be rebuilding single wire . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! I’m going to ask for order on 
both sides of the House so that this point can be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sask Power, Mr. Speaker, will be 
rebuilding single-wire power lines in 41 projects throughout the 
province this year. Each of these projects will contain . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! I’m going to caution the member 
for Shaunavon that I’ve just asked for order, and he’s hollering 
again at the Chair, and I’m going to ask for order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He was not hollering. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member for Shaunavon was hollering, and 
I’m asking for order. Absolutely. Proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, over the 20-year period, 
Sask Power will replace 108,000 kilometres of overhead 
single-wire lines which will serve 72,000 farms. In this year’s 
program, the farms included in the program are near the 
communities of Tuxford, Glentworth, Duncairn, Vesper, 
Blumenhof, Drake, Dana, Bratton, Ruthilda, Stranraer, 
Mayfair/Alticane, Adanac, Carlton, Birch Hills, Nipawin, 
Rocanville, Forget, Wilcox, Wauchope, Hinchcliffe, and 
Ketchen. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The 1986 program is estimated to cost 
$12.7 million, Mr. Speaker, a high percentage of which will be 
used to purchase locally supplied and manufactured material. 
Approximately 2.3 million will be paid to Saskatchewan-based 
contractors and engineering consultants. 
 
The rural underground electric program this year will create 100 
to 150 jobs, and for each year in direct employment, as well as 
spin-off benefits which will be felt by the service sector across 
the province. 
 
The original farm electrical system has been in continuous 
service for approximately 30 years. During that time the 
electricity requirement by Saskatchewan farmers has more . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . has more than doubled, Mr. Speaker, 
causing strained conditions on the capacity . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I don’t think there’s any excuse 
for the amount of yelling that’s occurring, and I would ask for 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And to conclude, Mr. Speaker, the 
corporation will be rebuilding these lines on the basis of demand, 
maintenance, and service reliability, Mr.  

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister 
bringing yet again to the Assembly the announcement of a new 
buried cable program. I don’t know why he stopped reading the 
list of names at B. You didn’t get up to places like Shaunavon 
and Rosetown, and we were waiting in great anticipation to see 
when you would get to those towns. And I know that I wanted to 
know which towns in my constituency would be getting the 
cable, and I didn’t hear any. But if it’s like other programs you 
people have introduced, they will be totally based on politics — 
where the cable will be going — the same as this announcement 
today was. 
 
The only question that I would ask is who’s paying for the 
announcement, because it obviously . . . The time of this 
Assembly should be paid for during that time period by the PC 
party, because that’s what ministerial statements have become. 
And I will predict we will be hearing more announcements about 
upgraders and fertilizer plants that are a myth in somebody’s 
mind. But I just say to you that I find it upsetting that we would 
have to sit through re-announced programs that were announced 
a year ago, and that that would be allowed in this Assembly. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 2:41 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Builder’s Lien Act 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation 
Act 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act 
Bill No. 37 — An Act for the granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending 
March 31, 1987 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:43 p.m. 
 

Question of Privilege 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
rise on a question of privilege. This is the first opportunity that 
I’ve had to raise this matter since it came to my attention late 
yesterday afternoon. I have provided the requisite notice pursuant 
to rule 6, and at the conclusion of my remarks if a prima facie 
case is found, I will be moving a motion asking for the House to 
find certain remarks of the member from Pelly to be in contempt 
of this House, and further to demand an apology from the 
member. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, a press release, issued under the name 
of the member from Pelly, accused the government of attempting 
to dismiss the legislative counsel and law clerk. That is, in fact, 
not an accurate reflection of the events that occurred at the Board 
of Internal Economy meeting. But that is not the issue that I’m 
wanting to raise with you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1101 
 

(1445) 
 
What particularly concerns me about the press release is that the 
impartiality of the Speaker and his office has been called into 
question. Allow me to quote certain paragraphs of the release. 
Quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The PC government is attempting to undermine the 
independence of the Legislative Counsel by forcing the 
office to report to the legislative assembly through the 
Clerk’s Office, rather than directly to the MLA’s. 

 
A further quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Independent officers like the Ombudsman, the Provincial 
Auditor and the Legislative Counsel are appointed to serve 
the public and all members of the legislative assembly, not 
the government of the day. As independent public 
watchdogs, they must be free to make recommendations, 
offer advice or take the government of the day to task, 
without fear. 
 
The PC government has already threatened the 
effectiveness of these public watchdog agencies by 
constantly cutting their staff, and now it is attempting to get 
these agencies directly under its thumb. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the only conclusion that can be drawn from these 
remarks is that the member from Pelly has suggested that the 
Speaker and the officers of the Table are not impartial. The 
suggestion made by the member is that if the law clerk reports 
through the Clerk for simply administrative purposes, somehow 
that means that the law clerk is serving only the government and 
not opposition members. The member from Pelly has also alleged 
that to have the law clerk report through the Clerk for only 
administrative purposes, is to put the law clerk under the 
government’s thumb. 
 
These are simply outrageous allegations, Mr. Speaker, and cast 
an improper reflection on the Chair. They are a direct attack 
against the Speaker’s office and cannot be regarded lightly. They 
imply that the Speaker and the officers of the Table are under the 
thumb of government. 
 
It should also be noted that the allegation that the independence 
of the law clerk is compromised is completely inaccurate. 
Opposition members know full well that there has been 
absolutely no suggestion by the Speaker, or anyone else, that the 
legislative counsel and law clerk would have to report through 
the Clerk in relation to the provision of legal advice or drafting. 
The opposite is, in fact, the case. However this issue should have 
been settled by the Board of Internal Economy and should not 
have been the subject of press releases. 
 
Beauchesne’s, Fifth Edition, at paragraph 52, in discussing what 
constitutes breach of privilege, says the following: 
 

52. (1) The Speaker should be protected against reflections 
on his actions. 

 

Maingot, in Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, makes a similar 
statement at page 315: 
 

Any suggestion of partiality or bias on the part of a 
presiding officer, such as the Speaker, a chairman of a 
committee of the whole, or a chairman of a standing 
committee or special committee, automatically shows 
disrespect and amounts to contempt. 

 
As House Leader, Mr. Speaker, and as a member of this House, 
I have a duty to protect the integrity of this institution. The 
Speaker and the officers of the Table must be protected against 
reflection on their actions, Mr. Speaker. When their motives are 
questioned, we must rise to their defence. This is part of our 
British parliamentary tradition. To fail to do otherwise would be 
destructive to our democratic process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to find a prima facie case of breach of 
privilege, and should you so find, I will move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly finds the remarks of the member from 
Pelly contained in the press release, dated May 5th, 1986, 
reflecting on the impartiality of the Speaker and the officers 
of the Table, to be in contempt of this House and demands 
a retraction and an apology from the member. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the issue 
that the Government House Leader has raised here, a question, a 
very serious question, of privilege. I have not had an opportunity 
to be involved with all the discussion, but I have been informed, 
as obviously the caucuses will do when they’re referring matters 
to the Board of Internal Economy — because it is the board that 
basically runs the Assembly and takes care of a number of issues 
that come up on a daily basis and is chaired by the Speaker. 
 
The issue at hand here is the question of privilege of members 
and what is discussed here in the Assembly. And one can say, if 
there are accusations made inside the Assembly and members 
dispute what one member is saying, I think there is obviously a 
rule that applies to that. And I say that if the Government House 
Leader has a dispute with the member from Pelly as to facts that 
have been given out, Mr. Speaker, I think, if you would refer to 
page 12 of Beauchesne’s, you would find that section 19 clearly 
outlines what should take place in this instance. And it clearly 
states that: 
 

A dispute arising between two Members, as to allegations 
of facts, does not fulfill the conditions of parliamentary 
privilege. 

 
And it goes on to say in (3), or section 19(3): 
 

Statements made outside the House by a Member may not 
be used as the base for a question of privilege. 

 
When I complete my remarks, I would like you to take  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1102 
 

that into consideration. 
 
But I think there have been allegations made here by the 
Government House Leader that need some background. And I 
would like to take some time to read into the record some 
exchanges of letters that have taken place on this issue, because 
I think the matter is being side-tracked on to a very lesser issue, 
a dispute between the member from Souris-Cannington and the 
member from Pelly. 
 
And I would like to take the time of the Assembly, now that it 
has been raised, to raise the issue that is at hand here. It is the 
basis of the challenge of privilege by one member to another. 
 
Now this has been going on for some time where we believe there 
has been a process in place to put together what is called by some 
a “department.” Now we don’t believe that there is any such thing 
as a department that deals with the running of the Assembly, with 
the Ombudsman, with the legislative law clerk, or with the 
individuals who work in this building. We don’t believe there is 
a department. We think that each area, the library and others, 
have a distinct role to play. 
 
Now there have been things happening over the last year or two 
that lead us to believe that there is a major change taking place. 
And in order to give background to this I want to read to the 
Assembly a letter dated April 16 to one of the members of the 
Board of Internal Economy from our caucus, Mr. Engel, which 
is from the Speaker. I think when we get done reading this, there 
will be . . . And the we replied to this letter. And I would like to 
get all of this on the record, because I think it’s important when 
members and others who may be watching this issue develop, 
before they make up their minds as to whether or not, in fact, 
there is anything to the allegations made by the Government 
House Leader. This letter, and I will quote — it’s dated April 16, 
1986: 
 

Mr. A.W. Engel, MLA, 265 Legislative Building, Regina, 
Saskatchewan, S4S 0B3. 
 
Dear Mr. Engel: I am writing to you to raise a matter of 
concern and importance. Members will recall that on July 
16, 1985, the Board decided to accept responsibility for the 
Office of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk due to a 
reorganization in government. The incumbent, Ms. 
Merrilee Rasmussen was retained. Since that point in time, 
Ms. Rasmussen has refused to follow my instructions and, 
I feel, the policy direction set by the Board. I am troubled 
by this situation and am thus raising it with the Board. 
 
I will outline some background to the whole situation. In 
April 1981, the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
recommended to the Legislative Assembly that a Board of 
Internal Economy be established. The Board was to set (the) 
policy for all agencies reporting directly to the Legislative 
Assembly such as, the Legislative Assembly Office, 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Director of Hansard and Legislative 
Library. Apparently the Committee, at that time, considered 
adding the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk and  

Ombudsman to the list of agencies under the Board but 
opted to wait and see if the experiment with the Board was 
successful. The Legislative Assembly adopted the 
recommendations of the Committee and the Board was 
established. 
 
Section 68.8 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act outlines the powers of the Board of Internal 
Economy. The Board has the power to “make 
recommendations for the organization and (the) staff 
establishment for the Legislative Assembly Office and the 
Legislative Library” and “to approve and review 
administrative policies and procedures in relation to the 
operation of the Legislative Assembly Office and the 
Legislative Library” and to “advise upon and give 
directions in relation to any matter that the Board considers 
necessary for the efficient and effective operation of the 
Legislative Assembly Office and (to) the Legislative 
Library.” 
 
In 1982, the Board authorized a reorganization making the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly a “deputy minister” with 
administrative responsibility for the various agencies under 
the Speaker. In 1984, I asked the Legislative Librarian to 
report to me for administrative purposes through the Clerk 
which she has done with very positive results. 
 
It is my opinion that the various legislative agencies under 
the Board are working well as a team and do respond to the 
direction given to them by the Board and myself as Speaker. 
 
Last fall, the Board agreed to accept the Legislative Counsel 
and the Law Clerk as part of its mandate and The 
Legislative Assembly Executive Council Act was amended 
to authorize this change. Section 68.32 states that the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk is to be appointed by 
the Board on recommendation of the Speaker. The duties of 
the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk as set in the Act are 
as “may be provided for in the Rules of the Legislative 
Assembly or that may be prescribed by the Speaker.” 
 
When this change was made last fall, it was, I believe, quite 
clearly understood that this change meant that the Office of 
(the) Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk would become 
part of the department under the Board for administrative 
and financial purposes. The Legislative Counsel and Law 
Clerk would obviously still retain its historic independence 
in the field of professional advice and legal drafting for 
Members and the Legislative Assembly. 
 
After these changes in the Act were approved by the 
Legislative Assembly, I asked Ms. Rasmussen to work with 
the Clerk and to work as part of the Legislative team in the 
field of departmental administration and finance. Part of 
this team-work involves a weekly meeting of the 
Legislative managers, including the Clerk, the Legislative 
Librarian, the Deputy Clerk, the Sergeant-at-Arms,  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1103 
 

the Director of Broadcasting, (the) Director of Hansard and 
others. This meeting is found to be useful for the managers 
to keep up-to-date on the happenings in the Legislative 
Assembly as it pertains to the department. The meetings 
deal with the administrative and financial matters and do 
not pertain to professional advice given by officers of the 
House to Members. 
 
Both the Clerk and I have met with Ms. Rasmussen on 
several occasions seeking her cooperation in working with 
the department. To date, she has refused to do so. On March 
21, 1986, I, as Speaker, wrote to Ms. Rasmussen instructing 
her to attend the management meetings and to participate in 
the Department. Ms. Rasmussen’s response is that she will 
not attend meetings and she will not follow my direction. 
 
The reason that I am raising this issue with the Board is that 
if disciplinary action is to be taken with regard to Ms. 
Rasmussen’s apparent lack of cooperation and 
insubordination, it must be taken by the Board. If it should 
come to the point of dismissal, section 68.22(1) and (2) state 
that the decision would be made by the Board on 
recommendation of the Speaker and a “statement of the 
reasons for so doing is to be tabled in the Legislative 
Assembly forthwith.” 
 
I recommend (want to) to the Board that an instruction from 
the Board be issued to Ms. Rasmussen directing her to be 
part of the department for “administrative and financial 
purposes” including attendance at the management 
meetings, stressing that this direction (is) in no way 
infringes on her power or freedom to give advice to 
Members of the Legislative Assembly. This direction is the 
same as that followed by all other officers of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I further recommend that if Ms. Rasmussen refuses to 
comply with the Board’s direction within two weeks of the 
decision of the Board (what decision I don’t know, I want 
to read that again). 
 
I further recommend that if Ms. Rasmussen refuses to 
comply with the Board’s direction within two weeks of the 
decision of the Board and the communication of that 
decision to Ms. Rasmussen, that she be removed from office 
and a statement be tabled in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I make these recommendations knowing the importance of 
the independent nature of the role of the officers of the 
Legislative Assembly. I am also aware that all (the) 
employees of the Legislative Assembly are obliged to 
follow the direction of the Board and (the) Speaker as 
authorized by The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Counsel Act. 
 
I have called a meeting of the Board for Monday, April 21, 
1986 at 11:00 a.m. in order to discuss the serious and 
troubling matter. Sincerely, H.J.  

Swan, Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will be well aware of that letter and the 
response that came back on . . . Well I will first say that my 
colleagues on the board went to you and got that meeting delayed 
because of problems we had with what we saw to be an 
infringement on the operation of the counsel — it writes the 
legislation for members of the opposition and that sort of thing, 
and advises us from time to time — that we had problems with 
that. 
 
And you delayed the meeting, and subsequently a letter came 
from the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon. Allan Blakeney. And 
I would like, for the record, to read that letter into the record, 
because it outlines very clearly some of the concerns that we saw 
at that time. This letter is dated April 28, 1986. It’s addressed to 
the Hon. Herb Swan, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, 
Province of Saskatchewan, Room 129, Legislative Building, 
Regina, Sask., S4S 0B3: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: I am writing with respect to your letter 
dated April 16, 1986 to my colleagues on the Board of 
Internal Economy, Mr. (Allen) Engel and Mr. Lusney. 
 
In view of the very serious nature of the contents of that 
letter, (that’s referring to your letter, Mr. Speaker) I have 
decided to write to you directly. Mr. Engel has made 
available to me the minutes of the Board, but I an not fully 
aware of its deliberations. 
 
I believe the central issue here is the independence of an 
(the) Officer of the Legislature, the Legislative Counsel and 
Law Clerk. 

 
(1500) 
 

As we view both custom and existing legislation, the Office 
of the Legislative Counsel exists as an entity totally separate 
from the Legislative Library, the Office of the Clerk, the 
Ombudsman, the Provincial Auditor or other offices or 
officers of the Legislature. We believe this was done not by 
accident, but rather to underline and ensure the 
independence of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk in 
rendering advice to all Members without fear or favour. 
 
In order that each of the principal officers of the Legislature 
be able to fulfill effectively the duties prescribed by statute 
and by the Rules, it is important that each be independent 
officers of the Legislature itself — independent of the 
government of the day, and independent of each other. 
(And) taken together, they do not constitute a hierarchical 
“department”. (as was referred to in the letter). 
 
I was somewhat surprised at the first paragraph of your 
letter, where you indicate that on July 16, 1985 the Board 
decided to accept responsibility for the Office of Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk. My reading of the proposals put 
forward at  

  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1104 
 

that time was that the Office would have been abolished and 
replaced by a new position of Law Clerk created by the 
Board. We do not regard this as a mere matter of wording. 
As we see it, there is a position of Legislative Counsel 
created by statute with duties defined by the Legislature and 
reporting to the Speaker. We regard this as particularly 
important to the Opposition. The Government has platoons 
of lawyers available to it, the Opposition has none. 
 
Therefore, an organizational structure which ensures the 
independence of the Legislative Counsel is of prime 
importance to us. On this basis we welcomed legislative 
changes which put into statutory form the past custom. 
 
I was also surprised to read, in the first paragraph on page 
two of your letter, that the Board authorized a 
reorganization making the Clerk a “deputy minister” with 
administrative responsibility for the various agencies under 
the Speaker. I would appreciate your referring me to the 
Board minute that explicitly sought to accomplish this. 
 
I note in paragraph four on page two you state that it was 
clearly understood that the Office of Legislative Counsel 
and Law Clerk would become part of the “department” 
under the Board for administrative purposes. If you are 
stating that it was so understood by Members of the 
Legislature when the Bill was passed, I must say that I recall 
no such understanding. I would appreciate your referring 
me to material on which this conclusion was based. 
 
This issue is neither minor nor irrelevant. The concept of 
viewing all agencies reporting to the Speaker as somehow 
constituting a “department” is novel and without statutory 
base except as may be encompassed by the reference to 
duties as “may be prescribed by the Speaker”. It is surely 
drawing a long bow to suggest that because the Speaker has 
the statutory power to prescribe duties of several separate 
Officers of the Legislature, he can constitute the several 
offices into a “department” in a way clearly not 
contemplated by the legislation. 
 
I am not, of course, suggesting that arrangements could not 
be made to combine for administrative purposes. Indeed, as 
you know, we have no objection to the Legislative Counsel 
and Law Clerk being an officer of the Legislative Assembly 
and subject to the Board with respect to budget and 
administration. I am suggesting, however, that any 
“department” analogy with a hierarchical relationship 
between Officers of the Legislature is not supported by the 
legislation. 
 
Since we put a very high premium on the independence of 
the Legislative Counsel and since this has not always, in our 
view, been recognized (e.g. the proposal to replace the 
Office with a Law Clerk without statutory base), we are  

concerned about any move that might impair the co-equal 
status of the Legislative Counsel with other Officers of the 
Legislature, which I believe is clearly provided for in the 
legislation. 
 
Accordingly, I would ask that no steps be taken which 
would impair the ability of the Legislative Counsel to 
operate in the independent way contemplated by the 
existing legislation. 
 
Finally, I believe that the principles of natural justice would 
require that before any potential disciplinary measures be 
considered, Members must be given an opportunity to 
review any relevant correspondence regarding this issue. 
(Signed) Yours sincerely, Leader of the Opposition. 

 
I read those letters into the record, Mr. Speaker, so that we would 
have some background to see how this has all evolved and how 
what was said by the member for Pelly was well within any 
purview or within his rights to say. 
 
I see no reason why there could possibly be a case of privilege. 
There is nothing in the press release that shows any disrespect for 
the Speaker. What it does, clearly, is refer to a statement made 
by the Speaker, or a recommendation. 
 
And I want to quote that one again because there was a 
recommendation made in advance to the meeting by the Speaker 
that if certain things didn’t happen, of if they did happen, that the 
individual referred to would be dismissed. And I, along with the 
member from Pelly, continue to express concern about that 
recommendation being made. 
 
And I would just like to read the third last paragraph of the letter 
of April 16th, which says: 
 

I further recommend that if Ms. Rasmussen refuses to 
comply with the Board’s direction within two weeks of the 
decision of the Board and the communication of that 
decision to Ms. Rasmussen, that she be removed from office 
and a statement be tabled in the Legislative Assembly. 

 
I think we can argue over who is making strong statements or 
pre-judging what will happen in a committee. But I think that I 
will have a hard time believing that there is any case of privilege. 
And that the member from Pelly was perfectly within his rights 
making the statements that he did and expressing his concern 
about changes that would be made in that position that would 
give it less flexibility and less independence to work for members 
of the opposition. 
 
Now we all know that we’re in the dying days of a government’s 
term of office. No one knows how the election is going to go. We 
all like to get . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think the member is straying 
from the point in raising election issues. The point that’s here is 
a very serious point, and I’ve been listening patiently, but unless 
you have something further, directly to the point, then I would 
ask that you end  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1105 
 

your remarks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reason I raised the issue, and I won’t 
refer to it again, is simply to point out the fact that who is ever in 
opposition, that this position is ultimately important that it be 
independent. And members opposite who were here — Mr. 
Speaker, you will well know this — that the independence of this 
individual to advise, consult, and to help with legislation being 
written is absolutely crucial to the operation of this Assembly. 
 
And for that reason I’m saying, not knowing what is going to 
happen, our point is that in order for this Assembly to operate and 
function properly, that this position must be maintained in its 
present form, and statements made by the member from Pelly to 
protect the integrity of the position were warranted. And I 
applaud him for taking and putting forward a strong view to 
maintain the independence of that office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the comments from both sides 
of the House. I did receive notice today, prior to 12 o’clock, from 
the House Leader. I will take under advisement the comments 
that have been made from both sides of the House and bring in a 
ruling at a later date. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Saskatchewan Participation in Expo ’86 
 

Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 
seem to be a little testy today, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t appear 
to like our ministerial statements and during question period, they 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member is rising on 
the motion under rule 16, and I would ask him to stay to the 
motion and present the motion. 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just saying that the 
members opposite in question period today didn’t feel that Expo 
happened to be a major topic or a major issue, and yet I would 
like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it certainly is a major issue. 
It’s a major news item right now. It’s being played, not only right 
across our province, not only right across our country, but right 
around the world. And the member opposite speaking from his 
chair, that probably won’t get into this debate, Mr. Speaker, can’t 
understand the importance of Expo and how it could help the 
northern communities in Saskatchewan, and I guess he really 
doesn’t care. But the Leader-Post headline the other day kind of 
said it all: “The gates to Expo ’86 are open.” 
 
All the hard work, all the planning, all the preparation and 
anticipation will now pay off, and pay off handsomely to those 
that are participating. As we all know, it started with a royal 
event, and it was officially opened by Prince Charles and 
Princess Diana of Wales. And again the members of the 
opposition, speaking from their seats, obviously no regard for 
royalty. It’s unfortunate, but  

perhaps they should have some. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our motto: Saskatchewan Expo ’86 — “A 
Presence to be Proud Of”; it now takes on a new meaning, a new 
meaning for all of us here in Saskatchewan, whether we be from 
the South or whether we be from the North; a presence and a 
proud presence. For the first time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
will have its own pavilion at this magnificent international 
exposition. 
 
It was pride in Canada that brought Man and His World to 
Montreal as Canada hosted this exposition in 1967. And 
throughout the world people are still talking about Montreal and 
about Canada. And now Vancouver and Canada will again be in 
the world spotlight. And it’s this pride in Canada, this pride in 
Saskatchewan, that prompted Saskatchewan to participate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Others, too, are very, very proud to participate — seven 
provinces, two territories, 54 nations, as well as three states and 
37 corporations. After all, this international exposition will 
attract people throughout the world. It will, in fact, open their 
countries or their corporations to the entire world. 
 
(1515) 
 
Yesterday the members opposite chose to elaborate, for instance, 
on Manitoba and their NDP government. And yet I ask why, and 
I wonder why Manitoba isn’t participating in Expo. We’re all 
proud to be Canadians. We’re all proud of our prairie provinces. 
Yet Manitoba will have no presence. 
 
Do they have no pride in their province? Do they have no pride 
in Canada? Do they have no faith in their future? Do they not 
want to open Manitoba to the world? What a glorious opportunity 
they missed when they chose to stay at home, to close their doors. 
Or maybe, just maybe, Mr. Speaker, they’re hoping to get a free 
ride at the expense of Canada. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to repeat our motto: “SaskExpo ’86, 
A Presence to Be Proud Of.” We do have pride in our province, 
Saskatchewan. We will proudly display and promote ourselves 
six months of a world-class promotion. 
 
Originally, as the SaskExpo corporation was established, I served 
very proudly and with much interest, Mr. Speaker, in my role as 
vice-chairman. And I watched as our presence was developed, as 
our plans unfolded, and eventually as everything for us became 
a reality. 
 
And what a marvellous way for us to enhance several areas of 
our government. I think primarily our sales missions on tourism, 
where our government has gone out to the entire world, you 
might say, and certainly in North America — sales missions in 
Denver, in Minneapolis, and Los Angeles — together with the 
private sector to promote Saskatchewan. 
 
And now that Saskatchewan is becoming just a little bit better 
know, as far as it relates to tourism, we have this magnificent 
opportunity — Expo ’86, where millions, an expected 16 million 
people, will go through Expo and  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1106 
 

determine all of the participants and players where they would 
like to visit. And we will be able to give them first-hand 
indication of Saskatchewan and try to encourage them to come 
to Saskatchewan for a visit. 
 
Another very important feature of SaskExpo, Mr. Speaker, 
concerns the missions of trade that were taken by our government 
right around the world, again opening up our province to the 
entire world. And now, through this pavilion, people will learn 
even more about Saskatchewan, more about the opportunities 
that we can present to them and what they can really come in to 
see in Saskatchewan and what it’s all about. 
 
Imagine! People from the entire globe will be coming to our 
doorstep to see what’s happening in Saskatchewan. This 
magnificent event and our participation in it will help cement all 
of the work that has been undertaken by our government in the 
last couple of years. It will prove indeed that Saskatchewan is 
open for business because we’re out there selling our presence, 
and we’re proud of it. 
 
No longer, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan the best kept secret in 
the world, as was done by the prior administration, just a closed 
shop that we didn’t want anybody to come in and see. We didn’t 
want them to come in and spend their money here in 
Saskatchewan. We didn’t want to display our people, our 
hospitality. We didn’t want to display our culture and our food. 
No, no, we didn’t want anybody to do that. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we do. We very much do, and SaskExpo ’86 will help us do that 
job. 
 
People from all around the globe will have a chance to see 
firsthand our culture, our Saskatchewan entertainers, taste our 
traditional foods, enjoy our hospitality, and learn what a great 
way it is to come to Saskatchewan to visit, to see our great 
province. They’re also going to have the opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to come and deal with us as it relates to trade or looking 
for investment. 
 
As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, it’s the first time Saskatchewan 
will have our own pavilion at a world’s exposition. Never before 
has our province had such a unique opportunity to tell our story 
to such a large world audience. 
 
We are participating in Expo mainly for three reasons: to promote 
a place which is second to none in resources, in capabilities, in 
products, and in people; to invite and welcome visitors, investors, 
and new citizens to our province; and to celebrate our talents. 
Expo ’86 will provide a world stage for our artists and artisans, 
for our actors, our dancers, and our musicians. Imagine 6 to 800 
native people from Saskatchewan, entertainers, will have the 
opportunity to perform live before an international audience. 
 
A major objective of our government is to raise the profile of our 
province internationally. The Pacific rim represents a 
tremendous market for our products and a source of investment 
capital. 
 
Expo ’86 is an exposition of firsts, setting many new records. 
Expo ’86 has surpassed the Los Angeles  

Olympics in corporate sponsorship. May 2nd of 1985 marked the 
opening of Expo Centre, the first time that a pavilion has opened 
one year in advance. And tickets for Expo ’86 went on sale one 
year in advance in British Columbia. Never before has a world 
exposition been so well developed in its early stages. 
 
Canada invites the world to Vancouver, and Saskatchewan will 
be there. Mr. Speaker, our pavilion is one of the highest 
observation points on the Expo site, approximately 10 storeys, 
and it is truly a magnificent landmark. It will accommodate 1000 
visitors per hour, and includes a welcome court, innovative 
exhibitory, a theatre, a visitor service and performance and food 
service areas. The ascent to the observation deck will explain a 
working grain elevator, with the descent simulating a ride into a 
potash mine. Our neighbouring international pavilions include 
Japan and Australia. And the interesting part of all this, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the government, together with the private sector, 
are making SaskExpo happen. 
 
To enhance the Saskatchewan pavilion’s design and exhibitory, 
a corporate participation program was developed. In order to tell 
the Saskatchewan story, it is essential that the partnership 
between the public and the private sectors, that partnership that 
our government so firmly believes in, is on its best display at 
SaskExpo, and it is a major element of our message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on August 4th, the soon-to-be-famous 
Saskatchewan Expo train will leave Saskatoon and Regina for 
Saskatchewan Day in Vancouver, which will be held on August 
8th. There will be a football game there that day between the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders and the B.C. Lions, and those 
travelling on that train, Mr. Speaker, will be presented with 
ambassador kits, our own Saskatchewan ambassador kits 
developed by the Department of Tourism and Small Business, 
and they will be given the opportunity to promote tourism to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan entertainment and fun events will be happening all 
over the Expo grounds as well as in our own pavilion. Some of 
the entertainers that will be participating include the 
Saskatchewan Chamber Orchestra; Solstice, of Saskatoon; the 
Great Plains Dance Troupe; Deborah Lauren; the Balfour 
Collegiate Dixieland Band; and the list of talent goes on and on, 
far too many to mention. But to name a few more: the Gabriel 
Dancers from Saskatoon; the Prince Albert Boys Choir; Winston 
Wuttunee of North Battleford; and the Esterhazy and Yorkton 
High School Band, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our host and hostesses, in addition to their enthusiasm and 
talent, they bring seven languages to our pavilion: English, 
German, Spanish, Portuguese, Japanese, Filipino, and French. 
Another benefit for us, Mr. Speaker, is the world business 
showcase, and it’s a unique, high-profile trade and investment 
show at the Canadian pavilion in Vancouver during Expo. 
 
So those are a few of the highlights, Mr. Speaker, and while the 
Leader of the Opposition is travelling in our province, changing 
his mind about all kinds of policies — here he doesn’t like the 
bacon plant; in North Battleford,  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1107 
 

he does; here, he doesn’t like the paper plant; in Prince Albert, 
he does. It would be curious, Mr. Speaker, to see what he’s saying 
truly about our participation in SaskExpo because everybody 
across the province that I have travelled, the four corners, burst 
with pride at our participation and think that it’s one of the best 
things that this government has ever done. So it’s going to be 
curious to see what the members opposite have to say about 
SaskExpo and how it has created excitement and enthusiasm 
throughout our entire province as we being SaskExpo at Expo 
’86. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its foresight and initiative in ensuring that 
Saskatchewan will have a major role in Expo ’86 and also 
in the world business showcase and, as a result, will be in a 
position to benefit from the many opportunities that will be 
available in the areas of trade, business, agriculture, 
tourism, culture, and the development of high technology. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have a seconder? 
 
Mr. Klein: — Yes, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I neglected to tell 
you that it would be seconded by my colleague from Yorkton. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
indeed pleased to be able to second my colleague’s motion of 
Expo ’86, and especially Saskatchewan Expo ’86. And I want to 
talk a bit about the benefits of the next Expo or a trade fair, an 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and to do with trade and business. 
 
I’m pleased because SaskExpo ’86 is already proving, in a matter 
of only being open two or three days, to be not only a great 
success for Saskatchewan but the talk of the entire country 
already. And why is that, Mr. Speaker? It is, I suggest, because 
the Saskatchewan pavilion is showing the world that we are a 
new Saskatchewan, a new Saskatchewan with energy, new 
vibrance, and renewed confidence. 
 
And at this time I want to commend the SaskExpo ’86 
corporation headed by my colleague, the Deputy Minister, and 
the committee that thought of the theme and the design of our 
pavilion at Expo, the architects that put that plan onto paper and, 
of course, our contractors that actually built the pavilion on the 
site. 
 
(1530) 
 
And let’s look at the Saskatchewan reunion held on April 25th 
and April 26th, Mr. Speaker. Over 13,000 former Saskatchewan 
residents turned out to acquaint themselves with the new 
Saskatchewan — 13,000, Mr. Speaker, who were so fed up with 
the lack of opportunity in this province under the former 
government that they packed their bags and left. Now they are 
excited about Saskatchewan, and many are talking about coming 
home because they can see that initiative and opportunity is 
flourishing here once again in this province. 
 

Let’s just look at the Saskatchewan pavilion,. My colleague from 
Regina North mentioned the 10-storey tower that looks out over 
the whole panorama of Expo ’86 — symbolic, Mr. Speaker, of 
the new Saskatchewan attitude. We are looking to the whole 
world with confidence. We are showing our stuff, and we have a 
lot to show, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course, agriculture is the very foundation of our province, and 
that’s why this government is showing the whole world 
Saskatchewan’s pavilion in the form of a gigantic grain elevator. 
But we’re also much more. We have the largest reserves of 
potash of any jurisdiction in the world. And that’s why, when you 
travel down the tower, you will be shown the great story of 
Saskatchewan potash industry. 
 
We are at the forefront of many high technological fields, and 
one of them we show off — the largest fibre optics network in 
the world. And I say in the world, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
important that the world knows that we have these talents. We 
are inviting them to buy our products, and Expo shows them our 
products are number one. Whether it is the display and 
explanation of our world-standard agriculture or the exhibit of 
our mining capabilities, Mr. Speaker, we are number one. 
 
And I can think back, Mr. Speaker, in 1983 when I journeyed to 
Vienna, Austria, to attend the potash conference of the world of 
producers and marketers. And while over in Vienna, Mr. 
Speaker, we could not find anywhere a brochure or a pamphlet 
or any reading material about Saskatchewan. We saw it from all 
the other provinces, from Canada itself, but it was very obvious 
that Saskatchewan was lacking in its promotion of itself to the 
world markets. 
 
It is exciting to be a part of all this. And you should know, Mr. 
Speaker, that a lot of people are a part of it. The only way of the 
members opposite, the way of sending a few government friends 
and bureaucrats to represent Saskatchewan — that way is gone, 
Mr. Speaker. No, this government is working will all the people 
of the province. 
 
And my colleague mentioned the people that were going to be 
going to Expo ’86 to entertain. The Balfour Collegiate Dixieland 
band will be there representing Saskatchewan; the Prince Albert 
boys’ choir will be there; the Saskatoon Gabriel dancers will be 
there; and from my home town of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, the 100 
marching band will be there to entertain the visitors from around 
the world of their band-playing ability and their marching. 
 
We also have a class of 31 students from the Yorkdale Junior 
High School that are leaving shortly to spend some time at 
SaskExpo ’86. And on a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I found out 
last week that my daughter, Coralee, who is taking dancing in 
Toronto, will be performing at the pavilion in August. And 
needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be there to see Expo 
’86. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, have 6 to 800 artists and performers from every 
corner of the province who will be there,  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1108 
 

doing Saskatchewan proud. They are the heart and soul of our 
province, and they will help with the other parts of Expo to show 
the world that Saskatchewan is a fun place to live and a fun place 
to visit. 
 
Never before, Mr. Speaker, has such an effort gone into 
promoting Saskatchewan tourism. Never before, Mr. Speaker, 
has Saskatchewan ever even attended a world expo. No, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP would have no part of it, and today still would 
not have Saskatchewan there — very obvious from the comments 
from across the way while my colleague from Regina North was 
speaking. 
 
They say we should let the world come to us, that we should stay 
locked up in our houses, Mr. Speaker, and wait for the telephone 
to ring. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, prior to politics I was 
involved with a company that went out world-wide to sell our 
product. And I can assure you that you don’t sit behind your desk 
waiting for a telephone to ring. You get out and you sale your 
produce. You get out and you spend money. And I’ve been 
listening for four years of this tremendous visitation and holiday 
around the world that our ministers are taking. Let me tell you 
that it is done by going out and seeing the folks, talking to people, 
making them sure that they understand what you product’s all 
about; that you will service the product; that you will be there 
when you need the help that they need to sell our product, and so 
on. 
 
I made four trips to Australia, which I’m sure the members 
opposite would think that it was a paid holiday. Let me tell you, 
we worked. We attended the shows in Gundagai in New South 
Wales, and Orange County. We attended the world fairs in 
Algiers. We went to the SIMA exposium in Paris. And that’s the 
only way that you can get around to sell you product. They’re not 
going to come here and, as I say, let the phones ring and we’ll go 
out and sell you your product. You get out and work at it. And 
this business of holiday paid trips by the taxpayers have made me 
sick over the last four years, and I just can’t believe that the 
members opposite would even believe that business can come 
and trade can come with us sitting on our prats here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You will note, Mr. Speaker, that Manitoba is staying away from 
Expo. But Saskatchewan people are not afraid of working and 
playing on the world stage, because we have the resources, 
talents, and people second to no one in the world. And I say 
second to no one, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP should wake up and 
recognize that fact that that is so, that it isn’t an NDP 
Saskatchewan any more. That’s the difference. 
 
And we are finding out that people around the world realize that. 
The quiet and the humble farmer’s image is not what we are all 
about. We are a dynamic people about to face great challenges. 
From potash mines to fibre optics, from wheat fields to the 
Churchill River, this province has been put back into the hands 
of people. We have faith in our ability to create opportunity and 
to protect today as we build for the future. 
 
And how do we do that, Mr. Speaker? Does the government sit 
back and say, we know what is best for everyone. We don’t need 
the people. That’s the NDP  

way, and that is why they could never have built Saskatchewan 
and built the Saskatchewan pavilion. And we listen to the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This motion before us 
today shows the Devine government’s misplaced priorities. We 
could be debating issues of substance and importance to all the 
people of Saskatchewan, to farmers and to business men, but 
instead the PC government opposite — through their member 
who is running away from his seat in Regina North, the former 
small-business minister — is congratulating the Devine 
government for Expo ’86. 
 
But today Saskatchewan people are not primarily concerned 
about ’86 — Bill Bennett’s political ploy in B.C., Mr. Speaker. 
No, Saskatchewan people today are talking about the real issues 
facing farm families and working people. The real issues facing 
— like my seatmate is going to be talking about shortly, about 
Northerners — the real issue facing our small-business men and 
women in Saskatchewan. But does the government really believe 
. . . Do you really believe, in the depths of your heart, that 47,000 
unemployed people are going to live it up at Expo? Do you really 
believe that? Do you really believe that? 
 
Does the Devine government really believe that 62,000 
Saskatchewan people who are depending weekly on their welfare 
cheques, that they’re going to be living it up at Expo. And with 
the lowest grain prices since the ’30s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
Saskatchewan farmers planning to take a little holiday in Expo 
’86? Do you really believe that? 
 
I note that at its annual meeting the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce has expressed concern about the provincial deficit. 
What is the deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The actual deficit that 
this government has run up, like my colleague has said, $9 
billion, and yet Expo ’86 is the top priority. Expo ’86 is the 
priority. Where are your priorities? 
 
The other day we had a motion before this House and the priority 
was: let’s cheer Brian Mulroney. Today the priority is: let’s cheer 
Expo. Well I want to tell you, Brian Mulroney failed. Expo isn’t 
going to fail because it’s not up to Saskatchewan. Expo isn’t up 
to Saskatchewan. It’s a world show that’s going to go, and it’s 
not up to us whether this resolution is passing today or not. 
 
But we can, however, quite easily understand the Devine 
government’s interest in international trips and international 
junkets by their cabinet ministers . . . And the member that just 
sat down talked about his trips to Australia. He talked about 
where he went and how they are out to sell. And I can understand 
why he’d do that. I can understand why he’d do it, and I would 
just ask the member for . . . the Deputy Speaker to listen carefully 
because this has to do with your priority and with Expo. This has 
to do with the resolution before us. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1109 
 

In my constituency . . . And if the member from Moosomin 
would have as big a heart as he has a mouth, he would run again 
and help his people in Moosomin. But the member from 
Moosomin can yack away with his big mouth, sitting on his seat. 
 
But the people from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg describe this 
government in two ways: join the Devine cabinet and see the 
world; or they say, the Devine government is not here for a long 
time — they’re just here for a good time. And that’s why we have 
resolutions like this today, because all they’re thinking about is a 
good time. 
 
It’s hard to keep track of just how many international trips PC 
cabinet ministers have taken, and how this PC government is 
entertaining its fifth year. But there clearly have been well over 
70 such trips — places like Denver . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The trips that cabinet 
ministers have taken during the term of this government are not 
related to the motion before the House. And if you can relate the 
trips of the cabinet ministers in the past four years to the motion 
before the House, you may continue, but I don’t see that at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the time is so short. We have 
only 10 minutes. I have used some of that time already. And I 
want to tell you, you know what’s in this resolution; you pass it. 
I’m not going to read the resolution to you. 
 
But the two former speakers talked about showing off 
Saskatchewan, showing off and getting around and seeing 
Saskatchewan, and the important thing is to get out and to live it 
up. And that’s what this resolution is all about: let’s go to Expo 
and celebrate Saskatchewan — let’s live it up! 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are neglected. We can go to 
Denver, and we can go to Chicago, and we can go to Atlanta, 
New York, and Washington, and Hong Kong, and Paris, and 
London, Tokyo, Saudi Arabia — just to name a few. And they’re 
living it up like they want us to go to Expo and live it up. No 
wonder the Devine government does not want to answer any 
questions about international travel by ministers. They don’t 
want to talk about details like that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order! The 
member persists . . . Order! The member persists in talking about 
alleged trips cabinet ministers have taken to various parts of the 
world. It is not dealing with the motion before the House. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are wasting my time by 
always standing up. 
 
There are priorities of this government where we’re talking about 
Expo and celebrating, and the government is refusing to answer 
questions about how much money they’re spending on their 
celebrations. They refuse to answer questions about their 
international market consultants. They refuse to answer 
questions about all the  

things that are priorities to this government. 
 
But yes, we have a resolution before us to pat us on the back 
about Expo. I’ve got reservations to go to Expo, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I have reservations to go there, but I’m going there like 
I went to Montreal and like I went to Seattle and like I went to 
many world fairs. And it’s great to see a world fair. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that all members will agree that congratulating 
the Devine government for Expo ’86 in Vancouver is not what 
this Assembly should be spending its time on today. That’s all 
I’m saying. 
 
I am surprised and disappointed that this motion before us fails 
to deal with pressing economic problems facing Saskatchewan 
people. The Devine government’s economic policies and 
failures, which have made conditions so tough for small-business 
men in this province — and yet they want to congratulate 
themselves for Expo. They’ve made conditions tough. The 
Devine and Mulroney governments’ failure to address the grave 
problems of commodity prices — and yet we congratulate 
ourselves on Expo. 
 
I want to tell you that the deficit is a big problem in 
Saskatchewan. We should be discussing ways today on how to 
deal with the deficit, not on how to deal with a resolution like 
this. That’s the point I’m trying to make. And if you can’t see it, 
that’s why you’re in trouble in your seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. We’re not discussing the 
position of the Deputy Speaker in his riding, which, I might add, 
isn’t that bad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — If the member would stick to the 
motion being discussed, I would not have to rise to interject. 
Please stick to the motion being discussed, and I will allow you 
to speak freely. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you showed your priorities 
loud and clear. Our priorities are this: I want to move an 
amendment to this motion because we’re wasting the House’s 
time. And you know it, and I know it, that this is not a time for 
congratulations. 
 
On last week Friday we took the whole day to congratulate Brian 
Mulroney for bringing up wheat, which he never did. He never 
did. You took the whole time out. Today we’re taking the time 
again. We should be talking about a motion that I am moving, 
that’s going to be seconded by my colleague from Pelly: 
 

That all the word after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
That this Assembly regrets that the provincial government 
has placed a higher priority on international junkets by 
cabinet ministers than on addressing the major economic 
problems facing Saskatchewan people today, including 
unfair taxes (to the member of Consumer Affairs), unfair  

  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1110 
 

taxes, including jobs, and the financial crisis facing farm 
families and small business. 

 
That’s what the debate is all about today, Mr. Speaker. This 
House is here for a reason, not to pat ourselves on the back and 
paint what a great time we’re going to have. We’ll all have it, 
anyhow. 
 
I move this motion, and I know my colleague, the member for 
Pelly, is going to second it, and I’m sorry that you interrupted me 
so many times through this little talk because that’s what’s the 
topic today. This is what’s before it today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And if you want to stand up in this House and brag how safe your 
seat is, you haven’t been following Gordon MacMurchy around. 
Because I want to tell you . . . I want to tell you this is what’s the 
issue today. 
 
I’m glad to have the privilege of moving this motion today, and 
I know we’ll get back on topic when we have the good motion 
before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The hon. member 
had already taken his seat. He can’t get back up again and speak 
on the same motion. The Hon. member knows it. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known rule of this House that 
members are not to drag the Chair into the debate, and that has 
happened on three different occasions from the NDP opposition 
— a flagrant breech of the rules, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to either take 
the opportunity to defend the Chair, which you have every right 
to do, or in the future bring the rules to the attention of the NDP 
opposition that seem to have forgotten all about them and are 
flagrantly abusing the privileges of this House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I would like to speak to that point of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, after that volley of 
attack on the position of the Speaker by the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, as trying to instruct you how to carry out 
your duties, I find it amazing that you would stand for that from 
that individual. But it’s not unusual. With this arrogant 
government, to try to push the Speaker around is not surprising. 
 
But I would just say that the issue that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was referring to . . . I watched the 
proceedings and I noticed the Deputy Speaker say, on his feet, 
that he was not in bad shape in his constituency. And I would just 
ask you for a ruling on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether or not 
you find your comments as to how you are doing politically in 
your seat, from that Chair, is appropriate or not. I think that’s the 
point of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I’ve listened to the points of order, and 
I would thank both sides of the House for their concern about the 
position of the Chair, and that it be unimpeachable, and that it be 
protected. And I thank them for their concern. In the future I 
believe all parties should be very careful in the remarks they 
make in their speeches. 
 
The motion before the House . . . 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, an entirely different point of order 
that was brought up earlier. The amendment as read into the 
record by the member from Assiniboia, in my . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I must interrupt the 
member as the motion must be put, and after the motion is put he 
will have an opportunity to raise his point of order. But the 
motion is as follows: 
 
Moved by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and 
seconded by the member for Pelly: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
regrets that the provincial government has placed a higher 
priority on international junkets by cabinet ministers than 
on addressing the major economic problems facing 
Saskatchewan people today, including unfair taxes, jobs, 
and the financial crisis facing farm families and small 
business. 

 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my point of order is that 
the amendment as put forward by the member from Gravelbourg 
has absolutely nothing to do with the motion that’s now under 
rule 16. It has nothing to do with the pith and substance of Expo. 
It’s to do with other matters whatsoever. And if, Mr. Speaker, 
this were to be allowed, it would allow people to put things on to 
rule 16, on to motions before the House, without complying with 
the rules that are required, the notifications and the printing of 
rules. 
 
So to allow this amendment, Mr. Speaker, that has absolutely 
nothing to do, and no relevance whatsoever to do with the motion 
before the House, i.e. Expo, would allow people to circumvent 
the rules and put things under rule 16 . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would the House please 
calm down. I’m having difficulty hearing the member raising a 
point of order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — With the member for Moosomin yelling 
in your ear, it’s no wonder. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — There are more members than that who 
are causing an uproar in this House. So let’s just have some quiet, 
please. 
 
Mr. Young: — The point I was trying to make, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that the amendment is out of order. And I suggest, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is out of order for the  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1111 
 

following reason: it has absolutely nothing to do with any bit of 
the pith and substance of rule 16, as printed in the blues, which 
deals with Expo. The amendment has to do with other things 
totally unrelated to what we have printed in rule 16. 
 
And if the Chair were to allow this amendment to pass, in my 
suggestion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would be allowing people 
to put things onto the blues without going through the hoops that 
one has to go to to get things onto the blues. And in that it has 
nothing to do with the printed rule 16, I suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is entirely out of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I have listened to the member’s point 
of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here the 
amendment that was moved to the main motion. And I just say 
to you that it’s not dissimilar from amendments that have been 
moved by the Conservative MLAs in the past. It’s been a 
tradition to be able to move this type of an amendment. And I 
want to quote from it: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
regrets that the provincial government has placed a high 
priority on international junkets of cabinet ministers. 

 
I don’t know what could be more relevant to the debate. Cabinet 
ministers spending over a million dollars last year to Air Canada, 
I’ll tell you, is an issue. It’s more of an issue than whether or not 
we’re going to Expo. 
 
And I want to go to Expo; my kids want to go to Expo. But for 
gosh sakes, I don’t know whether we should spend the time of 
the Assembly discussing what our holidays this summer are. And 
the amendment that was moved talks about addressing the major 
economic problems of Saskatchewan, including unfair taxes. 
And we’ve had the used vehicle tax that was imposed by this 
government, the flat tax, and the removal of the property 
improvement grant. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, if you ask the farmers in my constituency which 
is more relevant, the amendment or whether or not I’m going to 
Expo — and I’d like to go; I don’t know whether I’ll be able to 
afford to or not — but I don’t know how it is important to the 
economic development of this province whether or not I’m going 
to Expo, which is what the members over there are cheer-leading 
about. 
 
The member who was from Regina North and is now from 
Regina South gets up and cheers about how he’s going to Expo. 
Well good for that individual, good for him. He will have lots of 
time after the June election to go to Expo. But I don’t how we’re 
wasting the time of this Assembly to decide his travel plans for 
the summer. That’s why the amendment that was moved by my 
colleague that talks about political junkets, a million dollars to 
Air Canada last year, is perfectly in order. 
 
And you raised the point of order; now you don’t want to talk 
about it. Well I say to you, as you yell from your seat,  

that we will not be stopped from moving amendments. And what 
is happening here is that we have a massive majority government 
attempting to stop the opposition from moving amendments to 
motions, a motion that says and talks about going to Expo. And 
we’re not against Expo. Everybody wants to go to Expo. But how 
do you explain using the taxpayers’ money — and it’s been 
increased a number of times — to pay this Assembly to discuss 
our travel plans . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Souris-Cannington is yelling at the Deputy Speaker, how 
long are you going to let them talk? Well they can’t muzzle the 
opposition. They’ve tried to over and over again, and we’re going 
to be debating this amendment because I think it’s perfectly 
within order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order raised 
by the member for Saskatoon Eastview, and I must inform the 
House that I find that, according to the traditions of this 
Assembly, the amendment to the motion is in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Will you please allow the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to begin his remarks. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It appears to 
me that the NDP are all of a sudden against Expo ’86, as they’ve 
been against everything else and flip-flopping all over this 
province. I would like to say and suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the paint is still peeling off the walls in this 
Assembly from the member from Assiniboia and his colleagues, 
the members from Shaunavon and the Quill Lakes. 
 
I’d like to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
today is one of the most talked about provinces in Canada and, 
indeed, throughout the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to say that, and I want to follow it up 
through the fact that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the first time in the 
history of Saskatchewan we’ve partaken in a world’s exposition 
— for the first time in Saskatchewan history. And I would like to 
indicate to you that people from all over Saskatchewan are totally 
excited, because as they travel to Expo . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m having difficulty listening 
to the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and I’m sure other 
members must be too. I ask once again for order in the House. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m glad that you 
could finally quiet down the members of the NDP. 
 
I would like to say that the people in my riding, and indeed 
throughout Saskatchewan, are totally excited about being able 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there they go again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they’re cutting into my speaking time here. 
I’ve sat here quietly. I’ve listened to the members of the 
opposition speak, and  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1112 
 

now they won’t let me speak in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are you going to allot me some extra time, 
or are you going to quiet down the other side of the House? Thank 
you. 
 
Anyway, getting back to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
say that throughout Saskatchewan the people, as they go to 
British Columbia, as they travel to British Columbia and they get 
to visit the Expo site, they are going to be proud to be able to 
identify themselves with the fact that Saskatchewan has 
participated in one of the largest shows that ever occur in the 
world, one of the . . . 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member from 
Regina North West to please keep quiet. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — You talk about children. I would like to say 
that there’s some of these people in the Assembly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . Never mind. I won’t get into it. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s to a point where I think that 
as these people travel through the exposition in Vancouver, that 
they are going to be thrilled to be able to identify that we are from 
Saskatchewan, we were from Saskatchewan, and we are 
participating on the world scene. I think that is one of the most 
lucrative measures that any province could ever take, is to 
participate in such a large screen. 
 
I’d like to say that the members opposite . . . The member from 
Assiniboia said that we’ve misplaced the priorities of this 
province. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to the 
priorities, I would genuinely think that from the cost reductions 
to farm inputs that we’ve been able to — and it’s going to tie into 
Expo — that we’ve been able to pass on to our farmer friends, 
they are going to be able to take time off to travel to Expo and to 
take part in seeing what we are trying to do as a government and 
as private corporations, trying to sell Saskatchewan so that the 
world will know from one commodity to the other, and which 
ties in the abundance of agriculture, that it will indeed benefit all 
of the people of Saskatchewan. I would like to say that when the 
member from Assiniboia indicated that people in Saskatchewan 
are not interested in Expo ’86, I would tend to think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that he ought to go home and talk to the people of his 
riding, and he ought to travel around Saskatchewan, and he ought 
to talk to the people of . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is quite aware that terms such as “lying” 
are unparliamentary and not to be used, even if they are not on 
their feet at the time. And I caution the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that the next time he will be on his feel 
apologizing to the House if he persists. 
 
Please rise now and apologize. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You said next time. But I was trying to draw to 
the member’s attention that I didn’t say that. The record will 
prove. But I said he was lying so as to get your attention. Because 
I was hollering across the floor that I  

didn’t say the people of Saskatchewan don’t want to go to Expo. 
I never said that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I find the member’s explanation 
incredible, and that he would state to the House that he would 
call somebody a liar in order to get the Chair’s attention — I 
completely refute that type of action, and I ask the member not 
ever to carry on those kind of remarks again in this House. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, accusations such as 
the member had made towards me . . . I probably would remind 
the people that they can read back into the . . . because as he was 
speaking I was writing, and I have it word for word what he said, 
so they can read the Hansard. 
 
I would like to say that people of Saskatchewan, as I talk to the 
school children in my riding, they’re ecstatic. They’re telling me, 
you know, mom and dad and I, we’re all heading to Expo this 
summer. Well you know, that to me, when I can look back into 
the ’60s when Expo was in Montreal, that’s when we were 
children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And by gosh, some of us could 
not get to Expo, and I was one of them. 
 
I’m excited now. I’m excited now about going to the Expo in 
Vancouver. And I hope that as many, many children, and as many 
parents can take their children, and as many other individuals in 
the province can take advantage of seeing this great exposition. 
It not only creates an interest, but they can bring back the 
information to the ones that were not able to get away. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Expo is going to 
create a great economic spin-off for Saskatchewan, not only for 
what’s happening in Vancouver itself. But I want to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that from the east coast to the NDP Manitoba, I 
want to say that through the initiatives of this government, by 
eliminating the tax on clothing, the gasoline tax and everything 
else, people are going to take their time to travel through our 
province, are going to take the time to stop and buy clothing. You 
know, I can remember, as people were travelling back and forth, 
the only stop anybody would really make mention was that they 
would stop in Alberta to buy clothes, etc., because they didn’t 
have to pay the E&H tax in the provinces. 
 
But this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has taken that 
initiative for all these Expo people, these Expo travellers, to be 
able to travel through this province to enjoy the less tax, the less 
tax . . . Oh, what’s the word I’m looking for? It’s just a 
phenomenal feeling that they have, that they’re just going to feel 
great about it. 
 
I know that in NDP Manitoba right now, as they’re travelling 
through, the businesses are advertising in their local papers and 
they’re saying, Expo travellers, as you’re travelling through, stop 
and shop at our stores. You know, they’re excited. They want to 
sell more goods. And they’re advertising even the tax-free, the 5 
per cent tax-free on clothing. 
 
This is the excitement this kind of thing is creating. I’d like to 
say that the NDP have never participated in an expo before. 
They’d never have thought of it. You see, Mr.  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1113 
 

Deputy Speaker, that’s excitement. That breeds excitement, you 
know. And when the member from Assiniboia said that we did 
nothing for farmers, and we did nothing for small business — 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, eliminating the gasoline tax, 
eliminating the tax on clothing, that means that people can travel 
to Expo. That puts extra dollars in their pockets. You see? 
 
So when it comes to the fact of the economic spin-offs to this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it does mean that the people from 
the East Coast through Manitoba, as they travel through this 
province and they’re going and when they end up in Vancouver, 
they’re going to be able to tell the people in Vancouver just 
exactly what Saskatchewan is all about. They’re going to be able 
to tell the people that Saskatchewan is one of the prime provinces 
to travel through in Canada. 
 
I would like to say that the NDP are ashamed, and that’s why 
they yell so much across the floor. They’re ashamed that they . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I must interrupt the member; his 
time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
to the members opposite talking about Expo, help using the time 
of this House to debate something that could very easily be 
debated outside of the House. They can use the press releases that 
they use every other time to try and promote their pavilion at 
Expo. We should be using the time of this House to deal with 
some legislation and some economic programs for the province 
of Saskatchewan. But no, we deal with Expo. 
 
They have spent throughout the country hundreds of thousands 
of dollars to promote Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member from Pelly 
is attempting to make some remarks to the Assembly and is 
finding it very difficult with the decibel level, particularly to my 
left. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, they 
have spent hundreds of thousands of dollars. They have in place 
international marketing consultants that are there to promote 
Saskatchewan and the products that we have here. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what this government is doing. And they have people 
in place to do that. 
 
But today they use up the time of this House, saying that 
somehow Expo is going to do all the things that are necessary for 
this province, somehow it is going to improve our economic 
situation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that many people 
believe that. I don’t think that very many people really believe 
that. 
 
I listened to some of the members, and the member from Yorkton 
talked about all the things that this province has done and how 
they have to promote that at Expo. And he talked about potash 
and how when you go up in the elevator they’ll be showing you 
something about potash in there. And he talked about fibre optics, 
and he says that we are number one in the world. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are number one in the world. We were, 
under the New Democrats, because we didn’t need Expo to 
promote fibre optics or potash. People were well aware of what 
Saskatchewan was capable of, and what we had in this province. 
They were well aware of that, Mr. Speaker, and we didn’t need 
Expo to do our promotion for us. 
 
But they have chose to use Expo to promote some of the things 
that have been in place here for years. That’s what they’re using 
Expo for now. Instead of going out and selling some of the 
products that we have and use some of the consultants that they 
have out there and make sure that we improve the benefits for 
Saskatchewan people, they don’t use those consultants. They 
don’t use the different avenues that are available to them, but they 
use Expo. They have spent millions of dollars to put up a pavilion 
at Expo to try and promote Saskatchewan, and promote mainly 
things that have been in place before this government came to 
office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the members have criticized Manitoba for 
not being part of Expo or not having a pavilion there. Well, I 
suppose Manitoba made a conscious decision. They made a 
decision saying that what we need is some economic benefits in 
our province, and we can’t necessarily improve that by going to 
Expo and spending millions of dollars at Expo to build a pavilion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are others that agree with Manitoba, 
because when you look at what the Royal Bank says about 
Manitoba, I think you will find that Manitoba has made the right 
decision, given the economic situation that they’re in, mainly 
because of the Tory government that was there previous to them. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Royal Bank says that Manitoba is 
expected to lead the nation in economic growth during the 
10-year period, followed by Ontario and Quebec. Manitoba is 
going to lead in the 10-year period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they have decided that their 
priority is going to be to improve the economic situation in 
Manitoba. And that’s the area that they have been working on, 
and that’s what they have done. They have made that decision, 
and I agree with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We today in this province are $2 billion in debt in the 
Consolidated Fund. Our total debt, what the Crown corporations 
which this government has built up, is almost $9 billion. Prior to 
’82, our total debt in this province was only 3.3 billion, and now 
it is almost $9 billion. And they are saying the most important 
thing to deal with in this House today is Expo — Expo. That’s 
what this House has to do today. That is the most important thing 
that we could be doing in this House today. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that many people in Saskatchewan 
disagree. They talk about us saying that people don’t want to go 
to Expo. Well, Mr. Speaker, I  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1114 
 

disagree with them, because I think there are people that want to 
go to Expo. And I don’t say that they shouldn’t. If they can afford 
to, I say they should go to it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, how many people in this province will not be 
able to afford to go to Expo? How many people, because of the 
government that’s been in this province for the last four years, 
are going to have to say, we can’t go to Expo? We won’t be able 
to go to Expo, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague was trying to give me more 
information on just how serious a problem we do have in this 
province. And I think it is a serious problem because there are 
many farmers that won’t be able to go to Expo. They have had to 
borrow money and they are on the verge of going bankrupt, and 
they aren’t going to be able to go to Expo. There are thousands 
and thousands of people in this province that are unemployed 
because of the poor work-make projects of this government, that 
they will certainly not be able to go to Expo. All the people that 
are on welfare — doubled in this province since ’82 — they will 
not be able to go to Expo. 
 
So there are many people in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
certainly will not be able to take advantage of Expo. And those 
people are probably wishing that those millions of dollars that 
this government spent on the pavilion at Expo would be better 
spent to try and improve the situation right here at home in our 
own province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what this government should be doing. But 
no, they say that somehow Expo and the pavilion there is a lot 
more important. 
 
Some of the members would be well advised to look at what 
really is happening in this province, and what the situation really 
is, what is happening to small business. Many of the 
small-business people are finding it difficult, and they are finding 
it very difficult especially in the last four years. They are at a 
point today where if the economy of this province doesn’t 
improve then they are going to have to be forced into bankruptcy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a sorry day in this province when 
we allow a lot of our small businesses to where they get to that 
situation. 
 
That is happening with small business; it’s happening with 
farmers. It is happening with people that are unemployed where 
they have difficulties feeding their families. And yet, what do we 
find as the very important issue in this House today? Not how we 
can improve the economy of this province; not how we can keep 
the tourists here spending money; not how we get the people 
employed that are unemployed. We should be putting these 
people to work. 
 
If we put those people to work, that would bring back to this 
province a lot more money than Expo or any pavilion at Expo 
ever will. But no, they won’t address those problems and they 
won’t address the issues that are serious at this point. 
 
And they won’t address the solutions that are very obvious, Mr. 
Speaker. They are very obvious because we have given some of 
the solutions to them. We have told them what should be done. 
We told them that we need  

work for our young people. We have to create jobs for them so 
that when they get out of university they have somewhere to go; 
that they don’t have to go into the welfare lines in order to survive 
or go back to their parents and beg for them to look after them. 
 
These are educated people that should have the opportunity to get 
ahead, to find a job and advance themselves in this society. But 
no, Mr. Speaker, it seems that the food banks and the soup 
kitchens are what this province would like to see, and what this 
government would like to see in Saskatchewan. And that’s been 
happening over the last four years. And I think that’s something 
that we should not accept at all in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the member that his time 
has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure 
that I enter this debate. One a personal note, I’ll be fortunate 
enough to be able to attend Expo this summer. 
 
But I think we must draw our minds to what this motion is. It 
annoys me, Mr. Speaker, how the NDP can pervert a motion so 
terribly as this one. The motion before the Assembly is 
commending the Government of Saskatchewan on its foresight 
and initiative in ensuring that Saskatchewan will have a major 
role in Expo. The NDP try to pervert that into an issue as to who’s 
going to Expo or not. 
 
Well certainly there will be people, as the member from Pelly 
points out, who won’t financially be able to afford to go to Expo. 
And I imagine, Mr. Speaker, that back in 1967 there were people 
who were unable to afford to go to the exposition in Montreal, 
but that certainly has nothing to do as to the righteousness of 
having the exposition. And to try to make the issue as to what 
people are going to be doing in their summer vacations is 
certainly not the issue, and is certainly not the motion that’s 
printed on the blues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that Expo is going to be a wonderful event and I think that 
our government must be commended, as the motion reads, in 
being a major participant in Expo. There have been 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker, beyond our control, that are going 
to make Expo, in my submission, a bigger event than what was 
anticipated even a matter of six months ago. 
 
We have the terrorism situation and instability in Europe which 
is going to result in many more Americans coming to Vancouver 
for exposition then would have likely been there had the situation 
in Europe and the Mideast not blown up as it has. We have just 
last night, Mr. Speaker, two inches of rain throughout most of 
southern Saskatchewan — it tapered off as you go north — and 
that, Mr. Speaker, is going to result, in my submission, in more 
people from this province going to Expo. And in the end, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s going to be a bigger event then what was 
anticipated. 
 
I listened, Mr. Speaker, on my tractor with some pride on May 
2nd, when CBC broadcast live the opening  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1115 
 

ceremonies of Expo. And I noted, Mr. Speaker, the comments of 
the broadcasters as to the warm reception that the Prince of Wales 
and the Princess of Wales received when they opened the 
exposition. And I noted, Mr. Speaker, with some disgust here in 
the House, and it really bothers me — I know the background 
from which I come from, and a lot of my constituents have 
considerable respect for the monarchy — and when the member 
for Regina North East made mention in his remarks, when he 
spoke earlier than me that the fair had been opened by His 
Highness, the Prince of Wales, and the Princess of Wales, the 
members from the NDP . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. The member 
referred to the member from Regina North East as having said 
something in the debate. I have not yet spoken in this debate. I 
intend to if they give us the opportunity, but I have not yet had 
an opportunity to do that. So I think he should withdraw what he 
said. 
 
Mr. Young: — If I may speak to that point of order. It’s 
conceded I meant Mr. Klein, the member from Regina North. He 
was the one that spoke, and if I misnamed the seat, is was a 
Progressive Conservative member of the House, the member 
from Regina North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the House to come 
to order. There’s just so much conversation that it’s impossible 
to hear. 
 
Mr. Young: — As I was point out, Mr. Speaker, he . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I was listening with interest to the debate 
and the member from Saskatoon was referring to the member for 
Regina North East, talking about an attack on the monarchy. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, to get this little issue straight here, 
the member from Regina North, the former minister of Tourism 
and Small Business, mentioned in his remarks on this motion that 
the fair had been opened by His Royal Highness, the Prince of 
Wales, and the Princess of Wales, to which, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, particularly the member from Athabasca and 
the member from Pelly . . . Cumberland, mentioned “big deal.” 
They said, “big deal.” That’s what they said from their seats, Mr. 
Speaker, and that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think that both sides are being a little 
touchy on the issue and I would ask you to get on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Young: — In any event, Mr. Speaker, I for one am proud 
that the royal couple took it upon themselves to open up Expo 
and if that is not the position of the members opposite, so be it. 
I’ll get on to another topic. 
 

But I think that that is something that bothers me. And it deals 
with Expo, and their position on Expo and on the monarchy is 
something that I just can’t imagine. 
 
The question is, Mr. Speaker, if there had been an NDP 
government in this province, would we be participating at all, or 
in any event to the extent to which we are in Expo in Vancouver? 
And I think that it’s very clear that we wouldn’t be. We can get 
that from how the NDP government in Manitoba is participating 
in Expo and the reaction of the NDP members of this legislature, 
what they think about Expo. They don’t even want to talk about 
it. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we can be very, very proud of our 
participation in that event, and it is something that is certainly 
going to benefit Saskatchewan. 
 
Tourism is our second largest industry in this province, and if we 
can in any way make Saskatchewan a tourist destination by our 
activities at our Expo pavilion, then the benefits that we will be 
reaping over the long term from our participation in Expo will 
well pay the cost of our pavilion at that exposition fair. 
 
Certainly I think for many years to come, Mr. Speaker, that 
American tourists — and we must remember that they have 10 
times the population we do — are going to be looking more and 
more to Canada as a tourist destination because of the instability 
and the terrorism that’s taking place in other areas of the world. 
 
I think for a long time to come, Mr. Speaker, that that giant pool 
of tourists re going to be looking towards Canada. And if we can 
take this opportunity in Vancouver to point out the benefits of a 
summer vacation in Saskatchewan, those people coming up here 
will provide us with so much more benefit than we’re going to 
receive from our costs of our pavilion in Vancouver that we will 
long reap the benefits of that investment. And again, the foresight 
of our government in participating in such a large way in Expo 
must certainly be commended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I must say as well, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very proud to be a 
citizen of a country like Canada and a province like 
Saskatchewan, of the peaceful nature where we can hold such an 
event and not run the risks that I think would be inherent in 
having such an event in many, many other countries of the world. 
We’re one of the few countries left, Mr. Speaker, that can hold 
an event such as this with moderate security precautions that I’m 
sure will be required. 
 
I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the organizer of 
Expo, the chairman, Jim Pattison, is a former Saskatchewan 
resident. He’s from Luseland, Saskatchewan, and for all the 
people from the Luseland area, I must congratulate you all for 
providing Canada with that individual, and him and his efforts in 
putting on Expo under budget are certainly something that also 
must be commended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the flip-flop that we see the NDP . . . 
Expo, I predict, is going to be a smashing success and 
undoubtedly the NDP will then come onside and say, well, we 
were for it all the time. But if we look, Mr. Speaker, we see that 
the NDP Skelly, and the mayor of  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1116 
 

Vancouver, who is a former NDP member, what their position 
on Expo was and it was very negative. They fought it tooth and 
nail all the way. Even to this very late date, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
in British Columbia are boycotting and downplaying and bad 
mouthing the exposition. These birds here are singing the same 
song to this date. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, are they going to see the light, that it’s going 
to be a smashing success and come onside and support this very 
worthwhile exposition and a very worthwhile showcase for 
Saskatchewan and all of the resources and talents that we have 
available here. I think it’s sad, Mr. Speaker, to see how they can 
be so slow to come onto side on such a marvellous thing as what 
will be taking place this summer in Expo. 
 
(1630) 
 
Expo, as many of us know, Mr. Speaker, have broke records in 
the number of participants. Certainly we don’t have Manitoba; 
we don’t have Poland; we don’t have Russia. We don’t have a lot 
of backward-thinking countries participating, but all in all, Mr. 
Speaker, there are 54 international participants in Expo which is 
going to make it one of the largest fairs available. 
 
I went Mr. Speaker . . . I had the fortune two summers ago to — 
on my own nickel, I might add — go to the world’s fair in New 
Orleans, Louisiana. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the American 
states that participated in the world’s fair in New Orleans did well 
by it. I remember the pavilions of Mississippi, and I remember 
the pavilions of Texas. There were certain states who didn’t 
participate, Mr. Speaker, and I think that those states were the 
losers, as I think, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan would be a loser if 
we had an NDP government and we weren’t participating in this 
particular exhibition. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba in the long run is going to be a 
loser by not participating in Expo ’86, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned, the American tourists are having fewer and fewer 
places that they can go for their summer vacation. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that when we get right down to it, the circumstances that 
I say are beyond our control, that are going to bring about a high 
attendance at Expo, particularly the rainfall that we’ve had in the 
last couple of days . . . I know, Mr. Speaker, your own town of 
Rosetown didn’t do very well, but others did. 
 
What we have to do, Mr. Speaker, at Expo is to promote 
Saskatchewan as second to none in resources, products, 
capabilities, and people. We have to invite, through the auspices 
of Expo, people to come to Saskatchewan as a final tourist 
destination. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that having been at 
Vancouver and British Columbia for Expo, looking at our 
pavilions, it’s unlikely that in 1987 they’ll go back to the same 
province again. And certainly, trying to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It’s my duty to 
inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me today to get involved in this debate on a motion 
put forward by the Conservative government  

and an amendment offered by my colleague from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
I want to must make a short statement to you, Mr. Speaker, to 
you and to the House, about the statement that the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview just made about my colleague from 
Cumberland and myself, insinuating that we said from our seats 
derogatory words directed at the monarchy. I don’t know for 
sure, Mr. Speaker, whether that statement is worthy of comment, 
but I do say that it’s derogatory and it’s a slanderous statement, 
and I just leave it up to him whether he wants to apologize or not. 
 
We’re here today debating Expo ’86, and I want to say that I’m 
very proud to be a part of Canada and taking part in Expo ’86. 
And when I hear statements coming across the floor that we have 
a province, Manitoba, that has not taken part, Mr. Speaker, in 
Expo ’86, I want to say that it’s not just Manitoba that does not 
have a pavilion there. There are other provinces in Canada that 
do not have pavilions. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad in the name of unity — and 
we all talk about Canadian unity; we talk about regionalism — 
and I just say that it would be a lot better as far as I am concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure my constituents would agree with me, 
that we have one pavilion, a Canadian pavilion. We don’t have 
to have every province out there trying to outdo each other. Each 
province and the two territories can be a part of the Canadian 
pavilion. And I just wish that that would have taken place and 
that we could have had a Canadian pavilion with the 10 provinces 
involved, and the two territories, and we could show the type of 
unity that we have in this province. Not disunity; we want unity. 
And that’s what Expo is all about . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — . . . is to bring all the world countries 
together in one large pavilion and to try and show the world that 
we are all the same and that we can work together. 
 
But what does Canada do? And that’s why we have this major 
argument in here today. We hear all the disruption that we’ve had 
today over the pavilion that’s been set up by Saskatchewan in 
Expo. Well let me tell you, if we would have had one pavilion, 
and if all the 10 provinces and the two territories would have been 
involved with Canada . . . We see all the massive advertising 
that’s going across this nation, and it’s done by the Canadian 
government. And it could all be done by one, in the name of 
unity. But let me tell you, when I see the type of disunity that I 
have seen in this House today, the type of arguments that have 
gone back and forth, the type of accusations that have been 
brought into the House — especially the last one by the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview against my colleague from 
Cumberland and myself from our seats — I think that that takes 
away disunity. That destroys what Canada is really all about. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in the short time that I have left, 
that I have a number of my constituents, and I know my colleague 
from Cumberland has, up in northern Saskatchewan — senior 
citizens, students, and the like,  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1117 
 

who have been saving their money, who have been working on 
projects just so they can go down to Expo ’86 in Vancouver, so 
that they can take that trip. And they’ve worked hard and their 
parents have worked hard to pay for these tickets. And they’re 
proud of that. 
 
But I only wish, Mr. Speaker, that all of my constituents and all 
of my colleagues from Cumberland and all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan would have an opportunity, not only to see the 
displays in Vancouver that’s put up by Canada and the provinces, 
but the displays that are there from all over the world. 
 
I know they will remain, and they will have an opportunity, 
hopefully in years to come. But I think that that’s important that 
the citizens of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to go to Expo 
’86 and to have a look at just what’s there, what all the world 
expositions look like and how they’re operated and to see the 
different types of individuals who are going to be looking after 
the displays and the talent that comes from all countries. 
 
And I know that Saskatchewan is going to be involved, and I 
know that the citizens of Manitoba are going to be going to Expo, 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of whether they have a pavilion there or 
not. They’re going to be going. They’re taking part. They’re part 
of Canada. So to stand up in the House and suggest that just 
because Manitoba didn’t spend their money to set up a separate 
pavilion, to suggest that they won’t be taking part in Expo, I think 
is wrong. Because I know that they will be, and I know citizens 
from Manitoba who are planning to go out there. So I think that’s 
wrong. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I have many constituents in 
my constituency that would love to be able to go out to Expo ’86 
if they only had the opportunity to go, if they only had an 
opportunity to go. And there is so many of them in northern 
Saskatchewan in my constituency that do not have a job and do 
not have the type of money that it takes to go out to Expo. 
 
I know a lot of them are working on it, and there’s going to be 
many trips taken this year by constituents of mine. But there are 
many of them that will not be able to go because of the regional 
disparity that we have in our country. And I think that that just 
goes to show you the type of, not only regional disparity that we 
have in Canada, but right here in our own province. 
 
I know it’s going to be a lot easier for the citizens who are living 
down in Regina to be able to go to Expo than it is for the citizens, 
the senior citizens and the students who are living up North, close 
to the Northwest Territories in Stony Rapids and Black Lake and 
Fond-du-Lac and places like that. It’s going to be tough, Mr. 
Speaker, for those citizens up there to be able to take part in Expo 
’86. And I know that they all want to. Thanks to the television 
media they will have an opportunity to see what’s going on down 
there. But that’s as close as a large percentage of them are ever 
going to get to it because of the fact that they just haven’t got the 
type of funding, and they live in a geographical region of our 
province that costs so much money to be able to get out to Expo 
’86 and to Vancouver. 
 
I was sad to see this House, today, when we were  

debating such an important issue, Mr. Speaker, get into such 
turmoil and such arguments and political slander thrown across 
the floor. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that here we are, we have a 
motion that it says that Expo ’86 is there, you want to 
congratulate Saskatchewan for taking part in it. 
 
We feel with our amendment that more priority should be put on 
providing jobs for the citizens of Saskatchewan. We feel that 
there should be more priority to solving the crisis that many 
families and small-business men and farmers and Northerners 
alike are having today. That’s why we put this amendment in. 
 
And I think that that’s our job as an opposition, to make that very 
clear, that that was our role here today, Mr. Speaker. It most 
certainly wasn’t here to get into the role of slandering one another 
and all the shots that were being thrown across the floor. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for having the 
opportunity to take part in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank my 
colleagues as well; it’s nice to be appreciated once in a while. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re always appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m not always appreciated, contrary to 
what they’re saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Expo is an important event. I’m very pleased that 
Saskatchewan is there. I’m also very pleased that when I take my 
children there this summer that I’ll be able to say to them, there 
is the Saskatchewan pavilion, and they will recognize it although 
they’re only seven and four years old. They will recognize it right 
off the spot because it looks like a grain elevator, and they know 
a grain elevator. What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that what we 
are doing at Expo from Saskatchewan’s point of view is 
something that we can be proud of. 
 
And if I have any disappointment at all, it’s that I’m afraid that 
the pavilion isn’t going to be big enough, and that we 
underestimated the popularity of our pavilion. I understand that 
the tower will elevate 250 people per hour, and I predict that there 
will be line-ups through the entire summer because it will be one 
of the most popular pavilions in the Expo site. 
 
Now when we planned for Saskatchewan, we planned for the 
best, but we didn’t realize at all that our pavilion would be so 
popular and so well though of. I forecast that the line-ups will be 
phenomenal, and I hope to get through that line-up and see it, as 
thousands of other people will. 
 
Now with respect to why we should be so proud: it’s because it 
is a joint effort of all of Saskatchewan. The taxpayers have paid 
$6.5 million, and initially I wondered if it was worth it, and now, 
as I indicated, I think we should have spent double that because 
we’re going to get double our money out of it. And in addition,  
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1118 
 

it’s a world showcase. Not only is it something to be proud of, 
but that $6.5 million will come back to Saskatchewan tenfold. 
Not only that, my colleagues opposite who don’t like business, 
big or small, who don’t like trade . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
members that the time allotted has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 8 — Promotion of Positive Image of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I plan at the 
conclusion of my remarks to move a motion respecting 
Economic Development and Trade and Tourism and Small 
Business promoting Saskatchewan, and it’s going to be seconded 
by the member from The Battlefords. 
 
In dealing with a number of aspects as it relates to these two 
departments in dealing with the economic development in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I want to take and just briefly put into 
perspective a couple of things that deal with this kind of a motion. 
 
First of all, I believe that what we have done in this province that 
relates to small business and economic development: we have 
offered in a sense a degree of protection for the small-business 
operators. 
 
The second thing that I want to discuss is how we have improved 
the opportunity, through the various departments of government, 
for business in Saskatchewan to develop a greater accountability 
by the people of government in relation to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
And how does this come about, Mr. Speaker? This comes about 
because of a very concise, precise demonstration of leadership. 
And I believe in this government today we have a Premier that 
leads this province as a very energetic, dynamic type of person, 
and I believe that that is a part of the essence of who 
Saskatchewan is and what they are. 
 
I want to outline some of the things that we have done and are 
doing in relation to the economic development of the province, 
dealing with the small-business aspect and how it relates to 
various other areas. I want to just dwell on these briefly. 
 
There is probably in Saskatchewan in the rural community one 
of the most economic diversified types of items taking place each 
year as we have been a government in this province, and that’s 
the aspect of natural gas distribution. We have, as the Deputy 
Premier announced today, just had an extension into the 
underground cable for electrical services, for single-line service, 
and I think that that’s an exceptional kind of a program. 
 
Another area that we have taken a serious look at — a Crown 
corporation to do things in Saskatchewan — is  

SaskTel providing an underground buried cable in the province. 
What has this done for economic activity in the province, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s clear to the people of Weyburn, it’s clear to the 
people in Moose Jaw, that it has a direct economic benefit to 
them. Besides, Mr. Speaker, it has a direct economic benefit to 
the people in my constituency who work at supplying lines and 
installation services in relation to the development as it goes 
along. 
 
We have other aspects that I believe are important in economic 
development, and that’s how we interrelate government with 
building hospitals, nursing homes, dealing with those kinds of 
items. I believe we are taking a leadership role in those through 
the Minister of Health and through the Premier of this province. 
I believe that that’s the kind of thing that people want to see, 
where those kinds of activities exist. 
 
How do you go about dealing with these, Mr. Speaker? You deal 
with these from the aspect of reducing the complicated ways that 
you have to deal with government, in reducing regulations. How 
does business go about dealing with government? You reduce the 
regulations that have been stumbling blocks to them in the past. 
And I think that that’s a very important feature. 
 
If you go to the small business, I believe that one of the key things 
that we have introduced — we did this last year — we introduced 
the nine and five-eighths interest program. This budget that we 
announced just early this month, or the past month, is that the 
small business will get an 8 per cent loan up to $100,000, or 
rebated interest down to 8 per cent up to $100,000. And I believe 
that that is the kind of thing that we need to have far more of in 
this province, giving an opportunity for small business to take 
advantage of that. And in my constituency, where many, many 
small businesses exist, that’s the kind of thing that I think is 
extremely important. On Saturday I opened a new business in the 
town of Cabri, and I know that this is a part of what they would 
like to have and are continuing to look to. They have had an 
extremely important contribution to make, these small businesses 
in our communities, and I believe that that’s important. 
 
How do we deal with things on a larger scale? I believe that 
things like the Regina upgrade are an important feature. The 
inclusion of an anhydrous ammonia plant in conjunction with 
that, I believe, has the support of the rural community in this 
province, it has the support of the Sask Wheat Pool, the Federated 
Co-op — unique in its entry into the fertilizer business. 
 
The other things that I’m going to mention are the Rafferty dam, 
the power project down there. I believe that that is an important 
feature. It’s co-ordinating the kind of international relationship 
that we have with people outside of our province, and dealing 
with the kinds of support we can be to them and they can be to 
us. I believe that it is very important. 
 
I want to also mention that economic development is an 
interprovincial kind of a relationship. It deals with things like 
promoting processing in the province, in the Battlefords, and I’m 
sure the member from Battlefords will mention the Gainers plant 
in North Battleford. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1119 
 

We introduced things that relate to economic development in our 
housing program, and I know that the people are taking a very 
serious look at that. 
 
Programs that we are dealing with in agriculture that relate to 
economic development in the pre-processing stage — livestock 
investment tax credits, the tax credit as it relates to fat cattle and 
hogs and sheep — those are very important in relation to the 
economic development that we have in this province. And you 
will note, Mr. Speaker, that these have increased, in view of the 
fact that the declining numbers in the province have occurred. 
 
I want to take one more item in the business side that I think is 
important, is the venture capital corporation aspect in its dealing 
with the kinds of tax credits you can get in establishing 
businesses in this province. It takes the kinds of initiatives that 
people have in this province, the dimension of capability that 
they have, and I believe that those are extremely important. 
 
We had, or I had an occasion just the other day to deal with a 
business in the town of Herbert. And I went there and I said: these 
are the programs that you can use. You can use the venture capital 
corporation; does it suit you? Can you use the employment 
development kinds of things that you have there? Then you can 
have the entrepreneurial type program where young people can 
become involved. 
 
You have the opportunities for access for people who are 
unemployed, for people who are on welfare. These are 
opportunities that are made available to businesses and to 
business people. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, these are the kinds 
of things that we want to tell the world. And as we had the 
discussion earlier about Expo, those are the kinds of things that 
we can tell the world. 
 
I believe that in the past couple of years we have done a number 
of things that relate to the kinds of things that we need to tell 
other people about, the kinds of things that we are, what we can 
provide for them, and where they would like to go. 
 
For example, the Department of Tourism and Small Business 
have initiated an ambassador kind of a program where they 
provide a kit to those people who are leaving this province. If 
you’re planning on going to Expo, take one of these kits along 
and spread the good news that Saskatchewan is a good place to 
come to. That’s the kind of thing that we need to do. That’s the 
kind of enterprising thing the people of Saskatchewan are 
prepared to put together. 
 
Come back to Saskatchewan: develop this province. Come back 
to Saskatchewan and be a leader and a developer in whatever you 
are good at. That’s the kind of thing that promoting 
Saskatchewan gives. That’s promoting the industry, that’s 
promoting the development, and all of the good things that we 
can provide for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of please to 
move the motion. 
 
I move, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Minister of Tourism and 
Small Business, the Minister of Economic Development 
and Trade, and the Government of Saskatchewan for 
initiatives taken in promoting Saskatchewan throughout 
North America and the world. 

 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate having the opportunity to rise in the House today and 
second the motion of my friend and colleague, the member from 
Morse. Hopefully the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will 
be quiet long enough for me to make my few brief comments that 
I want to make here tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in particular this motion fits in with the things that 
we were discussing earlier in the House today, Mr. Speaker, and 
that was with the Expo ’86 and Saskatchewan’s participation in 
there. In terms of promotion, Mr. Speaker, it really has two 
aspects as far as a province like Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
One thing is we’re looking to bring business in and create 
opportunity and jobs at home. And the other aspect, or the other 
dimension to the problem, or the promotion opportunities that we 
take and make, are to develop markets for our products outside 
— not only outside of our province, but also outside of the 
country. And certainly this government has taken great strides to 
do that, to create jobs at home and to bring opportunity back to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what we’ve seen today, Mr. Speaker, earlier in the day, with 
discussions about Expo — and I want to bring this up because 
it’s very relevant — part of the Saskatchewan pavilion at Expo is 
targeted directly at marketing the province of Saskatchewan. We 
have a promotion there, one promotion in particular, that targets 
opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the member from Quill Lakes 
likes to carp from his seat, but no doubt he’ll have an opportunity 
to get into this debate. If his mother ever taught him any manners, 
he’s long since forgot them, so hopefully he’ll be quiet for a 
moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one aspect of the Expo pavilion is to market, show 
off to the world, opportunities that present themselves in 
Saskatchewan, to give people an opportunity to come in here and 
help us develop and build the province and create jobs for the 
people of our province. 
 
They pay a lot of lip service to that. But clearly, by the way 
they’ve ridiculed that project today, their pronouncements again 
today that they’re against such projects as the Weyerhaeuser 
paper-mill in P.A., the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford, 
on and on; Phillips Cable; the list goes on and on. They’ve 
ridiculed the upgrader in Regina and the fertilizer project. 
 
And I want to talk at length on all of those projects, Mr. Speaker. 
I see we are running near 5 o’clock and I would therefore beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1120 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
  



 
May 6, 1986 

 

1121 
 

ADDENDUM 
 

The House was to have sat at 7 p.m. Monday, May 5, 1986 to 
continue the day’s proceedings. Due to a power failure just prior 
to 7 p.m. it was not possible to carry out the business of the 
House, so progress was reported and the House adjourned at 7:08 
p.m. until 2 p.m. on Tuesday, May 6, 1986. 
 
 


