



















































Hansard: January 30, 1986


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

January 30, 1986 

4323 

 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Education and Health Tax Act, for the purpose of repealing provisions imposing a sales tax 
on used vehicles. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, under notices of motion, I give notice that I shall Tuesday next move 
first reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Tuesday next I will move first reading of a Bill 
respecting property improvement grants. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services. 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: during the period that your government had implemented the used vehicle 
tax which began on April 10th, 1985, and the date that the Premier announced that this tax was inconsistent and 
unfair and would be wiped out, during that period how many dollars in taxes was collected under that Bill and 
how many Saskatchewan citizens were affected by that unfair tax as explained by the Premier when he repealed 
it or announced that it would be repealed? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take notice of that question, and I’ll 
provide the information at the next sitting. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is whether or not he was involved in the 
discussion with the Premier at the time the decision was made to repeal it, and if he was, does he remember any 
of the details. This is a long time ago — it’s a couple of weeks — but can you remember how many dollars 
were collected under that Bill while it existed from April 10th until the time that Mr. Devine announced that it 
was unfair tax? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, the goings on within cabinet are confidential and the member across the 
way knows that. I have advised him that I will provide him with the figures at the next sitting. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. I wonder whether you can advise us 
whether or not when the submission went to cabinet, I assume under your name, whether or not you 
recommended that the tax be repealed, and whether or not you recommended that a certain amount of money 
had been collected under that Bill after April 10th. 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, I have advised the member that cabinet discussions are confidential. 
They remain confidential, and I will provide him with the figures at the next sitting. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — New question, Mr. Speaker. This new minister seems to believe that what the 
government does is confidential to the public of Saskatchewan. Well I know, Mr. Speaker, that thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents paid that unfair . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. The member is making statements. If you have a question, we’ll take  



 

January 30, 1986 

4324 

 

the question. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask again for a new question, which I asked for in the last 
question, and I have to say a sentence in asking the question. But my question to the minister is this: did you 
recommend to your government and to cabinet that as a result of repealing that tax that those people who were 
forced to pay this tax unfairly, as the Premier has said, will be getting a rebate? Was that part of the 
recommendation? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, the discussions that we held regarding this matter in cabinet are 
confidential. We have repealed the tax, and I have advised the member that I will provide him with the exact 
figures at the next sitting. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. And I want to make it clear that I’m not asking 
about any cabinet discussion. I’m asking about your position, Mr. Minister. Do you agree that this unfair tax, 
when it is repealed, should a rebate be made to those people who paid it, and as the Premier says, paid this 
unfair tax? Do you agree that it should be refunded? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, he is certainly asking about the discussions that took place in cabinet. 
He’s asking for my position when we discussed the matter in cabinet, and those discussions are confidential. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Minister, I ask a similar question. Sir, I believe — and it’s not often that I can 
support the member to my right on any issue — but I do believe the people of Saskatchewan are owed an 
apology by your department if in fact your intent is not to pay that tax, not to rebate that tax that was enforced 
for a few months in this province. Can you answer this question, Mr. Minister. Does your government . . . Has 
there been any discussion in caucus or in cabinet vis-à-vis the return to the people of Saskatchewan of an unfair 
tax that was placed on those people by your government and was paid faithfully up to and in fact the day that 
that tax was removed? There are people that paid that tax. And a couple from Saskatoon, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
paid that tax five days before the tax was removed and it cost that family $415, and they feel very unfairly. 
They paid that tax and they expect it to be returned. 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the member finds that he can support the members of 
the opposition because he’s certainly having difficulty finding anyone who can support him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — As to the discussions that may or may not take place in our cabinet and in our caucus, 
Mr. Speaker, now that we no longer have that member our conversations are considerably more confidential 
than they used to be. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Public Accounts for 1984-85 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services 
also, and it deals with the public accounts, Mr. Minister, for the fiscal year which ended March 31, 1985. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, has the Provincial Auditor completed his audit of the government’s spending for last year, 
and if so, on what date did he file the certificate approving those accounts? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my information that that work is not yet finished, that it will be 
finished and tabled in this legislature in due course. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to be perfectly clear. The normal date, Mr. Minister, and I know this is your first 
opportunity in the House to have questions, but normally the auditor’s report is completed and  



 

January 30, 1986 

4325 

 

filed as of September 30th and should have been this year. Are you saying to this House that as of this date that 
the auditor has not in fact completed his reports? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, the history of when the public accounts are laid on the Table in this 
House varies from year to year, and there have in fact been a variety of dates when that has happened. I’ve 
given my assurance to the member opposite that when they’re ready they will be tabled here, and that will be as 
soon as possible. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, the laying of the report to the legislature is the act of the government. What I 
ask you: has in fact the auditor completed the auditing of the books for 1985? That’s what I’m asking you. Has 
it been completed? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my information that that work is not totally completed and not ready 
to be presented. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much. A new question to the same minister on the same topic. If the 
auditor’s work is not complete — and I understand that to be your answer — as of this date, then it is about six 
months overdue, five months overdue. It’s normally completed by the end of the summer. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: is the government’s accounts in such sorry shape that the Provincial Auditor is not yet 
able to complete his audit four to five months after they’re normally completed? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to provide the member with a full background as to when 
the public accounts have been tabled in this legislature in the past, and I’ll undertake to do that and provide it to 
him. As of today we are not ready to provide them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well new question, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that the public accounts were 
tabled in this House on December 14th in 1979, December 12th in 1980, December 10th in 1981 — in 
December during the years that the former government was in office — I ask you, Mr. Minister, how it can be 
that the Provincial Auditor is unable to complete his audit of this government’s books four to five months after 
it’s normally done. I’ve given you the dates upon which they’ve been tabled in the past. You tell us at this date 
— this sounds unbelievable — you tell us at this date that the Provincial Auditor hasn’t finished his work. Am I 
correct in assuming that that’s because of the sorry shape of this government’s accounts that he cannot manage 
to put them in order four months after they’re normally done? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, the public accounts of the government will be tabled when they’re ready 
and we will make every effort to have them ready as soon as possible. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Arrogance, Mr. Speaker. A new question, Mr. Speaker. Let me say by way of 
background that arrogance isn’t a suit of clothes that you wear very well, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m well aware, Mr. Minister, that they’ll be tabled when they’re ready. The point of the discussion, though, is 
when they’ll be ready and why they aren’t ready at such a late date. So I ask you to deal with the question. How 
can it be that the Provincial Auditor has not completed his audit of the government’s books four to five months 
after they’re normally done? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, there have been a variety of different dates when the public accounts 
would have been tabled in this legislature. We will table them as soon as we can possibly table them and that 
date will be just as quick as we can and I’m sure the member will be happy when we do. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, there certainly have been an array of dates. In light of the fact that 
those array of dates began to happen in 1982 in which this government did not table a public accounts report at 
all, and in 1983 when it was tabled in February, and in light of the fact that in 1984 it was tabled in March, and 
in 1985 it was tabled in April, how can the minister stand up in this  



 

January 30, 1986 

4326 

 

House and defend the kind of disarray in which the public accounts and the accounting of this government is in 
right now? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, the public accounts of the government will be tabled when they are 
ready and we will make every effort to have them ready as soon as possible. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I think the minister should, once again, 
respond to the question. The question was: how can the minister justify the kind of disarray in which the 
accounting of his government is in to cause this undue, unnecessary, and not in the public interest delay of the 
tabling of the public accounts? What’s he hiding? 
 
HON. MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, we’re hiding nothing and attacks by the member opposite on the public 
service of this government are, I don’t think, warranted. We will make every effort to have the public accounts 
of this government tabled in the legislature at the earliest date possible and I undertake to do that. 
 

Committee on Farm Input Costs 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new line of questioning — and I’d like to address this to the 
part-time Minister of Agriculture, or partly minister, as I understand you’ve sent the former minister to Ottawa. 
But my question isn’t about your duties as Minister of Agriculture but about your cabinet committee you’ve set 
up to look at farm input costs. 
 
I want to ask about the terms of reference of this committee and whether it will be studying a full range of farm 
input costs or just those you spelled out. Will you also be looking at utility rates and federal and provincial 
government taxes, besides interest rates and fertilizer and chemical and farm fuel costs? Is there going to be a 
broad range or are you giving them a very narrow . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the committee that will be studying farm input costs, one 
of the things that the committee will be doing at the outset will be explaining those measures that we have taken 
to reduce farm costs. 
 
For example, the rural gas distribution system across Saskatchewan cuts the cost of energy by about 50 per cent 
to farmers. And that wasn’t here before, but it’s a powerful vehicle now to cut costs. 
 
Similarly, with respect to the 8 per cent money and the 6 per cent money and now the zero per cent money, in 
terms of cash advances for the livestock industry that wasn’t there before — and certainly the recent 500 million 
to a billion dollars in operating money at 6 per cent will be discussed, because we want to make sure that the 
farmer can keep most of that, and it isn’t going to end up with elevator companies or chemical companies or 
others, as they see us provide this kind of assistance which has never ever been provided before in Canadian 
agriculture. We want to make sure that kind of money stays in the pockets of farmers. 
 
Therefore we want their advice on how we can keep the lid on, say, manufacturers in Ontario or chemical 
producers in Ontario that may raise prices $20 a pail or $50 a tonne or something else, because they know that 
this government will back up agriculture all the way to the bank and make sure that we protect farmers. And it’s 
never been done in the history of the province before. So we’re going to make sure the farmers hang on to the 
money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m impressed that the Minister of Agriculture will stand up and publicly say that his little 
team’s going to be cheer-leaders. This is what I hear. It’s what I hear you doing. You’re going to impress on the 
farmers what you’ve done for them. That isn’t basically what we were hoping for, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m wondering specifically: when you mention farm chemical prices, how serious do you see the  



 

January 30, 1986 

4327 

 

whole farm chemical pricing question? Is it the view of your government that the price of farm chemicals is 
unjustified and that alternatives need to be found, perhaps developing generic chemicals right here in 
Saskatchewan? How serious are you about farm chemical pricing? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite mentions cheer-leaders. I’ll say thousands 
and thousands of farmers across Saskatchewan are cheering for the programs that we’ve put forward to help cut 
costs. That’s the first. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to recommendations, I doubt if we’re going to 
get recommendations from people across Saskatchewan that we institute a new land bank. And that was the 
option that was available to people prior to 1982 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You raised the question, sir, with respect to cheer-leading. I’m telling you about cheer-leadings in 
Saskatchewan. Agricultural people in Saskatchewan will cheer the kinds of programs that cut their costs, and 
for a government that will respond. When interest rates are 22 per cent, we responded. They asked you to 
respond and you didn’t. So there is going to be some cheering with respect to that. 
 
On chemical costs and fertilizer costs and anything else that’s going on with respect to agriculture and input 
costs and reduction, we will listen to all the concerns of people and the companies and we will be prepared to 
make and listen to the recommendations that are brought forward to that committee. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m glad the minister is serious about farm chemical questions and that that pricing will be 
reviewed. But I want to ask him specifically about how impartial is your committee going to be on this issue, in 
light of the actions of one of the members on that committee, i.e. the member for Kelvington-Wadena. Is the 
minister aware that that MLA, who is your Legislative Secretary, is a member of this committee, is currently on 
a trip to Venezuela which is sponsored by Pfizer Chemicals and Generics Ltd.? Has that members’ trip been 
paid for out of his own pocket, out of the public purse, or out of this international chemical company? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we have had many debates in this legislature with respect to agriculture 
and protecting agriculture. Members opposite . . . I’m sure that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the 
member from Shaunavon, don to talk an awful lot about the fact that they may have 4,000 or 5,000 acres of 
land. And they have asked for large acreage payments from $50 to $100 per acre that could end up in small 
fortunes — not small fortunes, large fortunes — to MLAs in this legislature because of the land holdings that 
they have. 
 
Now when I come back and I’m going to be reviewing farm chemical costs, the member opposite can’t even 
bring up positive suggestions with respect to the kinds of things that we could do, without picking on MLAs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we take farm input costs seriously. We will make sure that farmers are protected. We will 
make sure that the chemical companies are going to treat farmers in a respectable fashion. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question because the minister didn’t hear the old one. The 
Minister of Agriculture didn’t hear the old question. You have appointed a member on your committee, who at 
the expense of a chemical company, if it’s true, at the expense of a chemical company — and I asked you the 
question — is over in Venezuela right now. And he is going to listen to the problems from farmers and not be 
overshadowed? 
 
The question was, Mr. Minister: do you agree that if your Legislative Secretary is on a trip sponsored by a 
chemical company that he should be removed from that committee? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, that is pure speculation as the member talks about and  



 

January 30, 1986 

4328 

 

suggests. It’s hypothetical. So if it’s hypothetical, I’m not going to address it. I don’t know the answer to it and 

if the member doesn’t know the answer to it, when we know the answer to it then we can respond to it. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — I asked you what your Legislative Secretary’s trip to Venezuela was paid for. I gave you 

three options. Did he pay for it himself; did you pay for it out of the public purse; or did Pfizer chemical 

company pay for his trip? That was the first part of the question. If he was paid for by three, Pfizer chemical, 

then is he a legitimate member to have sitting on this committee to review farm chemical pricing? That’s the 

question, Mr. Minister, and I think there’s a conflict of interest there. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee to the member that farmers across Saskatchewan will 

get a fair hearing with respect to farm input costs from all walks of life and all aspects of agriculture, and the 

members of the committee will be listening to every single, solitary suggestion. He is raising some hypothetical 

concerns. I will look at them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you don’t know whether it is or it isn’t. And 

you’ve just mentioned that. I will make sure that that committee responds to the agricultural needs, listens to all 

the concerns, and reports back to the legislature. 

 

Vehicle Safety 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question is to the minister responsible for SGI. It deals with public safety, 

specifically the safety of vehicles being licensed on our streets and highways. The Saskatchewan Auto Body 

Association has lobbied your government for more than two years to introduce a strict vehicle inspection system 

for what is called unibody construction cars. When a unibody construction vehicle . . . Well the member from 

Regina South has lost his opportunity to answer these questions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It sure hurts, 

doesn’t it, to be sitting there. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — When a unibody constructed vehicle is involved in an accident, even a minor one, 

the repairs require special equipment and training or else these cars will be extremely unsafe to drive. Yet the 

association claims that even unibody cars which have been written off by SGI have been taken away, repaired, 

and put back on Saskatchewan roads without any road worthiness check of any kind. Can you explain, Mr. 

Minister, why it has taken more than two years to deal with what appears to be a clear issue of public safety? 

 

HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be very pleased to gather all the information possible of what’s gone 

on in the past few years, and maybe even a little bit beyond the past couple of years. Maybe we’ll go back about 

10 years or so. And I’ll come back to the legislature with a full report on what’s going on through SGI. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know how long, Mr. Minister, you expect this legislature to last. Mr. 

Speaker, supplementary. Mr. Minister, I asked you . . . I expect in a moment to get an answer that this is cabinet 

confidentiality. Mr. Minister, I asked you a fairly simple question. I don’t think I asked for a lot of statistics or 

detail. I simply asked you, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order! The member that was recognized has the right to be on his feet and 

ask a question, and I would ask his other caucus members to give him that opportunity. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Minister. I asked you a very simple, straightforward question: 

why has it taken you more than two years to deal with what is an understandable problem even for ministers of 

this cabinet, and what is a fairly simple issue? Why has it take you more than two years to deal with an issue 

that I think anyone can see involves a question of public safety? 

 

HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, yes, he did ask a very simple question. So therefore my desire is to come 

back to him with a very simple answer that he can understand, and I’ll endeavour to do so. 



 

January 30, 1986 

4329 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. While your government has been discussing and 
studying, or whatever it is you do that is so confidential, there are hundreds and perhaps thousands of unibody 
cars on Saskatchewan roads which have been in accidents and put back on the road without any kind of 
inspection. In effect, they’re travelling time bombs. When, Mr. Minister, does public safety in this issue get to 
the top of your priority list? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure, if the member opposite would check the record of this 
government, that public safety has always been a prime concern. As I mentioned earlier, I will be very glad to 
get all the details on what SGI has been doing, as well as other agencies, to further ensure public safety in this 
province. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a comment, Mr. Minister, from an auto body shop foreman. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — This is question period. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question; introductory comment. For the benefit of the member from 
Souris-Cannington, I don’t know whether you want me to explain the rules of question period. 
 
Mr. Minister, new question; introductory comment. I have a comment from an auto body foreman who said, “A 
person can buy a write-off from Saskatchewan Government Insurance, get the body work done at some small, 
back-alley shop, and get it licensed with no questions asked.” Mr. Minister, do you find that kind of system to 
be in the public interest, and do you find that to be mindful of public safety? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite aware of the article that the member is quoting from, and 
certainly it does raise a number of issues, and SGI is looking at that and I will come back with a response. And I 
do not believe the member should be indicating that this is a brand-new problem in this province. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. This question period seems to be a studied effort to say 
absolutely nothing at all by the government. 
 
New question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister. Would the minister consider using some of the tens of millions of 
dollars that you’ve stockpiled in SGI’s rate stabilization reserve fund to introduce a vehicle inspection program 
to protect the public? 
 
I want, Mr. Minister, to ask you if you’ll consider using some of that fund — which has been the subject of a 
public quarrel with yet another body, the PURC — would you consider using part of that fund to introduce this 
public safety program? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated on numerous occasions already this afternoon that I will get 
back with the full information and I will certainly supply that information to the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 144 — An Act to provide for Settlement of a Certain Labour-Management dispute between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union 

 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the Assembly to move first reading of An 
Act to provide for Settlement of a Certain Labour-Management dispute between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I then move first reading of An Act to provide for Settlement of a 
Certain Labour-Management dispute between the Government of Saskatchewan and the  



 

January 30, 1986 

4330 

 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — With leave, later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Education and Health Tax Act for 
the Purpose of repealing Provisions Imposing a Sales Tax on Used Vehicles. I so move, with leave. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move first reading of a Bill to amend the Income Tax 
Act. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Property Improvement Grants. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Before orders of the day I have the honour to submit herewith, pursuant to 
section 222(1) of The Election Act, a report respecting the returns of the election expenses incurred by political 
parties in the constituency of Thunder Creek for the by-election held on March 27, 1985. Signed Keith 
Lampard, chief electoral officer. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may have leave of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure for me to introduce a very distinguished guest, the Consul 
General for Great Britain for the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, who is sitting in the Speaker’s 
gallery — I believe he’s still there — Mr. John Doble. I would ask him to rise. Mr. Doble is now situated in 
Edmonton. 
 
I would ask the members from both sides of the Assembly to extend a very hearty welcome to Mr. Doble to 
Regina as well as to Canada, and I hope he will enjoy his stay in our country, representing Great Britain. Thank 
you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

January 30, 1986 

4331 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much. I want to join my colleague from Regina South in welcoming 
these distinguished visitors. Great Britain is a nation with which we have a lot of trade, and of course we have 
the very closest of cultural ties. We owe the democratic freedoms which we are exercising here today in this 
Assembly to the richness of the British culture. For that and for many other things, we thank you, and I join my 
colleague in welcoming you here. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Space Shuttle Tragedy 
 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would ask the members of this legislature to 
join me in paying tribute to seven men and women who died on Tuesday in the United States Space Shuttle 
Challenger. 
 
Throughout mankind’s history we have been graced by men and women who have been prepared to sacrifice 
their lives in our quest for the understanding that has brought us a better world. We in this province have a 
special knowledge of that sacrifice through our connection to the pioneers who struggled and died on this land 
100 years ago. I think we sometimes overlook the debt we owe to those who dare to challenge, particularly 
challenge the unknown for the rest of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes a tragedy of the starkness and the suddenness of the Challenger accident to make us aware 
of how far we have come, but indeed, Mr. Speaker, how far we yet have to go. 
 
I hope all members of this chamber will join me in expressing our deepest regrets to the people of the United 
States, and especially to the grieving families of the seven astronauts. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, just a few short words on behalf of the members of the opposition on 
this proposal put forward by the Premier. We would want to join with all members and all people of 
Saskatchewan who express their deepest sympathy to the families and the people of the United States who lost 
seven great individuals, courageous people, who were involved in the space program. I think they were 
representative of people who have taken steps and who had the courage of their conviction to do what they 
believed was right. People like, I suppose, Christa McAuliffe, who was a school teacher involved in the space 
program, went into space with the sole intent of teaching two science classes to children of the United States, 
and, I believe, of the world. 
 
To these people who were involved in the space program and the many people who will be in grief over this 
incident, we want to express our deepest condolences to the family and to the American people who, I believe, 
had a great loss. This is something that has been expressed by all people. I noticed this morning on TV people 
doing interviews on the streets of Moscow, for example, were saddened and shocked by the terrible accident 
that happened. 
 
I suppose I would say that here in Saskatchewan we should be pulling together as well to solve the problems 
that people are facing at the present time. I wish with the Premier the condolences to these families and to the 
people of the United States. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House to now adjourn. 
 
The division bells having rung from 2:38 p.m. until 4:36 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 35 
 
Devine Dirks Weiman 



 

January 30, 1986 

4332 

 

Tusa 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Taylor 

Duncan 

Hardy 

Schmidt 

Folk 

Smith (Swift Current) 

Myers 

Dutchak 

Embury 

Sandberg 

Klein 

Currie 

Martens 

Maxwell 

Smith (Moose Jaw South) 

Hodgins 

Morin 

Bacon 

Young 

Rybchuk 

Caswell 

Meagher 

Boutin 

Muller 

Baker 

Glauser 

Zazelenchuk 

Gerich 

Swenson 

 

NAYS — 7 
 

Tchorzewski 

Thompson 

Engel 

Lingenfelter 

Koskie 

 

Lusney 

Shillington 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:39 p.m. 


