


















































March 25, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 25, 1986 

153 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Katzman from the Standing Committee 
on Private Members' Bills presents the 12th report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 
agreed to report the same without amendment. 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Canadian Bible 
Society, Saskatchewan District 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act respecting Medical Services 
Incorporated 
 
Your committee recommends under the provision of rule 
58 that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing, with 
respect to Bill No. 01. 

 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the 12th report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Seconded by the member from Cumberland, Mr. Yew. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you, and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, some 75 students seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
This is another group, today again, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn, from the grade 8 
class there. They are accompanied today by their teachers, Jim 
Nedelcov and Dave Lewicki, and as well bus drivers, Wayne 
Vilcu and Brian Tait. And as well, Mr. Speaker, a special 
student in the group today, Larry Wu, who is the Rotary 
exchange student from the Philippines. 
 
I hope that the students found their tour earlier this afternoon an 
educational one. I'm certain that you'll enjoy question period. I 
look forward to meeting with you after question period today 
and answering your questions, as I did the group that was here 
yesterday from your same school. Given the weather conditions 
out there today I, as well, wish you a safe trip home after your 
visit here today. I would ask all members of the legislature to 
join with me in extending a very warn welcome to these 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 60 
adult students from the Regina Plains Community College, 
Saskatchewan Skills Development Program, that are seated in 
the east gallery, along with their teaching 

staff and three chaperons. I can't read the copy that I've got, so 
I'll have to apologize for that, ladies and gentlemen, and I'll 
meet you at 3 o'clock for coffee and juice in the members' 
dining room. And at that time you can certainly address any 
questions that I may answer regarding the operation of the 
legislature or, in fact, any other questions you may have. 
 
So I would ask the House to welcome this group, please, and I'll 
meet you at 3 o'clock. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Availability of Hospital Beds in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with a question you took notice 
of last week. Last week we were inquiring of the minister the 
number of people on the waiting list for the hospital beds in the 
city of Saskatoon. I wonder whether the minister could now 
inform us, in fact, how many people are waiting for the beds in 
the city of Saskatoon; that is, hospital beds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I could not provide that 
information today. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this morning we took an 
opportunity to canvass the City Hospital, the University 
Hospital, and St. Paul's, and we find that at those three hospitals 
in Saskatoon we have a waiting list now in excess of 6,000 
people waiting for beds in the city of Saskatoon. And I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that, while in opposition, you complained 
long and hard about the waiting lists in 1982, which at that time 
were less than a third of the 6,000 we now find in Saskatoon. In 
addition to this, we have close to, or a similar number in the city 
of Regina waiting for hospital beds. 
 
I wonder whether you can now tell us why at St. Paul's Hospital 
in Saskatoon they have been forced to close 77 beds as a result 
of the financial problems they find themselves in as a result of 
inadequate funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I've long since 
learned not to take the statistics of the member opposite as 
being anywhere valid. That would be the first premise. 
Secondly, his polls and surveys sometimes are a little off the 
mark, to say the least. However, as I said, I cannot report 
exactly what the waiting lists in Saskatoon are today. 
 
Certainly the member opposite knows, as does everyone else in 
this Chamber, that hospitals are autonomous boards. They make 
the decisions as to how they will work within their budgets. 
Those are local decisions. I'm not apprised that there are 77 
beds being closed down. Again I do not take it as the gospel 
because it comes from the member opposite. But certainly to 
indicate this is because of a lack of funding I think is a gross 
exaggeration. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 
Minister of 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

154 
 
 

Health, and I want to ask the Minister of Health: can he explain 
again the rationale of 77 beds being lost in St. Paul's — reported 
by St. Paul's — indicating that these beds will be out of service 
for a number of days, partially in an effort to cope with budget 
deficits? 
 
What is happening here, Mr. Minister, there is an underfunding 
of the health care. Can you explain whether or not you feel you 
have an obligation in light of the fact that some 6,000 people 
are waiting to be admitted and hospital beds are being closed? 
Do you have any obligations, and do you have any plans for 
overcoming this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly you hear lots 
of announcements. There was a very good one yesterday of 6 
CAT scans in the province of Saskatchewan, one that I've been 
flooded by calls of congratulations for over the night and this 
morning. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also spouts the 
figure of 6,000, which I do not take as being anywhere near 
accurate, regarding the closure of beds. They know as well as I 
do that hospitals from time to time close down beds within the 
operation of that hospital. I can't say with any degree of 
certainty: I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that we are putting on 
a substantial expansion at St. Paul's Hospital. We also . . . I 
remember coming in, the first year that I was Health minister, 
and giving them $1 million up-front money for needed 
equipment that was not provided by the previous administration 
at St. Paul's Hospital — $1 million right up front, money for 
needed diagnostic equipment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think for those members to criticize a 
government that has year after year put more money into health 
care than any other government in Saskatchewan, that has a 
$300 million capital program in hospital and nursing home 
construction, and a $100 million program in staffing, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, those figures speak for themselves to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they realize that health care has been a 
priority of the Devine government ever since they took office in 
'82 and will continue, and will continue to be a priority of the 
Devine government following the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further supplemental. Mr. Minister, you have 
indicated your lack of knowledge, or your ignorance, or your 
incompetence, or all three. Because first of all, you do not admit 
knowing how many are on the waiting list in Saskatoon, and 
secondly, in spite of a report indicating that beds are being 
closed down in the city of Saskatoon . . . I'm asking you: are 
you denying the fact that 77 beds are being shut down in St. 
Paul's Hospital? And I'm asking you: what are you prepared to 
do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, if I'm going to 
have consultation discussions with St. Paul's Hospital, it will be 
between me and St. Paul's Hospital, or my deputy, and not 
because of some statement in the paper, not because of some 
statement in the paper. The people opposite, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the members ask questions, I 
think they should give the minister an opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that many of the 
press releases that come out from the Department of Health are 
bitter pills for the opposition to swallow. I understand that very, 
very well. 
 
I would ask the gentlemen opposite: if they're really going to be 
sincere and look at these types of situations, wouldn't it be 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see how many patients last year St. 
Paul's treated over the previous years, and how many patients 
are being treated by St. Paul's and other hospitals throughout 
Saskatchewan now than were under the NDP administration? 
 
I think we would see some very glaring figures there, figures 
that have shown that the hospitals of Saskatchewan, with the 
increased funding by this government, have continued to put 
through more people than they did in their day — when, I 
remind you, I stood in this House last week and indicated in 
1976, July 1, 1976, a 5 per cent reduction in hospital staffing. 
 
And you talk about St. Paul's Hospital? I can give you the letter, 
Mr. Speaker, that says St. Paul's Hospital on July 1, '76 was to 
be reduced by 6.2 registered nurses — 6.2 — NDP government; 
2.5 CNAs; 3 nurse's aides. Now is that addressing waiting lists? 
They don't like those figures, Mr. Speaker, but they're true. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member from Regina North West 
have a supplementary? I'll take the supplementary from Regina 
North East. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister's sincerity and 
integrity is questioned when he is not even prepared to meet 
with nurses who have asked him to meet again in Saskatoon last 
night where there was a public forum held. 
 
My supplementary, Mr. Speaker: in light of the fact that St. 
Paul's Hospital has announced the closing of 77 beds, why were 
not the minister of any one of his 10 candidates in the city of 
Saskatoon, all of whom were invited, prepared last night to 
meet with the nurses at a nurses' forum to discuss the problems 
in health care in that city last night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think it's very evident that 
if there's anyone who speaks for health care on this side of the 
House, it's me, and I indicated to the members opposite in 
question period a few days ago I would be attending one of the 
meetings that the SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) are 
having around the province on health care, and I will explain at 
that meeting the government's position. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, since the minister has 
confirmed now for the second time that he will attend one of the 
meetings of the nurses that the nurses are sponsoring, I want to 
ask him, since I will be there at the meeting tonight, and so will 
my colleague, the critic of health, will he come to the meeting 
in Regina tonight so that he can answer the questions that 
people who are deeply concerned about what's happening in the 
health care system can ask him? 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

155 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My advice for the member opposite, 
would have his homework done for tonight. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you've got 77 
beds closing down or have to close down for a period of time in 
St. Paul's Hospital in Saskatoon, and also in light of the fact that 
a hospital in Canora, Saskatchewan, has been cut down in 
funding last year from 40 to 36 beds, this year from 36 to 30 
beds — a 50-bed hospital, Mr. Minister — is it the policy of 
this government to cut down the funding to the local hospitals, 
or to every hospital, in view of this news article, to the point 
where they cannot operate all the beds that they have, that they 
have to shut down some of them or else go into a huge deficit? 
Is this the policy of your government, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly not, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite, if he knows how the hospitals are funded and 
how it’s worked out, the average daily census is worked out in 
consultation with the hospitals. Canora hospital has the 
opportunity to meet with the Saskatchewan hospital services 
branch each year to work out the needs of that hospital. That’s 
gone on during this administration, was the policy of the 
previous administration. I’m sure if you look back you will see 
where the average daily census decreased in some of the 
hospitals around Saskatchewan under the NDP. 
 
This is nothing new, Mr. Speaker. That is the way that the 
hospitals, other than the base hospitals which are funded under 
the old basis, their funding arrangements are worked out. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
members of the Canora hospital board have met with your 
department just about a week ago, and they were told, since 
they have 50 beds and they are full, but they have from 12 to 18 
long-stay patients, that they will not get funding unless they 
release those long-stay patients out of there. They have no place 
to go; they are forced to keep them. But because they are forced 
to keep them, they cannot get funding. 
 
Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that these hospitals have to kick 
those people out, that have nowhere to go, if they’re going to 
get funding; or else they have to go into deficit position or ask 
the taxpayers for more money to keep those patients in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it may be, Mr. Speaker, that one of 
the reasons it's a difficulty to find where the long-stay patients 
should go was that the moratorium that was placed in '76 in the 
construction of nursing home beds; we haven't completely 
overcome that disastrous event. 
 
But also, if you look at the whole picture in the Canora area, 
where we have the Gateway Lodge, which comprises three 
areas in there — Canora, Norquay, and Invermay — three 
towns in the areas, and two of those are getting additions for 
long-stay patients on their lodges, Mr. Speaker. And it may well 
be that SHSP's plans are that some of these people who are in 
the Canora hospital at this time will be able to move to those 
integrated facilities 

that we built in that area. 
 

Tabling of Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Engel: — My new question. My question is to the Minister 
of Revenue and Financial Services. Mr. Minister, it deals with 
Public Accounts for the fiscal year which ended March 31, 
1985 — a year ago — a year ago next Monday. The minister 
admitted in this House that the Provincial Auditor has 
completed his review, and still those accounts have not been 
tabled. 
 
Can the minister assure Saskatchewan taxpayers and this 
Assembly that the 1984-85 Public Accounts will be tabled 
before the day is over today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
for his question. I won't give him that assurance. I've said in this 
House often that the documents will be tabled in due course, 
and they will be tabled in due course. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary. If the Provincial Auditor has 
approved them, and you were on the Public Accounts 
Committee, sir, what is preventing you from making these 
public documents public that are more than a year old? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to begin with, a little 
history on this. The Public Accounts under the former 
administration were tabled as late as March 28th. And they are 
not more than a year old, and they will be tabled in due course. 
And I don't know what more to tell the member. I mean, we've 
been over this ground time and time again. They will be tabled 
in due course. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary. Other than having something to 
hide, why won't you table those documents? What are you 
trying to hide? One reason why you're not tabling those 
documents, other than covering up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member has 
indicated that I was on the Public Accounts Committee, and so 
was he. And if he would go back and review the documents 
from the Public Accounts Committee over the years that this 
administration was in power, he would find that there are fewer 
and fewer items that the auditor raises, and that they are of less 
and less significance. 
 
So if we're hiding anything, Mr. Speaker, certainly no one 
knows what it is, because by the auditor's own admission things 
are getting better and better in the administration of the 
government accounts. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The supplement was short and simple. What are 
you trying to hide, period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SUN Meeting in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would just like to get back for a moment, 
Mr. Speaker, to the meeting last night in Saskatoon that SUN 
held on health care issues. I was the only member there, and it 
was obviously boycotted by Tory candidates and the eight 
members from Saskatoon. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

156 
 
 

But one of the concerns that the chief negotiator with SUN 
raised with me regarding the 100 million you indicate is 
earmarked for bedside employment in the hospital, in fact 
employment of staff, is: how can you, Mr. Minister, direct that 
funding after it hits the hospital? It's at that point controlled by 
the hospital boards, and will they not control where that money 
is spent within the hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as I said previously in this 
House, that figure that we came up with — the $100 million 
that was needed for staffing and for equipment and to address 
waiting lists, as the question was today — was arrived at in 
consultation with the hospitals in Saskatchewan. And I can 
assure the member, precisely at this time, that type of 
consultation is going on as to how the money will be deployed 
and to how many bodies will be in the various hospitals in the 
upcoming year. 
 

Costs of Advertising 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Deputy Premier, and it has to do with an opposition in 1982 that 
promised, if elected, they would cut the government 
advertising. My question today relates to a two-page colour 
advertisement which appeared in the Leader-Post and other 
daily papers yesterday. What I would ask the Deputy Premier is 
how many hundreds of thousands of dollars this political ad 
cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and how you justify 
spending this kind of taxpayers' dollars to elect a bankrupt 
government — bankrupt of ideas and bankrupt of plans — but 
is using their tax money to try to get re-elected? How do you 
square that with the taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think even the 
member opposite would be critical of us, or any government, in 
communicating to the young people of Saskatchewan the 
opportunity that exists in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 
sure that after sober reflection, even the members opposite will 
endorse that as being an excellent method of communication. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy 
Premier was: how much did this psychedelic-coloured photo 
cost the taxpayers, and just what do you think you're appealing 
to with this kind of a poster. I say to you that the hundreds of 
thousands of dollars that the placement and cost of production 
of this kind of an ad is not going unnoticed by the taxpayers, 
and using taxpayers' money to try to salvage a sinking ship is 
not going to work. I ask you again, how much did it cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, as might be expected, Mr. 
Speaker, from the member opposite, he's fast and loose with his 
numbers. He's done it before; we know it. I mean, it's become a 
tradition with that particular member to make wild allegations 
about costs, or is fast and loose with the facts. But the truth is, 
Mr. Speaker, I don't know how much it will cost, so I'll take 
notice of the question and find out for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Relating to 
advertising, in this week's Western Report, this type of 
advertising, it's indicated, cost the Government of 
Saskatchewan 60,000. It's an ad which, in fact, advertises 

advertising. And this is not an ad that . . . This isn't really an ad 
that I think costs a great deal because of the production costs, 
compared to the ad the member just raised in the House. So 
60,000 for this, Mr. Minister — what did that one cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously I'm not reaching the hon. 
member. I just said 30 seconds ago that I didn't know. But that 
went over your head. Now I've taken notice of the question, and 
I'll provide the House with that information in due course. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be interested in the Deputy 
Premier telling us what the series that you ran on television that 
we just have two more Sundays to bear with, to listen to — 
what did that agricultural series, those half-hour prime time TV 
shows, cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think this 
question was raised in this House before. And if it wasn't raised 
in the House, I think it was dealt with outside of the House and 
was reported broadly. And I'm going only from memory, Mr. 
Speaker, but as I recall, it was in the neighbourhood of 
$250,000 for the four productions. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That was the production cost's high price. What 
about the place we got? What did this little fancy piece of thing 
that came in the mail to the farmers' pockets this week cost 
you? I'm not too impressed, because I got a phone call from a 
constituent of the Attorney General this morning who told me 
that there's some articles in there that aren't even correct. What 
did this fancy little piece of production cost that are trying to 
brainwash the farmers on what a good job you're doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, since I'm not 
the Minister of Agriculture, I wouldn’t be expected to have that 
kind of information at my fingertips. But I wonder if after 
having received that particular publication which sets out all the 
programs that you may have access to in the Department of 
Agriculture — I wonder if it was only after that that the hon. 
member accessed those programs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Deputy Premier. And I want to suggest to him that it's his 
business to know when he's dealing with taxpayers' money. It is 
not good enough to say that he does not know in this particular 
case when he knew very well these questions at some point in 
time would be asked. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, the blatant political advertising which we 
have brought to your attention here today only scratches the 
surface. There are literally dozens of government ads in every 
newspaper and each day on Saskatchewan radio and television 
stations that Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying for your 
political purposes. If you put them all together, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it looks like an Eaton’s catalogue. 
 
Will you confirm that your government has spent between 3 
and $5 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money in the past 
six weeks alone trying to buy votes prior to an election 
campaign? That could have hired a lot of nurses in a lot of 
hospitals in Saskatchewan. And isn't 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

157 
 
 

that the price tag on all that this political advertising is all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is truly 
incredible. He's standing over there, Mr. Speaker, talking about 
hiring nurses while during his reign as minister of Finance, he 
cut 400 nursing positions — 485, I believe —from the roles of 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . and another solid indication of the 
incredibility of the guy — I imagine when he was over on this 
side of the House, he could stand up and recite line by line 
every nickel that was spent by every department on advertising. 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that is totally incredible. Not only 
could that member not do it, his leader couldn't do it, not even 
the genius, salt-water sheik from Shaunavon could do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, when the Deputy Premier 
gets pressed he reacts in very strange ways. I want . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The 
member is asking a question. It would be impossible for any 
minister to hear what he's asking. I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy 
Premier, in his exuberance and his determination to look 
backwards instead of forwards, failed to answer the question, so 
I will ask it again as a supplementary. Will you confirm that 
your government has spent on this blatant political advertising 
in the newspapers between 3 and $5 million of taxpayers' 
money in the last six week.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Size of SGI Rate Stabilization Reserve Fund 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for SGI. On January 31st 
you took notice of a question about the exact size of SGI rate 
stabilization reserve fund. Can you tell the Assembly and the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers the current total of that reserve fund in 
SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to indicate that the 
report for SGI should be tabled very shortly, and the 
information will be there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
do you have no sense of responsibility to the public legislature? 
On Friday, January 31st, on page 438 of Hansard you took 
notice of the question as to how much money you have 
stockpiled in this reserve fund in SGI. Why, six weeks later, are 
you still uninformed as to this figure, and why will you not 
table that figure in the House today? 

Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
should well know through his years of experience that those 
figures are tabled with the annual report, which will be tabled in 
this House in due course. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Ministerial statements. Introduction of Bills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What about ministerial statements, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'm sorry. I called ministerial statements; 
nobody rose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If Mr. Speaker in fact called ministerial 
statements, I of course have to live with your ruling. The fact is, 
I did not hear ministerial statements being called, nor did 
anybody on this side of the House. And if these guys . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I think my point has been well 
illustrated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Introduction of Bills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to go to 
ministerial statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the minister have leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if, before orders 
of the day, we could go down the order paper, with leave, to 
private members' Bills to deal with Bills No. 01 and 02. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Canadian Bible Society, 

Saskatchewan District 
 
Clauses 1 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act respecting Medical Services 
Incorporated 

 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Canadian Bible Society, 

Saskatchewan District 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

158 
 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act respecting Medical Services 
Incorporated 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, items 78 through 280 to 
notices of motions for returns debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Motions 78 to 280, orders for return 
debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor, and the amendment thereto moved by Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to make a few brief remarks during this throne 
speech debate, Mr. Speaker, that related to this government, the 
Devine government's vision of the North. At this very moment, 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Grant Devine is in Prince Albert, meeting 
with the people from that city and from other northern 
communities to bring them some very welcome and very 
exciting new. It is this news, Mr. Speaker, which I wish to 
convey to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision for 
northern Saskatchewan, a vision which includes stability and 
opportunity for our citizens, but most of all a vision of jobs for 
the people of northern Saskatchewan, security for existing jobs, 
and creation of new jobs. 
 
(1445) 
 
In the past, some of our northern forestry jobs have been in 
jeopardy. For example, the Bodmin sawmill in Big River, a 
government-owned plant, is losing money. And to take a much 
larger example, the Prince Albert Pulp Company is also losing 
money. Accumulated losses on these two operations have 
reached $47 million, Mr. Speaker. These losses have put at risk 
hundreds of Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Well in the case of PAPCO, the problem is 
a drastic and fundamental change in world market for pulp. 
Throughout this decade we've been victims of falling prices. 
Low-cost, third world countries are exporting more and more 
cheap pulp and paper. That kind of restricted world market is 
going to be part of our 

future for a long time to come. And if we keep going the way 
we are, we can project another $100 million loss for PAPCO — 
another $100 million of taxpayers' money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The solution to this problem in Saskatchewan is the same 
solution which pulp producers all across North America are 
finding. Small, single-product operations have to tie 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, into large, integrated forestry 
companies. That integration should include every phase of the 
industry — forestry, pulp production, paper manufacturing, and 
a first-class, well-established, international marketing and 
distribution network. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the essence of 
the announcement we are making today. 
 
The government has reached an agreement in principle with 
Weyerhaeuser Canada which is going to open up a new era of 
opportunity for the people of northern Saskatchewan. The deal 
we're finalizing will include the purchase of the PAPCO pulp 
mill and other related assets, the modernization and expansion 
of the pulp mill, and the construction of a giant, new paper mill 
— the first fine paper mill, Mr. Speaker, in the prairie 
provinces. 
 
The paper mill is going to be something all of Saskatchewan 
can be proud of — as big as two football fields, Mr. Speaker; a 
capacity of 200,000 tonnes of fine paper a year, one-sixth of the 
entire Canadian production; the second largest fine paper plant 
in Canada. 
 
And I can understand that the members opposite have a difficult 
time with this. And I understand that the . . . The members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, are groaning again. And they're telling 
us, if they ever get back into office, they'll cancel this project, 
cancel the jobs in northern Saskatchewan, cancel the jobs in the 
very constituency of the member . . . In any event, Mr. Speaker, 
the second largest paper plant in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said our vision for the North was centred on a 
vision of new jobs. Well here's the bottom line on jobs, which 
result from our agreement from Weyerhaeuser: 215 new 
full-time jobs in the industry, 50 in the pulp mill, 165 in the 
paper mill and the woodlands, 700 man-years of construction 
work, Mr. Speaker, plus the spin-off employment we can expect 
from this activity — 430 indirect full-time jobs in our northern 
communities, 350 indirect man-years of work spinning off from 
the construction phase, and another 2,000 man-years of 
Canadian manufacturing employment by those companies who 
will be supplying equipment, goods, and services to build the 
new plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to provide a few more details of the 
related assets which I said would be part of the agreement. 
Weyerhaeuser will purchase the PAPCO pulp mill and other 
PAPCO assets such as timber rights and PAPCO's chemical 
plant in Saskatoon. The purchase won't include PAPCO's 
sawmill in Meadow Lake. The plant will remain in operation as 
is, and will grow and prosper on its own under the Crown 
Management Board. But the purchase will include the Bodmin 
sawmill, which up to now has been under the ownership of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

159 
 
 

This agreement is a breakthrough for the Saskatchewan forest 
industry. First, the pulp mill will be modernized to handle 
hardwood more efficiently. Our abundant reserves of aspen 
hardwood, or poplar, are greatly underused. It's going to waste, 
too small for lumber, and it's not the kind of wood the PAPCO 
plant was built to handle. PAPCO has started to take in 
hardwood, but what the plant needs is several million dollars 
worth of upgrading so it can handle aspen efficiently. And that's 
what Weyerhaeuser is gong to do. 
 
Second, the pulp mill is now going to have an assured market. 
Instead of fighting to sell our pulp in a tough world market, 
we'll be shipping it right next door to a brand-new paper plant. 
 
Third, the paper mill is a brand-new manufacturing plant for our 
province. That means more valued added in our forest industry, 
more production in our province before exports are shipped out. 
 
Fourth, the export market for our paper will also be assured. 
Weyerhaeuser Canada's parent, the Weyerhaeuser Company, is 
one of the biggest American forest products companies, and 
there is a whole distribution network in the United States owned 
by Weyerhaeuser. That network is ready and waiting to take the 
paper we're going to produce here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 
financial side of the agreement. In total, this is a $498 million 
transaction, and the financial plan looks like this: Weyerhaeuser 
will purchase the pulp mill and related assets for $248 million. 
This will be done through a debenture from the provincial 
government which the company will repay with interest over an 
expected 20-year period. Weyerhaeuser will also invest $250 
million in modernizing the pulp mill and building the new paper 
mill. That $250 million will be raised, approximately one-third 
through Weyerhaeuser's direct investment, one-third through 
loans guaranteed by Weyerhaeuser, and one-third by — 
approximately $83 million — through loans guaranteed by the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very clear messages which we can 
see in the financial side of this agreement. First, Weyerhaeuser 
has shown that it is fully committed in dollars and cents to the 
economic promise for Saskatchewan. Second, the government 
intends that the people of Saskatchewan get a fair dollar value 
when they sell their asset in PAPCO. Third, the government and 
the people of Saskatchewan have clearly said, no more 
unnecessary government ownership, and no more government 
interference trying to do poorly those things that the private 
sector can do well. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, our vision for northern 
Saskatchewan, a vision which has included a new technical 
training institute, a major transmission line project — the vision 
has now taken another bold step towards realization. The 
transfer of PAPCO and Bodmin into an integrated forestry 
company; the construction of a new paper mill which will be a 
Canadian giant and a source of millions of dollars worth of 
exports; the securing of pulp markets and paper markets 
through the Weyerhaeuser marketing network; a return to the 
people 

of Saskatchewan for the millions of dollars they've invested in 
PAPCO over the years; and most important of all, Mr. Speaker, 
jobs for the people of northern Saskatchewan; current 
employment level secured, and new jobs to be created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the vision that we have for northern 
Saskatchewan, and that’s how we're making that dream come 
true. And I'm very proud to inform you and the members of this 
House how effectively we are getting the job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to continue to talk about another part of 
this particular project, and that has to with the 
PAPCO/Weyerhaeuser forestry agreement. And again, this is a 
very important part of our vision of the North, Mr. Speaker. 
This concerns the precious forest resource we have in our 
province. 
 
Our vision of a northern pulp and paper industry depends upon 
forest management policies which will achieve two goals. First, 
the efficient, wise, and careful harvesting of our forests so that 
Saskatchewan people can prosper from that resource wealth. 
Second, the protection and renewal of our forests so that the 
benefits of that renewable resource will be enjoyed by our 
children, and our children's children, and their children, Mr. 
Speaker, in perpetuity. 
 
To this end, Mr. Speaker, the government and Weyerhaeuser 
Canada have reached an agreement in principle for a forestry 
licence that opens up a new era of enlightened forest 
management. The new agreement will help us realize our vision 
for the North by giving us more woodlands jobs, more 
opportunities for small Saskatchewan forestry firms, better 
forest allocations, more efficient cutting rights, and a long-term 
renewal plan, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan timber. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the pulp mill in Prince Albert, 
under the ownership and with considerable investment of 
Weyerhaeuser, will be able to process hard woods which now 
go to waste in our forests. This use of hard woods, particularly 
aspen or poplar, is a key factor in our new forestry agreement. 
More efficient use of aspen will mean Weyerhaeuser will be 
able to harvest more timber in a smaller licence area. To say it 
another way, the company will be making more efficient use of 
all the timber in their cutting area, and that cutting area, Mr. 
Speaker, will be substantially smaller than the area that used be 
reserved for PAPCO. The result is that more wood is now 
available for other Saskatchewan forestry companies. Together 
with this, a more efficient renewal program will mean 
comprehensive reforestation that's going to guarantee a 
long-term future for this important renewable resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with your permission I will try to summarize as 
briefly as I can the elements of the forest licence arrangement. 
They are as follows: 
 
1. Tighter control over forest management by using shorter 
licence terms of 20 years with five-year renewals instead of the 
older 30-year terms; 
2. More wood for small operators by increasing 80 per cent the 
amount of timber which can be harvested 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

160 
 
 

by other operators in Weyerhaeuser's licence area; 
3. More timberland made available for small operators outside 
Weyerhaeuser's core licence area by providing more 
non-exclusive harvesting areas and by increasing the amount of 
timber which can be cut by small operators; 
4. A 'use or lose' harvesting system whereby the size of the 
agreement area available to Weyerhaeuser can be increased or 
decreased depending on the company's demonstrated use. 
 
Next, more revenue for the province through an increase in 
stumpage fees which will bring the former level paid by 
PAPCO to the equitable level paid by other operators, and a 
strong company commitment to good forest management, based 
on obligations for proper timber use and reforestation at the 
expense of the company. 
 
Better planning of timberland development tied to a long-term 
approved forest management strategy which will include other 
forest resource uses — for example, resources like wildlife; and 
reduction of forest waste, by harvesting those hard woods 
which were previously unused or were discarded in the process 
of timber cutting. 
 
In the future, Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of northern 
Saskatchewan will look back on these two announcements 
made today as the dawn of a new era in the forestry industry, a 
revitalization our pulp capacity, plus the construction of a major 
Canadian pulp mill, and a new timber agreement to bring added 
wealth and long-term security to our forest lands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision for northern development is becoming a 
reality, a reality which is going to provide jobs now and in the 
future for Saskatchewan citizens. I want to thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, and members of the opposition for allowing me to 
participate in this throne speech debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
opportunity to respond. I realize that the rules don't allow my 
seatmate and someone that knows that area like the back of his 
hand and could respond more adequately to this kind of an 
announcement. 
 
But this announcement today, Mr. Speaker, when we think of 
history — and I was thinking of the remarks I was going to 
make in my throne speech — it's interesting to hear this and to 
see how history repeats itself. It seems to me we have a similar 
situation here as to what we had when Davey Steuart stood up 
and in grandiose style announced a little sweetheart deal with 
the fellows that nobody forgets in Saskatchewan. 
 
When this gentleman across the way — the Deputy Premier —
made this announcement today, he says we're not going to 
forget it for along time, and I can assure you that we won't. But 
the people of Saskatchewan remember Karl Landegger as well. 
They remember that Athabasca pulp mill announcement just as 
well, and the only difference here is we have a new company 
and a new 

player. 
 
We had the same de-regulation of the forestry; the same 
de-regulation. When he talks bout core areas and 'use or lose' 
terms in there, he makes it as though that's some threat to this 
new pulp mill. That's no threat to the pulp mill. That's a threat 
to the forestry and the heritage we have in our forestry to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
To allow a company free access and free title to that area of 
land at the expense of communities like Big River, Carrot 
River, Hudson Bay, or Green Lake, and to tell me that they like 
it, I can assure you that the member from Meadow Lake better 
not spend any more time in this House. He'd better get home 
and start doing a little lobbying and have a little love-in to make 
sure that they like it because I know that his constituents aren't 
going to like this announcement today. 
 
The little fellow . . . What riding is he in? The person that sits 
two seats behind you, the little member from Turtleford, is 
going to have his hands full. He can speak in whatever brogue 
he likes, but he's not going to convince the people of Big River 
that this is a good idea for them. To give a core area, and to sell 
them out on this kind of a deal today, smacks of exactly what 
Davey Steuart tried to do. And you'd think that they'd learn. 
They tried to copy, they tried to copy their slogan that we're 
open for business. They painted the green slogan red and blue 
and thought that everybody in Saskatchewan would jump on 
this new slogan and say, we're open for business. 
 
Now they're stooping at the dawn of an election and say we've 
got to have a megaproject. Fellows, we've got to get together, 
and we've got find somebody to come in here and buy a 
megaproject. So they give a $400 million pulp mill at P.A. They 
give the taxpayers' pulp mill away for $248 million, or $250 
million. They put up another $83 million to beg them to come 
in, with no assurance that they have a share in the company, just 
a guaranteed loan. Give them the guaranteed loans like you did 
to Peter Lougheed's family when they bought the coal mine at 
Coronach. Give them those kinds of deals, create little love-ins 
with your friends that have the money. 
 
And I'm going to tell you something — the people of 
Saskatchewan don't like it. The people of Saskatchewan are 
going to do to you exactly like they did to Davey Steuart and 
his little band of men that sat over here. The only difference is, 
Mr. Speaker, back in '64 to '71 we didn't quite have the 
mismanagement like these people have here today. We didn't 
have that $2 billion deficit hanging on the heads of all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you will know and you will find out that the writing's on 
the wall. The truck drivers, the suppliers, the garages, the 
people up there that are looking after the thousand or more 
people that are working in forestry today, that are working in 
their sawmill operations, they're going to say to you, you can 
have your giant operator take over this forest, you can give it to 
him, and you can give him a core area to use or lose. Well, I 
don't think that's going to wash, Mr. Speaker. I don't think that's 
going to wash. 
 
And if that's your megaproject, if that's your megaproject, to go 
into an election when you hide the Public Accounts 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

161 
 
 

from the people, you hide the Public Accounts . . . And today in 
question period he stood up and said that there's been dates like 
March 28th before. What about '73? In February 6th, 1971-72, 
Public Accounts were tabled by February 6th. We weren't afraid 
to let people know what's happened. '72-73, December 19th — 
you can go down the row and there's only one year when there 
was March 20th. Every other year was in December, late as 
February 24th, and now all of a sudden . . . 
 
I have the dates right here before me that were tabled from 
every date from 1973 to 1985, and the only times it was late 
was in 1983, when it was February 24th; '84, March 23rd; and 
'85, April 12th, and what's it going to be this year, Mr. Speaker? 
Likely after the election's called, because there are numbers in 
there that damned you people last year, that let the people of 
Saskatchewan know where your priorities lie and who you want 
to spend on, and what kind of sweetheart deals you're making 
with your friends like this deal on the pulp mill today, like your 
advertising deal, like the deals you've made with Peter 
Pocklington, and so on. 
 
And I want to say that as I get into the main remarks of my 
throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I think that when we gathered in 
this House, when we started this session, with a tribute to one 
that all Saskatchewan people love, and different ones in the 
legislature, and particular the Premier, tried to tie his reputation 
to one Tommy Douglas. I would today like to pay tribute to all 
those that have served in their capacity as MLAs, and as leaders 
of parties in different positions, those that have gone before and 
paved the way for opportunity for people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say to my colleague, the member for 
Cumberland, that I appreciated getting to know what his people 
stand for and their values, very much having served and worked 
with our dear friend and brother for four years. Others in this 
Assembly — the member for Rosthern, who has decided not to 
run after serving his constituents well, recognized the needs and 
aspirations of the people, and particularly the large Mennonite 
community in his area that he was so well able to serve. But I 
don't blame him for not running again. If I'd have to rub 
shoulders with cronies like he has had to in the last four years, 
no wonder he's decided not to run again. No wonder he's 
decided not to run again. 
 
Our friend from Regina South is hoping the election is going to 
be till later on in July or maybe even in fall or next spring, 
because if it's held earlier, his trip to England will likely be off. 
And I suppose the other 10 members or so that aren't running 
again would also like to see the election, that it wouldn't be 
called real soon because they can see the writing on the wall. 
 
And so we're standing at a crossroad. Much of the pressure has 
been talking about that there'll be an early election. We 
anticipate it will likely be called within a week. But there are 
good reasons why it likely won't be able to be called for another 
year or more. 
 
To recap my history in politics, I think of the time, that I can 
remember, that I decided to get into politics was because of the 
lean, dry years we had from '64 to '71. 

Business foreclosures across our area down in southern 
Saskatchewan were in record numbers. Agencies were folding 
and moving out. Farms were getting larger and larger, picking 
up the land that came up for sale, as young people wouldn't and 
didn't go back to the farms. 
 
But in that time I noticed something that bothered me a little bit, 
and that was that the friends of the Liberal government were 
doing reasonably well. Contractors that were related to the 
Liberal Party seemed to be getting the better jobs and seemed to 
do reasonably well. Other groups in society that the Liberal 
Party decided to favour in their wisdom were doing well, as 
well, and there was a gap forming between those that had, and 
those that didn't have. 
 
In '71 there was a turn-around. We had a new government 
formed in Saskatchewan. Businesses turned around. It wasn't 
long before dealers were lining up equipment and bringing in 
and taking risks and bringing in lots of stock. Business turned 
around, housing starts were up to record numbers, and the 
province began to pay its own way. Wealth was being reaped 
from the oil patch. I had contracts . . . I was involved and I 
know what was happening, and by 1981 the oil patch was 
bringing in a revenue of over $600 million —close to $700 
million a year. 
 
Potash mines, that in the '64 to '71 period were on a quota, were 
running at a third throttle — just not even half bore, only a third 
— production was way down; potash was losing money. But in 
the '71 era, from '71 to '81, the potash industry turned around, 
Mr. Speaker, and the potash began to make money. And by 
1981 we were making 175 or $180 million in potash. 
 
Uranium mines were opened up across northern Saskatchewan, 
and jobs were created. Saskatchewan's future was one that was 
positive. Good management, together with a good planning 
team, had the kind of approach, Mr. Speaker, that built a new 
vision and new opportunities in Saskatchewan. And by 1981 the 
province had accumulated a surplus. 
 
They met the needs and aspirations of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And young people in particular were coming 
back to farm. Farmers my age group were making a little 
money. General public got relaxed and were comfortable and 
saying, everything's great. Everything's great. 
 
And what happened? Along came a little cheer-leader, the 
invisible man, as he called himself the other day in this House 
when we were here. And you remember that, Mr. Speaker. And 
he started making some promises. And they said, vote for us 
and you'll have some cheap gas; you'll have some cheap 
mortgages; you'll have some jobs; we'll reduce the welfare roll. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker? Did all those things come to 
pass? Did we have that kind of prosperity that he promised to 
the people that were living in comparative luxury and living in 
comfort? Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that hardship 
creates some dissension. Good wealth restores a sense of 
lackadaisical attitude, and the people decided to go for it. We're 
going to give them a try. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

162 
 
 

And they elected you right across the province in seats that you 
shouldn't have got. There's just no way that Riversdale should 
have gone Tory. Seats all over the province went Tory. And 
people had some visions that we're going to give them a chance. 
 
In just four years, Mr. Speaker, in just four years, what has 
happened? What has happened to those young farmers down in 
my riding; Rockglen, where's there's 25, 30 new couples moved 
in, in the years from '71 to '81? What's happened to those young 
people? Have they got hope and a vision of tomorrow? Are they 
happy with the Tory government that promised all those things? 
Are they content, and are they living at ease and in luxury and 
enjoying life? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and those young people and all of 
us wound up with a $2 billion deficit. We've got the debt on our 
hands. If you'd rent out your farm and go back to Europe for 
two years, Mr. Speaker, and you'd come with that farm 
mortgaged to the hilt, what would you do? What would you do? 
 
Well, I want to tell you we came back to face Saskatchewan 
four years later, one election later, and here we had a province 
that was making money in oil, was making money in potash, 
was making money in uranium, was making money on the 
farms and the small business. Things were comfortable. And all 
of a sudden we've got the highest welfare rate, welfare roll, 
ever; the most people unemployed and looking for work; 
farmers across the piece not making any money; and people are 
saying, we never dreamt it was possible; we didn't think we 
could face that kind of tough times in Saskatchewan. And 
things became really tough and really rough. 
 
(1515) 
 
Why did this kind of a mass resentment take place, Mr. 
Speaker? Why did we get this kind of a mass resentment, and 
what are we going to do about it? The Tories got their heads 
together and said, it's time to make some announcements. 
Today we got the announcement on a pulp company. A couple 
of weeks ago our Premier went down to Estevan to make 
another announcement, an announcement on Rafferty. It was a 
decision based on the need to get re-elected. They exaggerated 
the benefits and deflated the price. The Premier and the Deputy 
Premier were down there and they left very, very many 
questions unanswered. 
 
What is Rafferty dam, Mr. Speaker? If you look at a map, 
there's a valley that leads from Estevan up towards Weyburn on 
the north side, about 45, 48, maybe 50 kilometres — a valley 
that has ranching. It's the kind of land that isn't cultivated; little 
bit of hay irrigation there. They tell me, the PFRA figures tell, 
that when that dam is full there'll be 760,000 — 760,000 
acre-feet of water. Now you imagine how big an acre is. You 
take 760,000 acres and put a foot of water on there, that's as 
much as Rafferty dam could hold when it's full. What about a 
dry year? How much water will there be in a dry year, Mr. 
Deputy Premier? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much is there in Diefenbaker in a 
dry year? 

Mr. Engel: — The Deputy Premier wants to know much water 
is there in Diefenbaker Lake in a dry year. Well we've had three 
dry years. We've had three dry years and the shore line from 
Diefenbaker Lake went down a little bit. You know it better 
than I do. But I've looked at it and the shore line is down a little 
bit. But, Mr. Speaker, it didn't go down to 3,600 acre-feet of 
water. 
 
The guaranteed level in Rafferty will be, not 760,000 acre-feet, 
but 3,600. Now just imagine a 45-mile-long valley, a mud flat, 
with 3,000 acre-feet of water at one end, enough water for one 
cooling generating station. This is what they're foisting on the 
people of that valley. 
 
Rafferty dam is gong to be the largest mud flat in the world in 
an average year. In a dry year it won't even be a mud flat. It will 
just be a valley that's not used, and I don't know what's going to 
grow in there. I haven't had a clue. The environmentalists don't 
know what's going to grow but it isn't going to be good hay, it's 
not going to be good hay —it's not going to be a good hay. Mr. 
Speaker, in three years out of 100 it'll be full. Three years out of 
100, Rafferty is going to be full. That's worth spending $160 
million on. 
 
Now the Premier stood up, and I believe he thought he was 
sincere and honest. Somebody gave him a script to read, and he 
said, we're going to use Rafferty dam for recreation and 
irrigation. Well I can tell my friends that love sailing . . . And 
maybe Jack Chapman will go down there and ride his boat — 
he's got a nice sail boat and I've ridden with him on Diefenbaker 
Lake — maybe he'll take his sail boat down there and sail on a 
wet year. He'll have a nice 45-mile stretch he can sail on. But on 
a dry year he might as well put it on a pond because the lake at 
Boundary dam is going to be as big. That's all the water that's 
going to be there on a normal dry year. 
 
On a wet year, when things are really wet and we've got a lot of 
rainfall and a lot of snowfall, then the farmers will be irrigating. 
I don't know too many farmers — the member from Morse 
maybe does . . . Maybe you have to irrigate when it's wet, but 
when it's dry and you want to irrigate, it's going to be 3,000 
acre-feet of water, not 750,000. 
 
So I think when you look at the whole story and you see the 
whole and look at all the facts, two things stand out. Number 
one, it was a vehicle to elect the Deputy Premier and the 
Premier, the Bobbsey twins. The Bobbsey twins thought, this is 
a good scheme to get elected on. That's one thing. The only 
other thing about Rafferty that I can see — and that it's a 
vehicle to pay off their friend, Mr. George Hill. I can't see 
another good reason that come out of this Rafferty dam. It's 
some fancy deal where they could pay off our friend, George 
Hill. 
 
I think that when the chickens come home to roost, the people 
in Saskatchewan will be saying the same poem as the young 
children at Coronach did. And they revised a nursery rhyme, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think I'd like to read that into the record at 
this time. And to make this nursery rhyme work, I'm going to 
have to use the Premier's name. It's in a quote in a poem. So on 
those cases will you not . . . Could I use the name? I'm reading a 
poem. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

163 
 
 

But anyhow, the poem goes like this: 
 

Grant Devine went up to Hill 
To fetch a little power. 
Grant fell down and lost his crown 
And Hill came tumbling after. 

 
And I think there's your story. There's your story on the 
Rafferty dam. There's your story on what the people are going 
to do as far as Rafferty dam is concerned. 
 
Announcements like Rafferty dam, announcements like the 
pulp mill, announcements like the pork operation, $10 million 
grant to Peter Pocklington — those kind of announcements are 
going to come home to haunt all of you. 
 
CAT scans — we needed CAT scans in Saskatchewan. The 
waiting list on CAT scans . . . They should have built one in '83, 
they should have bought one in '84, and they should have 
bought one in '85 and the other three this year. But now they're 
trying to convince the doctors that they're going to buy six at 
one time. Who'd believe you? Who would believe those kind of 
promises? 
 
If I look at these kind of promises, it's what somebody in my 
constituency coined "catch-up politics." And I'll tell you what 
catch-up politics is all about: you try and announce at the end of 
your four-year period everything that you should have done in 
four years. But I want to tell you, it doesn't work, because 
catch-up politics means it's going to catch up to you, and the 
people have got your number, and they won't believe you. And 
nobody in Saskatchewan's going to call it catch-up politics; 
they're going to call it missed opportunities. 
 
In four years people that needed CAT scans were going down to 
Minot. They're weren't getting them in Saskatchewan, because 
catch-up politics is a little too late, Mr. Minister of Health. 
You're a little too late with your announcement to expect 
anybody to believe you. 
 
Another example of that — and I'd like to get a little closer to 
home than Rafferty or the pulp mill — and let's go to 
Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan. In 1981, Mr. Minister of Health, 
Gravelbourg did a study on their local hospital and nursing 
home. They spent $20,000 on this study and the feasibility 
study. Plans were in motion to proceed in '82 with a renovation 
and new construction down at Gravelbourg. 
 
What happened? This government sat on those plans. They 
wouldn't move; they wouldn't go ahead with the construction. 
What I'm talking about is Gravelbourg, and the Minister of 
Health well knows. There we have a plant that was built more 
than 50 years ago. It was a well used plant already when it came 
along, and so I know the age of that hospital. That hospital was 
built . . . Out-patient delivery of care comes from the fourth 
floor in the Gravelbourg hospital. Their offices are on the main 
floor and their patients are on the second and third floor. It's the 
kind of facility that isn't designed to meet today's needs. It 
needs a major renovation and overhaul to bring the hospital 
down to where we can use it. 
 
The nursing home which was built in the '60s was built to 

accommodate levels 1 and 2 care. The people have gotten in 
worse and worse condition and the nursing home is stacked 
with level 3 and 4 people. The facilities aren't available to 
handle that kind of care. The doors are too small to roll beds in 
and out. The rooms are too small to properly care for them. 
They need a massive overhaul. 
 
What did this PC government do in the last four years? The 
study was completed four years ago. The project was ready to 
go. What did these guys do? This spring they made an 
announcement that they're going to do something. All of a 
sudden now they're going to start. 
 
How much credibility is in their announcement? I looked at 
their five-year plan and I questioned the Minister of Health. 
Gravelbourg wasn't on your five-year plan. It wasn't a promise. 
But now all of a sudden it's an election promise saying, elect a 
PC down here and you'll get your nursing home and hospital. 
 
The people of Gravelbourg don't believe you. I don't believe 
you. And the people of Gravelbourg know that if they want to 
get their nursing home built, they're going to elect the member 
that's been fighting for it for the last 10 years. We’re going to 
get their housing unit. 
 
Something that I am really proud of and I had some input into 
our planning and strategy committee is our new housing 
program that we announced just today, Mr. Speaker. And I'm 
sure you'll be interested in hearing it in case you didn't hear the 
noon news and hear the announcement that our leader made up 
in Saskatoon when he announced the new housing plan. 
 
We've got a four-point housing policy, Mr. Speaker, that we 
announced. When we form this next government in five or six 
weeks time, whenever the take-over is going to be — I believe 
it will be sooner than six weeks, but whenever it's going to be 
— we're going to provide every young family that hasn't had a 
house, first-time home buyers, with $7,000 assistance to build 
their first-time new house. 
 
This program isn't going to be a one-year shot like your other 
approaches in the past. We're going to make this assistance 
program available for a minimum of three years. We expect that 
this will be the kind of cash injection young people need, that 
were looking for jobs, that were sitting by, frustrated because 
they couldn’t find work under your present administration. We 
think this kind of an injection of cash is going to turn it around 
in Saskatchewan. It's going to get the builders and the plumbers 
and the electricians, the retailers that sell furniture and 
appliances, going. And it's going to create the kind of 
employment, the kind of enthusiasm, and the kind of 
opportunity that Saskatchewan has been looking for, and been 
seriously looking for, for four years. 
 
The other aspect of that package, Mr. Speaker — that's a 
four-point package — the other aspect is going to be that we're 
going to provide protection which will guarantee the home 
mortgage interest rates. Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker, 
because this is going to catch you. We're going to guarantee the 
interest rates at 7 per cent for seven years on the first $70,000. 
There are some numbers that you can remember, Mr. Speaker 
— $7,000 for a first home; 7 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

164 
 
 

per cent interest for seven years up to the first $70,000 of their 
mortgage. And besides that, for those that are living out in the 
country, or those that want to rebuild their home, we're going to 
have a home rehabilitation assistance plan which will provide 
another $7,000 — up to $7,000 for assistance for those who 
want to make major renovations and improvement to their older 
homes. 
 
This commitment is going to provide jobs that are so badly 
needed in Saskatchewan. It's going to put people to work and 
it's going to be something that works. And the housing program, 
Mr. Speaker, the housing program in Saskatchewan is going to 
get generated like it's never been before. 
 
Let me take a moment now to turn to the area that I've been the 
critic for and had the responsibility of trying to keep herd on 
three different cabinet ministers during the last four years. I'm 
sure that they had no place else to go, Mr. Speaker. We've 
watched the Deputy Premier try and hang on to agriculture and 
get a good economic climate out there and try to build some 
support in rural Saskatchewan. It didn't work. They got the 
member for Weyburn to step in and take over agriculture and all 
we had is drought and grasshoppers. And now to bail out the 
Tory party they said we're going for the best; we're going to put 
in our Premier. And what's happened? What's happened with 
agriculture? What happened to the headlines since that time? 
 
A headline in February 3, 1986, and I want to start with a 
religious paper, The Prairie Messenger: "Agriculture crisis hits 
family farms." February 3, '86: 
 

The current crisis facing agriculture producers on the 
Prairies may mean an end to the traditional family farm. 

 
That's a headline in the Messenger — "Agriculture crisis hits 
family farm." Who's the Minister of Agriculture? Our Premier 
hasn't been able to pull it out of the crisis. 
 
Another headline, March 20, 1986: "Grain prices may tumble." 
Jim Knisley, in the Leader-Post said: 
 

The light that farmers have been seeing at the end of the 
tunnel for the last few years is now clearly in sight, but it's 
attached to an oncoming train. 

 
And he goes on to describe what this express is going to do to 
farmers. A panel of experts during the third annual 
Saskatchewan Grain Prospects conference said that 
Saskatchewan farmers would get about $800 million less 
income in this coming year. 
 
(1530) 
 
Eight hundred million dollars less. It was summed up by Gary 
Storey, a Professor of Agriculture at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And Storey said prospects are not very 
promising. Prices for wheat, Saskatchewan's largest crop, could 
drop by 20 to 30 per cent. 
 
And what does our minister, the Premier of Saskatchewan, do 
about it when grain prices are expected to drop by 30 per cent? 
"Saskatchewan farmers 

face big income drops"; "Farmers warned income will drop"; 
“Figures show on-farm land values are declining"; “Farm life 
worsens during hard times." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the wrong person took over the Agriculture 
portfolio, because instead of getting better, instead of being as 
good as it was when the minister of Agriculture was the 
member for Weyburn, things are getting worse. In fact, 
according to the 25th edition of the Leader-Post, wheat prices 
are expected to hit a 55-year low. During the last 55 years the 
average price for a tonne of wheat has been about $242 — 
1981. And today we’re back to the same old Tory times, those 
tough times, when wheat prices hit a low. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was 1931. Who was in power then? 
 
Mr. Engel: — Yes. Anderson government was in power in 
1931. And we've hit the lowest wheat prices ever. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee called on the 
federal government and on the minister in charge of the 
Canadian Wheat Board that we need a deficiency payment. If 
we can't compete, if we can't compete with the farmers from the 
United States, and if we can't compete with the farmers from 
the Common Market, Saskatchewan farmers just aren't going to 
hang in there. 
 
And what do the Tories do? What do the Tories do when 
farmers are facing this tough times? Well I have a little 
document here, Mr. Speaker, and Deputy Speaker — I don't 
know who's in charge right now — but I want to show you here 
a document. It's called Economic Growth: Agriculture Section. 
 
I wonder how many of you have seen this. I'd like to know how 
many people on the opposition side have seen it. This is a study 
team report to the task force on program review. And we have a 
document here that has, for agriculture alone, some 266 pages 
— 266 pages here. And cheapie from Regina North East is 
asking it be tabled. Well I'll tell him to lay out 35 bucks like we 
did and buy yourself a set. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I've got a set. They sent me a set for 
nothing. They did. I'm still on the Tory mailing list. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Tories still rank. Tories till rank pretty 
good. We didn't have that privilege. 
 
Let me quote from page 22. And there's some very, very 
distressing — very, very distressing things here. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for your edification, so maybe you, of all the 
Tory members, will come on side and start sending some 
vibrations to Ottawa, in closing this section here on the 
Canadian Wheat Board, the study team writes: 
 

One has to wonder whether an organization such as the 
Canadian Wheat Board is a liability or an asset. 

 
They wonder if it's a liability or an asset. 
 

It discourages criticism. It tends to stifle innovation. It 
slows down strategic thinking. And 

  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

165 
 
 

it could become a vehicle to hide mistakes. 
 
It could become. They didn't say it does hide mistakes. The 
didn't say it stifles it. But it might and it could. So their number 
one aim, and the aim of this report, is, let's do away with the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Let's do away with the Canadian Wheat 
Board. And I am telling you, the end of that chapter says, 
agriculture is good for Canada. 
 
I want to say that if this report is tabled, that line will read, 
agriculture was good for Canada. Because I like what the 
Canadian Wheat Board has been able to do, in spite of Tory 
governments and in spite of Liberal governments. They got in 
and marketed my grain at the best possible advantage to me, 
and not at an advantage to a friend of one of the other. And this 
Nielsen report takes on the Canadian Wheat Board. It also 
recommends scrapping the PFRA and farm improvement loans. 
They said those are not in the best interests of farmers. The 
report says that those programs have to go, as well. 
 
The Nielsen report recommends a shift in accounting to the 
accrual method. Now I’m not sure if you know what that 
means, because you haven't said anything about it. I listened 
carefully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to your speech and you didn't 
talk about it. You didn't mention the Nielsen report or what the 
Nielsen report was going to do. But what that does in a year like 
this when you have your granaries full of wheat . . . To me this 
year it wouldn't make any difference because my bins are empty 
and my carry-over wasn't anything. But you'll pay income tax 
the minute you're through harvesting on the grain you've got on 
hand, and that report recommends calculating your income tax 
on a basis of what you grew that particular year, rather than 
what you sold — on the accrual method. And that is going to 
cost you a lot of tax, Mr. Member. 
 
And I want to tell you, you'd better get up, when you get out of 
that Chair, and start sending some messages to Ottawa, saying 
that you don't like the Nielsen report, because nobody else over 
there does. I listened to the speech of the member for Morse. 
Not a word against the Canadian Wheat Board, changes that are 
supposed to be made — didn't say a word about this report and 
this study that the Deputy Premier commissioned. 
 
He didn't say a word about the method of calculating our 
income tax. He didn't say a word about the PFRA being 
dismantled. And then when it gets right down to it, I suppose he 
doesn't care about cash advances that much. Maybe he doesn't 
need them, but I think the cash advance program — the minute 
harvest is done and you've got the bushels in your bin, you can 
get a cash advance on up to 75 per cent of the value of that 
grain — that has pulled a lot of farmers through when times are 
this tough. They're saying that they should abandon all cash 
advances. 
 
Rail line abandonment, they're saying, is supposed to be 
speeded up. The branch lines are costing us money and are 
costing upgrading, and they're saying they're costing 
modernizing the rail line. And I think this report is dynamite 
when it comes to serving farmers. 
 
The Nielsen report favours variable rates for shipping grain. 
Are you interested in that in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood? Do those farmers think it's to their 
advantage if the rail line's gone and they go to the main lines? 
Well, you shake your head in approval. But I want to tell you 
that on that page 88 in this report . . . and it talks about the 
whole aspect of payment to the railways, continue the $660 
million subsidy. 
 
There is no economic rationale for this subsidy. It exists as an 
acquired right to compensate for termination of the Crow rates 
on a 30 million tonne export crop. This subsidy amounts to over 
$20 a tonne, or roughly 10 per cent of the port price of your 
grain. They're saying that that $20 a tonne subsidy has to go. It 
doesn’t make any . . . They have no rationale for that. 
 
The other line that I was going to refer to says that branch land 
retention is the single biggest impediment to increasing grain 
handling efficiency. Well I've had no problem with efficiency 
of grain handling. My grain gets going every fall. We can haul 
in 5 to 6,000 bushels while we're harvesting, and their quotas 
continue to open and we get rid of our grain. The system is 
efficient enough to get rid of our grain. I don't want to pay the 
extra $20 a tonne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I'm sure you don’t 
either. 
 
I'd like to hear somebody, somebody from your side, send a 
message to Ottawa like they did from other provinces. 
Somebody from Saskatchewan speak up for the price for us. 
But what do we hear? What do we hear? The little cheer-leader 
pats Brian Mulroney on the back and says, keep up the good 
work, Brian. Big smile. 
 
The other aspect that they're saying in this report, and the other 
option they're doing is, they're saying, variable pricing options 
should be investigated. I think this report stinks. If I wouldn't 
have paid $30 for it, I'd rip it up right in front of this TV. It is 
that bad. But nobody from the government side is registering 
any complaints. And nobody from Saskatchewan, as far as the 
PC government is concerned, is saying to Erik Nielsen, we can 
live with that report. I haven't heard a word. And yet the other 
provinces are complaining. 
 
Nielsen would also have the grain growers in the province pay 
significantly more crop insurance. They're saying their crop 
insurance rates . . . and that was amazing. It's amazing how 
much they expect that the crop insurance should go up — by 20 
per cent. The federal government wants to save 20 per cent on 
crop insurance and pass that on to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
as far as the premium is concerned. They say that they want to 
get out of that. 
 
And this is only a partial list. I can't take the time of this House 
to go through all the changes that this Nielsen report 
recommends. So far we've heard no opposition whatsoever from 
the Devine government. From all appearances, they welcome it. 
They say, this is great. This is right-wing politics; it's great. 
Let's go with it. Let the fittest survive. I'm telling you that this 
spells the end to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Federal Agriculture Minister, John Wise, has been under 
considerable pressure from other provinces such as Ontario, and 
has already said Ottawa will not act on at least a couple of the 
recommendations, such as ending 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

166 
 
 

dairy payments or feed freight assistance. And from his point of 
view, why should he scrap any other sections of this report? For 
all he knows, the Saskatchewan government is whole-heartedly 
endorsing this report, and everything that is in the task force 
report. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan 
family farms don't endorse it. In fact, they don't want any part 
of the Nielsen report once they see what's in it. They reject its 
right-wing nonsense, and will also reject any political party that 
hasn't got the guts of the leadership to fight the imposition of 
these recommendations. 
 
We in the New Democratic Party have made it clear that we 
will not sit idly by and watch Erik Nielsen or Michael Wilson, 
or in fact Brian Mulroney, or any other Tory, do a hatchet job 
on the institutions and on the programs that people in the West 
have co-operated to build, like the Canadian Wheat Board, like 
the Crow benefit, and like our crop insurance. And any erosion 
of our rail system will be strongly opposed by the New 
Democratic Party once we form the next government. 
 
If the Devine government hopes to be able to pretend there is no 
threat to prairie agriculture in these recommendations, the 
Saskatchewan PCs want only to ignore the report and hope that 
strategy will get them through this next provincial election. 
 
Well, I'll tell you right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that tactic 
won't work. You either condemn those unacceptable portions of 
this report or you will be tarred with them, just like your federal 
party is being tarred. By refusing to fight the imposition of this 
proposal for agriculture, you are putting politics ahead of your 
duty to the province of Saskatchewan and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have spoken in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in times past, 
about cuts to the beef stabilization plan; the loopholes in The 
Farm Security Act which are letting more than half the 
foreclosures on farms go ahead at record-breaking numbers and 
it's very much shortened up times. I have condemned the 
counselling and assistance program which has provided a loan 
guarantee to only a handful of farmers. And as the Minister of 
Agriculture admitted in the spring session, there's only a 
handful that benefit from that program. 
 
I have spoken out against a tripartite hog stabilization plan 
which is only half as financially worthwhile to producers as 
SHARP (Saskatchewan hog assured returns program) was. I 
have opposed the livestock tax credit which only serves to get 
lawyers and doctors into the feedlot business to compete with 
bona fide farmers and bona fide cattle feeders. I have pointed 
out that the problems with the farm purchase program, where 
many young farmers with variable interest rates on their loan at 
the bank had been paying as much as 10.5 per cent more while 
the PC government sits back and likes to brag and say they got 
8 per cent money. So I'll not be surprised and not be supporting 
the measures in this throne speech because there's nothing in it 
for the rural community. 
 
I want to conclude my remarks by going on record as 

opposing not just this throne speech as a pitiful record that 
you've had in this office, but more than that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am opposed to the reign of terror that the PCs have 
carried out while they were in government. 
 
(1545) 
 
The PCs read the polls and they arrived at a conclusion that 
unions are an easy target for government. So instead of 
spending your time creating jobs and solving problems in 
agriculture, you construct a confrontation with civil servants. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a tactic that right-wing, red-neck 
politicians are interested not in good government, but rather 
demigod tactics. Young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
across my riding, several young people just this past week have 
come up to me and said that Tory organizers in my riding are 
using tactics to pressure young people into buying PC 
memberships with threats of losing their jobs. And if you want 
the names, I can give them to you. 
 
The PC pollsters have also told this government that an attack 
on welfare recipients will have some appeal. And this 
government has responded with cuts and asked people to line 
up to get their cheques. This, despite the fact that a very large 
percentage of Saskatchewan's citizens receiving social 
assistance are children of single parents, or physically or 
mentally handicapped, or elderly. 
 
In anticipation of this legislation being dissolved very, very 
soon and an election called, I don't want to delay the 
proceedings of this House for one minute longer. But I want to 
tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am pleased — I am pleased 
— with the programs we've put forward. We've put forward a 
housing program that's never been initiated before in this 
province, a housing program that has some grab in it, a housing 
program that people are going to love and respond to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — We've initiated other programs and other attacks 
that are going to provide fairness, that's going to provide sound 
fiscal management. People in my riding are saying we can't 
afford four more years. 
 
So I'm going to support — I'm going to support — the 
amendment that was put forward by our leader, and I'm going to 
vote against the resolution. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana on her feet? 
 
Mrs. Bacon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg leave of this 
Assembly to bring special greetings. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Anniversary of Greek Independence 
 
Mrs. Bacon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
colleagues in 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

167 
 
 

this House. Today, March 25th, is a very special day for the 
Greek communities in Saskatchewan, as well as across Canada. 
Today is the 165th anniversary of the country of Greece 
achieving independence from the occupation of the Turks. 
 
When we think of slavery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
hesitate to guess that most persons in North American reflect 
upon the Civil War that took place south of our boundaries. 
However, Father John Nikdlaou from the parish located in 
Nutana told me at a celebration on Sunday night in 
Saskatchewan that during the Turkish occupation of Greece the 
women and children were sold into slavery and the men were 
drafted into the army. 
 
I, like many of my colleagues, have come to know many people 
in the Greek community in Saskatchewan and have formed long 
and beneficial friendships. When my husband and I were first 
married and stationed in Humboldt at the RCMP detachment, it 
was two Greek families that became our surrogate parents for 
Easter and Christmas when were separated from our families, 
and opened their homes to us. 
 
Their contribution in Saskatchewan to the multiculturalism 
events such as Folkfest in Saskatoon has left a permanent mark. 
In Saskatoon they have their own Greek school, and their 
culture, their dances, their poetry, and their traditions are kept 
alive within their families. 
 
I would ask other members of this Assembly to join with me in 
celebration of their independence day, and I ask the other 
members join with me in extending to our Greek friends in this 
province and the country much happiness and continued 
prosperity. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to continue 
where I left off last night, although I've been interrupted by a 
very major event in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. As indicated in the throne speech, this 
government believes in economic development, and today you 
have heard the announcement of the sale of PAPCO and the 
expansion of the pulp mill and the building of a paper mill. 
 
What has happened in the House here today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is exactly what I thought would happen. The NDP 
haven't changed one little bit. They haven't learned anything at 
all. They are still against everything that isn't socialist 
orientated. They don't care whether there are jobs in this 
province. They only want government jobs and government 
corporations. They only want socialist jobs, sharing the 
diminishing pie rather than building. So therefore the members 
opposite immediately get up in this House and denounce the 
expansion of the P.A. pulp mill. And worse yet, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, again they have indicated they are against it. And I'm 
just waiting for them 

to say they would review it; they would kick out those people 
who create jobs. They don't want jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I'm going to show you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the 
expropriation dollar. I've saved it to remind myself and 
everyone in this province what the NDP have promised they 
will do if they ever — help us if they ever — got into power. 
They said for one dollar they would expropriate any Crown 
corporation we have sold. That's what they've said. That's their 
view. This is the expropriation dollar. This is the dirty dollar 
that they're going to use to destroy this province. And I will 
save it and I hope that I never see it spent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I will guard that dollar. 
 
The problem is that they have no respect for property. They 
have no respect for people investing and they are not in the least 
bit interested in jobs. They are interested in ideology. They are 
interested in their socialist ideology rather than jobs. And 
therefore we have examples. They denounce everything that's 
built. They denounce a power plant. They denounce every 
major project in this province that creates jobs. Why? Because 
it's not a socialist project. 
 
And then they say, remember Ross Thatcher, he build this pulp 
mill. He certainly did. It's still there and the jobs are still there. 
Where is their socialist shoe factory? Where's their socialist box 
factory? They're not there. Nobody even remembers them. 
Where are the jobs they created with those socialist plants? 
They don't exist because they don't work. So I am pleased that 
Ross Thatcher built the pulp mill, and I'm very pleased that 
Grant Devine can expand it and double its size. And the people 
of Saskatchewan will see it for 30 or 40 or 100 years. 
 
In addition, they are against everything. Where are the profits 
from the potash mines that their socialist philosophy was going 
to bring us? All we've got is a bottomless pit, a hole that sucks 
up our tax dollars year after year. They say, oh, don't sell it to 
any corporation. Well, if there are going to be losses, let it go to 
a corporation rather than the people of Saskatchewan. And if 
there's going to be profits, let the people of Saskatchewan take a 
fair tax and then let people make money on their investment. 
But basically, above all, there are jobs involved here, and that's 
what they are against. 
 
With respect to labour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and labour is 
something that they think they own, they have a few union 
leaders who are card-carrying members of their party, the 
powerful arm of their party. And they say, oh, we are labour. 
Well they are — they are big union labour. But they are not 
jobs; that's not what they are talking about. They are not the 
party of the worker; they are the labour party, not the worker 
party. They wouldn't call themselves the party of the worker. 
 
When I took over as Minister of Labour a few months ago, 
immediately there was a great turmoil created. Why? Because 
the NDP wanted to see turmoil; they wanted to see militancy. 
They encouraged people to march on the legislature. They 
encourage people to parade around in front of this building 
rather than be at their jobs working. Allan Blakeney has called 
for militancy, and that's what 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

168 
 
 

we have had. And if you ever re-elect him, that's all you're 
going to have. 
 
With respect to labour, our government has indicated in this 
throne speech that we stand for jobs. We stand for jobs and 
more jobs and continued jobs. And I, as the Minister of Labour, 
have taken a very clear position. I represent employees, whether 
they are organized or unorganized, whether they are unionized 
or non-unionized. I represent employees, not just a segment of 
this province, but all employees. And what I promised to all 
employees, and what our government has shown for all 
employees, is what's most important to employees: jobs, 
thousands and thousands of jobs. 
 
And yesterday we had the member for Regina Centre complain 
about the Worker's Compensation Board. With respect to the 
Workers' Compensation Board, it is something that we should 
be very, very proud of in this province. We have the best 
system of workers' compensation. It is funded; we have reserves 
to cover the cost of this board. And contrary, in Manitoba they 
have a deficit in the workers' compensation fund. They don't 
even meet their day-to-day obligations. That's the kind of 
management they've developed in Manitoba. 
 
In this province we have a very good system, the best in 
Canada. And it is now under review, as you know — as you 
know on the other side of the House here — that every four 
years this is reviewed, and a board is now sitting to review 
things. We expect that workers' compensation could be 
improved, and it will be improved, and it will continue to be the 
best plan in Saskatchewan, the best plan anywhere in North 
America, so much so that other people come here to study it. 
 
And in addition, the throne speech has promised protection for 
workers. And we will debate this Bill later, but my department 
has already delivered to this House an amendment to section 
11(1)(m) of The Trade Union Act, to protect workers. What 
they wish to do is protect their political friends. 
 
Now I have found, as Minister of Labour, that there are two 
kinds of union leaders. I have found a very professional group 
of union leaders, people who represent their people well, people 
who stay out of politics and take care of their members. And I 
have nothing but respect for those professional union leaders. I 
don't really care what their politics are, but they are truly 
professional and I have nothing but respect for them. 
 
On the other hand, I have found too many union leaders in this 
province, the leaders, who are not at all concerned about their 
members but are primarily concerned about politics. They are 
the political union leaders and I treat them as common 
politicians. And I have to treat them as common NDP 
politicians because that's what they are. 
 
So I have great respect for the professionals in the field. I have 
found them to be very, very helpful to their members and very, 
very firm in their views, and also realistic in how this province, 
this country, and this world operates. But with respect to the 
political leaders, I have to treat them 

like politicians. 
 
And then we have the members opposite who talk about 
unemployment, but they never talk about jobs. I want to report 
that there was an article in the Leader-Post of March 3rd, and 
the headline reads: "Women advancing in the job market." Now 
this is something that the members opposite don't want to talk 
about because they can't take credit for it, but in part it reads 
that females are outpacing males in Saskatchewan's labour 
market. In the last 10 years new jobs held by females grew at 
three times the rate of those of men. And that in the last 10 
years, jobs for females have increased form 23,000 to 52,000 in 
the 25- to 30-year age bracket where most of the new jobs have 
been created. 
 
It also goes on to state that these jobs for women are permanent 
jobs. They are permanent jobs for women, and that has had a 
major effect on Saskatchewan's economy. We now have a 65 
per cent participation rate in our labour force. There are more 
people working in Saskatchewan today than there ever have 
been in the history of this province. 
 
Statistics can be misleading. Let's talk about employment. More 
than 92 per cent of the people who want to work in this 
province have jobs, and that is a very good record. That is a 
record in this province for the number of people working. And I 
am very proud to indicate that many, many of these jobs are for 
women. For example, on an industrial basis the growth of 
female employment has outpaced men in all major categories, 
including agriculture. In government, females have increased 
their share of available jobs from one-third in 1975 to 57 per 
cent in 1985 — 57 per cent of all the workers in government in 
this province are females. That is not equality; that is 
superiority, and I have no objection to that. These are good 
jobs, they are clean jobs, they are well-paid jobs, and I'm very, 
very pleased that women have been able to fill them. 
 
(1600) 
 
So when we came to the topic of jobs, to the topic of labour, to 
the topic of employees and the importance of women having 
jobs, this is all a question of fairness, and it's very, very fair that 
there should be more jobs for women. 
 
And that leads me to my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where this government has seen fit to move the head office of 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to Melville, Saskatchewan. 
This is part of a decentralization plan that is very fair to all the 
citizens of this province. 
 
And it gets me back to the bad old days that I recall very, very 
well, the days when I was a member of the NDP. This is one of 
the reasons why I quit that party, because I recall when the NDP 
started farm programs — some of them good, some of them bad 
— but they all employed people. All of those jobs were in the 
large cities. 
 
I remember the hue and cry from the NDP: we have to save 
rural Saskatchewan; we have to save rural Saskatchewan with 
farm programs. And what did they 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

169 
 
 

do? They created hundreds of jobs in Regina — none in 
Davidson, none in Canora, none in Kamsack, none in 
Shaunavon — all of them in Regina. 
 
Are there any farms in Regina? Not very many, but all the jobs 
for farmers and all the jobs for their wives are in Regina, so 
farmers couldn't hold these jobs to keep their farm going. 
Farmers' wives couldn't get work. That's what's fair about 
decentralization. 
 
There are thousands and thousands of government jobs in the 
city of Regina. There are very, very few in rural Saskatchewan. 
Those people pay taxes, and those women deserve jobs as well, 
I tell you in the NDP. Those women deserve a fair chance at 
employment. It is tough enough for a farmer to make a living 
without his wife being unable to get a job. Here in Regina you 
have two-income families. Out in rural Saskatchewan they're 
half-income families, because a farmer can only make a half an 
income because all of the money is going to your friends right 
here. 
 
Your friends are demanding more. They've come to me as the 
Minister of Labour. They say, we need more money. I said yes, 
you do; but I want you to think about this: that while you're 
making $2,000 a month the farmers of this province are making 
$1,000 a month. And do you wish me to take more money from 
them so that you can make $2,500 a month? Do you think they 
can live on $500 a month? Well that is quite a question. The 
question is fairness, and decentralization is very, very fair. 
 
I remember the NDP. I remember being at your convention in 
1974, and I remember when you publicly stated that you 
believed in decentralization. And you publicly stated that you 
would decentralize government and give equal opportunity to 
all people in this province. And what did you do? Nothing. You 
continued to put jobs in the city so that farmers would go 
hungry. And during your reign and during the period of your 
government, while you talked about decentralization . . . And 
your leader now says, oh, he started it, and it's good thing. No, 
that is not correct. He promised, and now we are delivering. 
 
During that period of time, in 1960 the city of Melville was 
incorporated as a city with 5,800 people — 5,800 people in the 
city of Melville in 1960. By the time we got to the 1981 census, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the city of Melville had shrank to 5,100 
people. The city of Melville, when I was elected, was in danger 
of becoming a town. And I have turned that around, with the 
help of this government — this government that believes in 
fairness, that believes in decentralization, and that believes that 
when there are 55 jobs and approximately 45 of those are for 
women, that rural women should have a fair chance at those 
jobs. 
 
Now I am the Minister of Labour. And we are not a ruthless 
government, and we have indicated very clearly to those 
employees in Regina that we will not force them to leave the 
city if they have reason to stay here. If they have family ties, if 
they have economic reasons, personal reasons why they cannot 
move from Regina to Melville, that we will help them find jobs 
in other government departments — and we have thousands of 
other government departmental jobs in this city of Regina. And 

it seems to me that when there are well over 5,000 — and there 
could be 10,000 — government workers in Regina, that to 
move 55 of them to Melville to give the city of Melville a fair 
chance is not unreasonable. But that's not what Larry Brown 
says. Larry Brown says, we won't go. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who's Larry Brown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Larry Brown is the head of their union, 
and he has a duty to represent his workers. I agree he has that 
duty. And I am advised that Larry Brown was a former 
executive assistant to the NDP minister of Labour. So there may 
be some connection between Larry Brown and the members 
opposite. However, I agree he has a duty to his members to 
represent them. But if he is a member of the NDP, and if 
anyone is a member of the NDP and opposes decentralization, I 
ask them: do they have a social conscience? Do they think the 
people in Melville should starve? Do they think they should live 
without jobs, or do they think they should all come to Regina? 
Do they think that the farmers in the surrounding areas should 
not have a chance for their wives and their children to get jobs? 
Should they all have to come and live in Regina Centre? I think 
not. 
 
And so I say this is a matter of fairness. We are delivering 
decentralization. We are taking rural departments to where the 
people are. And therefore I am stating clearly to the NDP that if 
they have a social conscience at all, they will control their 
people and they will co-operate with the move of this 
department to a city that is in need. And this government looks 
after the needy, not the greedy. And I ask the NDP not to be 
greedy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have already explained the fairness of 
the move, of decentralization, to Swift Current and to Melville. 
And now I want to say to the workers that are coming to 
Melville, and to those who cannot come, that our government 
will be fair with respect to the transfer of people; there will be a 
lucrative package to assist in moving; that there will be 
consultation; and that people who cannot move will be dealt 
with fairly. And for that reason, I ask them to be co-operative; I 
ask them to be understanding; and I ask them to understand that 
fairness requires that other parts of the province also have 
employment. 
 
So therefore I look forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this 
decentralization. I look forward to these workers coming to 
Melville. I know that they will like my city very much. The city 
is waiting with open arms. This is the biggest job creation in the 
city of Melville since 1907 when the railroad came to Melville. 
And the people of Melville will appreciate it very, very much. 
And I encourage the NDP on that side, I encourage them to 
co-operate and control their greedy members. 
 
Thank you very much, and I expect co-operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It's a great deal of pleasure for me this afternoon to rise in the 
Assembly and speak on the excellent throne speech that we 
heard in this Assembly a week ago yesterday by the Lieutenant 
Governor of our province. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

170 
 
 

And I want to congratulate the member from Regina North, my 
colleague, for his moving of the throne speech, and also the 
member of Humboldt who seconded that motion. 
 
It's also an honour for me to be in this Assembly representing 
the people of Yorkton and my constituents. We wish to bring 
greetings to the Assembly from them. 
 
As most of you know, the Yorkton constituency is nestled in the 
east central region of the province, a city of some 16,000 
people, and surrounded by a prosperous and fertile mixed 
farming area better know as the parkland. 
 
And we are blessed with a hard-working population of many 
ethnic backgrounds. Pioneers who settled in the area in the late 
1800s and the early 1900s — pioneers from many countries of 
the world who saw a vision and opportunities for themselves 
and their families in the parkland. The predominant nationality 
that settled in this area is the Ukrainians who pulled up stakes in 
the Ukraine to begin a better and new life for themselves in 
Canada and Saskatchewan, and to leave behind the socialistic 
thumb that suppressed them, and state control that denied them 
the freedom to live and run their own lives and to own their 
own lands, and not to be an employee of the state. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I decided to run as a candidate for the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan under the 
dynamic leadership of Premier Grant Devine back in February 
of 1981, simply for the reason to play my part and help to stem 
the same socialistic suppression trends that my constituents 
tried to get away from when they pulled up stakes in their 
homelands. 
 
We saw an NDP government which reminded me of an octopus 
with its tentacles reaching out and snapping up our 
Saskatchewan farm land, choking out the oil industry, taking 
over businesses, and the list goes on and on. The members 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were so obsessed with their 
power that they forgot to listen to the grass roots, and we all 
know what happened in April of 1982. 
 
The electorate voted in '82 for Premier Grant Devine because 
they recognized leadership in this man and the Progressive 
Conservative Party. Leadership means vision and enthusiasm 
— that means trust and constant innovation. It means 
compassion and optimism — that means commitment and 
determination, that means dealing with the issues and concerns 
of Saskatchewan people. And from what I've heard in four years 
in this Assembly from the members opposite, that is not what 
they believe in. 
 
Within minutes of taking office we eliminated the gasoline tax 
which provided immediate additional income to Saskatchewan 
people and at the same time provided a boost to the economy 
through increased consumer spending. 
 
We brought in a 13.25 per cent interest rate reduction plan 
which helped over 44,000 families with the purchase of their 
homes. The people saw leadership in protecting the family farm 
and assisting young farmers to 

own their own land, land which often had been in their families 
for generations. 
 
Last spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a budget was presented to this 
Assembly by our Progressive Conservative government which 
set out and targeted funding for a five-year development plan 
covering the four basic corner-stones on which our province can 
be further developed, built, and strengthened. 
 
The four corner-stones, of course, are the employment 
development agency and the $600 million employment 
development fund; health care and the $300 million health 
capital fund; education and the $400 million education 
development fund; and agriculture with a $200 million 
development fund. 
 
What has this strong initiative on our four corner-stone 
commitment done for our province? Let's look at employment 
for a moment. Since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the 
leadership of Grant Devine and the Progressive Conservative 
government, 30,000 new jobs have been created. For four years 
we have, on average, led the nation with the lowest 
unemployment rate. And for the first time in our history our 
province has topped the one million mark of population; and 
our work-force hovers around the half-million people. All of 
this despite poor world market conditions for uranium, potash, 
our grain, and all of this despite severe drought and grasshopper 
infestation. 
 
Our second corner-stone is health care. And our Progressive 
Conservative government recognizes the importance of health 
care in protecting the people of Saskatchewan and is developing 
new and innovative responses to the needs of the 1980s and 
beyond. 
 
(1615) 
 
We are fully cognizant of the increased numbers of our ageing 
population and the increased life expectancy. We all must be 
participants within the health system, working together in a 
creative and meaningful way to provide a level of health care 
unmatched anywhere and still keeping within a cost which our 
society can afford; $1.2 billion has been budgeted for health 
care, one-third of our total provincial budget. With the $300 
million health capital fund which was set up last spring, 
additional funds are made available for targeted areas as 
circumstances occur. 
 
The recent announcement by my colleague, the Minister of 
Health, of extra funding for increased staffing and equipment of 
$100 million is a good example. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I agree with my 
colleague, the member from Melfort, whole-heartedly, when he 
states that the NDP use unadulterated scare tactics when talking 
to the electorate and suggesting that the Progressive 
Conservatives will take medicare away from them. I've talked 
with my many seniors and widows who confirmed that they 
were afraid to vote for us because of what NDP candidates had 
advised we would do with hospitalization. 
 
We would never have believed that grown men would 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

171 
 
 

stoop so low to mislead elderly people just to pick up a vote or 
two. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to the members opposite 
that if they try the same tactic in the next election, the electorate 
is going to discredit their integrity totally, when the people of 
the province know full well that never, in the history of our 
province, has so much money been spent and targeted to health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture, another major corner-stone of our 
province, is without a doubt the backbone of Saskatchewan. 
How agriculture goes and performs determines how 
Saskatchewan will perform; how small business will benefit. 
The ripple effect that happens in our economy when farmers 
have a cash flow is unbelievable and our Progressive 
Conservative government recognizes that fact. 
 
We only have to look at the many programs that have been 
provided to rural Saskatchewan, such as the 6 per cent loan 
program, where in the last five to six weeks $2 billion has been 
put into farmers' hands. I know the impact.The small businesses 
in Yorkton have prospered because of that cash flow that the 
farmers have had over the last few weeks —the livestock cash 
advance at zero per cent interest rate, the cash and protection for 
our cattle producers; the 8 per cent farm purchase program, 
solid interest rate protection for the young farmer who wishes to 
start farming; and the 21 cent per gallon rebate program, a 
payment made possible because of increased royalty revenues 
from the oil industry which we can pass on to our farmers. And 
we have heard for months and months and months the 
ridiculous nonsense coming from across the way, talking about 
the massive oil corporations stripping Saskatchewan of all their 
funds. 
 
The list goes on and on — a 500,000 exemption on the capital 
gains tax which will provide tax relief for farmers selling their 
land and which gives them a good retirement income; the 
announcement of the building of a brand-new agricultural 
college by our Premier a few days ago, a $78 million project 
has been required for some 25 years. 
 
Where has the NDP been during the last 11 years? They have 
been so busy buying up our farm land for the land bank, so busy 
at nationalizing potash mines, so busy building gold office 
towers, that they forgot that agriculture and small business even 
existed. Not one cent was offered the farmers to assist them 
when interest rates rose to 18, 19, and 20 per cent in the 1979 to 
1981 era. You outbid young farmers for land which drove the 
price sky-high. You were so obsessed with your power to run 
and own people's lives and ambitions that you forgot the 
electorate completely. 
 
Education, our fourth corner-stone, is the institution that will 
train our people, young and old, to cope with the technological 
environment that we will live in today. Our Progressive 
Conservative government is committed to enhancing 
opportunity and to promote economic development within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If the youth of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are to lead 
independent and productive lives, they require the necessary 
training and skills to secure a position in the work-force. 
Because of this commitment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we are targeting an additional $275 million to provide 
improvements over the next five years for youth from 
kindergarten to grade 12. 
 
Increased support, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for native education in 
a number of areas has already begun. We are continuing our 
support for native teacher education programs, alternative 
school development, and native curriculum development. Over 
the past year we have provided adult basic education to 
approximately 1,000 non-status and Metis people. Forty-eight 
hundred farmers in rural communities have upgraded their 
education. 
 
Three hundred Northerners have been training in mining, 
forestry, and wild rice harvesting, which has enabled over 200 
to find employment. This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is helping 
Northerners, including natives, to partake in Saskatchewan 
opportunities. 
 
Between 1982 and 1985, the Progressive Conservative 
government has provided $80 million more funding, and 
achieved 18,000 more student enrolment, than was the case 
between 1978 and 1981. We have also responded by providing 
$125 million through the implementation of the university 
renewal and development fund. Our community colleges and 
technical institutes are providing programs to assist people to 
learn a new trade or upgrade their own education and skills to 
enable them to actively participate in Saskatchewan's future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take a few moments to 
comment on various projects that have occurred in my 
constituency since April, 1982. 
 
A major renovation program to the Yorkton Union Hospital, 
approximately $14 million, which is covering the reception, 
admitting, emergency ward, administration offices, and a 
brand-new laundry facility. Probably one of the most highly 
technical laundries that we have seen for many, many years is 
in our hospital. 
 
A 31-bed senior citizens' complex, Victoria Place, at a cost of 
$1.6 million — a beautiful complex where seniors can enjoy 
their retirement. 
 
And the announcement of a new 40-bed nursing home to be 
added onto the present Yorkton nursing home. 
 
All these facilities to help the seniors of our Yorkton area and 
the whole zone of the area to come and use during their 
retirement or when they are ill. 
 
Funding has been arranged for blacktopping the road from 
Yorkton out to York Lake, which has been causing a lot of 
problems with dust and dirt, and the people that live along that 
road which is being used extensively now because of the 
development out at the lake with the ball diamonds, new cottage 
development, and a lot of activity going on there. 
 
Another area that I'm proud of, which will recognize the 
Ukrainian element of my constituency, was the generous 
co-operation from my colleagues for a $225,000 grant to help 
the Ukrainian Professional and Business Men's Association 
with their chapter two of the Ukrainian encyclopedia. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

172 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Volume two is the second of a series of four 
volumes, and volume two is going to be dedicated to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also had a $1 million addition to the Yorkdale Junior High 
School, and I want to thank my colleague, the Minister of 
Education, for that help in that school there. 
 
Another very, very interesting event that took place in our 
constituency last fall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the first 
national youth conference ever held in Canada, which was held 
in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. And the reason that that conference 
took place was the young people of my constituency who took 
up the challenge of Premier Grant Devine to host a national 
conference, and that is exactly what they did. And I want to 
publicly thank Heather Laxdal and Trent Tuttosi, the two 
students who were co-chairmen of that conference, and Barry 
Sharpe, the teacher at Yorkton Regional High School, and his 
colleagues, that put on such an excellent conference. It covered 
people from all provinces in Canada and also the United States. 
 
Another event that has just taken place and turned in to be one 
of the most exciting events that we have had in Yorkton was the 
Saskatchewan winter games. And here again I want to thank 
Jim Caudle and his committee for the tremendous job that they 
did in hosting the Saskatchewan games. 
 
The member from Regina North East asked, why aren't we 
talking about Mr. Pocklington? So let me tell the members 
opposite that, if you fellows are not anxious to have the pork 
plant — and I understand the Leader of the Opposition is going 
to be investigating — I'm telling you that we are aggressively 
gong after that pork plant for Yorkton. And I want to thank my 
council and their men for doing exactly that. 
 
You people are not in favour of jobs at all. Everything that's 
good you pooh-pooh. And to me it's people like the George 
Morrises, and the Pocklingtons, and the Degalmans, and the 
Malinowskis — people that have got the guts to put some 
money, and take some risk, and get the job done in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — I was never so embarrassed last November 
when I sat in this Assembly and listened to the garbage that 
came across the way of people that have the guts to do 
something in our province. I was embarrassed to even suggest 
that I belonged to Saskatchewan that day when I sat in that 
Assembly. 
 
We are going to go after that. We are going to go after that 
project and provide 400 to 500 jobs for the people of Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan. And I'm not going to listen to the garbage that 
comes across from over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — The other thing that we are really proud of 
and can see what is coming in our province is the 

Saskatchewan pension plan. And I was home on the last 
weekend, and I couldn't believe the response that came from my 
constituents covering that pension program. They have really 
enjoyed the home repair program, and hundreds of people 
applying and doing renovations in their homes. 
 
I've listened to the members opposite talk about the massive tax 
increases and so on, and they're going to return the tax that was 
collected from the education tax on used cars. I would like to 
know why you don't add the $26 million that you stole from 
orphans and widows when you had the succession duties on 
back in the '70s. Why don't you give that back to the people of 
Saskatchewan as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And I want to tell you why I believe that, 
Mr. Speaker, and why I believe that the majority of people in 
Saskatchewan hold that view as well. Sixty thousand reasons 
why, Mr. Speaker. We've set a goal to have 60,000 more people 
working in the province of Saskatchewan this summer than 
were working in 1982. This past year alone, 16,000 more jobs 
— 16,000 more people working this year than last year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's a future with a Progressive 
Conservative government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to compare for a minute, Mr. Speaker, the job creation 
record of the NDP government with that of the Devine 
government during the past four years. When we go back to 
October 1979 and we take a look at the permanent jobs that 
were created from October 1979 to October 1981 we find that 
the former NDP government created 4,000 permanent jobs. 
Now people might say that's not a bad figure — 4,000 
permanent jobs. But let's take a look, Mr. Speaker, and compare 
that to the record from October of 1982 to October of 1985. 
And I want to quote you, Mr. Speaker, from the fourth page of 
the Leader-Post, December 10, 1985, just a few months ago. 
And the Leader-Post researcher indicated at that time that the 
Progressive Conservative government did not create 4,000 jobs 
during that period of time; they didn't create 10,000 jobs during 
that period of time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they helped create 
21,000 new jobs during the same period of time: 4,000 jobs by 
the NDP; 21,000 new permanent jobs created by Grant Devine 
and the Progressive Conservative government here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is any doubt as to which administration 
can lead the way into the future throughout the 1980s and into 
the 1990s, then I would say it's the Progressive Conservative 
government, clearly. 
 
I have before me, Mr. Speaker, a brochure which has as its 
heading, "The Choice is Clear." And in my mind, Mr. Speaker, 
the choice is indeed clear. As we lead up to what many people 
consider to be an election sometime in 1986, the choice indeed 
is clear. And I want to reiterate for the members of the 
Assembly and for the people of the province why the choice is 
clear, why the choice is clear, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

173 
 
 

Let me ask you some questions. Who was it that provided 
interest rate protection for 40,000 home owners in the province 
of Saskatchewan? Was it the Leader of the Opposition and the 
NDP party when they were in power? Certainly not. But the 
Premier of the province and the Progressive Conservative 
government, when interest rates were 18, 19, 20, 21 per cent 
and people in this Assembly and people across the province 
were running the risk of losing their homes, we said we will 
help the people of Saskatchewan and we provided them with 
the assistance they needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was it that helped to clean up the taste and 
odour problem of Regina's drinking water? Was it the NDP 
administration? Was it the Leader of the Opposition when he 
was in government? I can recall, Mr. Speaker, for 11 years that 
administration talked about what needed to be done. Yes, we 
need to solve Regina's taste and odour drinking water problem 
and, yes, we are the government to do it. That what they said. 
What does the record show, Mr. Speaker? In 11 years did the 
former NDP government ever spend one red cent to clean up 
the taste and odour drinking problem here in Regina? Not one 
red cent. 
 
In four years, Mr. Speaker, this administration has moved 
quickly to clean up that problem and today the people of Regina 
have good drinking water. No thanks to the NDP, but they can 
certainly thank a Progressive Conservative government. We 
said we would do it, and we did. And that's why the choice is 
clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the choice is clear because I believe a Progressive 
Conservative government is the government that understands 
small business. Eighty-eight per cent of all the jobs, new jobs 
created in the province, are created in the small-business sector. 
Ask yourself the question: which party and which government 
understands small business? The NDP are the government that 
chased business out of this province. The NDP are the 
government that do not want businesses to come into the 
province. The Progressive Conservative government believes in 
small business. We know that's where the jobs are going to be 
created. The people of this province know that small business is 
the engine of economic growth. And when they ask themselves 
the question — who best can create jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan; who best can work with small business? — they 
know it's not the NDP. They know it is the Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was it that took the provincial gas tax off in 
the province so that today Regina has the lowest gasoline prices 
of any city in Canada? Who was it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The NDP members opposite talk about tax increases. I want to 
ask the members of this Assembly, and I want to ask everybody 
in this province: can you remember one time ever in their 11 
years when they reduced taxes for people in this province? Did 
they ever reduce the gas tax, Mr. Speaker? Never. Did they ever 
reduce the income tax, Mr. Speaker? Never. 
 
But what did they do to the income tax? What did the member 
from Regina do when the budgets were 

brought in and that income tax went from 37 per cent to 39 per 
cent to 41 per cent, and on and on? Did you ever vote against 
those tax increases? The NDP, Mr. Speaker, increased our 
personal income tax from 37 per cent to 51 per cent. They 
increased the gas tax year after year after year. And every year, 
Mr. Speaker, when the power bills went up under the NDP, they 
taxed that by putting the sales tax on power bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the choice is clear. This administration took the 
gas tax off and that's one of the reasons why we have the lowest 
gasoline prices in Canada. And can the people trust the Leader 
of the Opposition and the members opposite when they say, oh 
no, we learned our lesson; we won't put the gas tax back on; we 
won't put the gas tax back on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP are the party of big 
government, they are the party of high taxes, and we know 
what's going to happen to that gas tax when they get back in, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we ask ourselves the question, who is it, Mr. Speaker — 
who is it that has a vision for the future of this province? Who 
is it, Mr. Speaker, that has a vision for what this province can 
be? Let's compare ourselves, Mr. Speaker, to NDP Manitoba for 
a minute. What was their vision, Mr. Speaker? Did they want to 
participate in Expo? Did they want to show the world, Mr. 
Speaker, what an NDP government could do in Manitoba? 
What are you going to see when you travel out to Expo this 
year? What are you going to see from the NDP government in 
Manitoba? Nothing. But when you travel out to Expo and you 
see what the Progressive Conservative government is doing to 
sell the province of Saskatchewan, then you will know, and the 
people of this province will know, that it's a Progressive 
Conservative government that has a vision for this province. 
 
And when you take a look at the initiatives that are announced 
in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I think that will become very 
clear. And I'm going to get to some of those initiatives in a 
minute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we say the choice is clear, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the 
members of this Assembly a very important question. This 
throne speech document, Mr. Speaker, does it show that this 
Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, has 
become a government that is a pawn of the big labour unions? 
Certainly not, Mr. Speaker, But everybody in this province 
knows that the member from Shaunavon, and the member from 
Regina Centre, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, all of 
the NDP members of this House, the NDP party, the Leader of 
the Opposition, we all know, Mr. Speaker — we all know — 
that the NDP party today is the party of big labour union bosses. 
And they can't deny it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that if an NDP 
government were ever returned to the province of 
Saskatchewan, small business would not have a major say in the 
direction of this province. Agriculture would not have a major 
say in the direction of this province, and that's not what the 
people of this province want, Mr. Speaker. That's not what I 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

174 
 
 

want; that's not what this government wants; that's not what the 
majority of families want. 
 
They want a government, Mr. Speaker, that has a vision for the 
future of this province that is not motivated by the big labour 
union bosses, but is motivated by families, by small business, 
and by the farmers. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the choice is 
indeed clear. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about a vision for the future of 
this province, would an NDP government have a vision for the 
future of this province that would include women? Would they 
have a vision for the future of this province that would include 
the women of this province? 
 
I want to ask the members opposite: when you were in power, 
did your premier, the now Leader of the Opposition, did he ever 
once appoint a woman to your NDP cabinet in 11 years? Never, 
never. Answer me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We never managed to get one elected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Now the member from Regina Centre 
indicated that they never even managed to get one elected — 
never even managed to get one elected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in this province there were 16 to 17,000 
new jobs created. And the statistics indicate that the great 
majority of those jobs went to women entering the labour force, 
Mr. Speaker. There is a future for women in Saskatchewan 
under the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask another question, another question that's very 
important for the people of Regina. I'm wondering why it is that 
when the NDP government was in power they never once 
seriously considered the possibility of building a massive oil 
upgrader in the city of Regina. Why was it? You had 11 years. 
You had 11 years to consider building an oil upgrader in the 
city of Regina, and you chose not to. 
 
But what did you do during your 11 years? Where did they put 
their money, Mr. Speaker? They didn't put money into oil 
upgraders. They put their money, Mr. Speaker, into buying 
uranium mines that haven't returned one red cent of investment 
to the people of this province. Those mines would have been 
created anyway, Mr. Speaker, and now through some 
convoluted sense of social policy or economic policy, having 
spent $600 million to buy those uranium mines, what do they 
want to do, Mr. Speaker? Close them, Mr. Speaker. Close them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an NDP Speech from the Throne, you know what 
it would have read like? Close down the uranium industry. 
Close down the oil patch, Mr. Speaker. Cancel the Rafferty dam 
project, Mr. Speaker. Cancel the Gainer plants in North 
Battleford and wherever else they're going to be. The members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, they want to cancel, cancel, cancel, 
cancel — cancel hundreds of jobs in northern Saskatchewan; 
cancel hundreds of jobs in North Battleford; cancel hundreds of 
jobs at the Rafferty dam project, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of this province know, Mr. Speaker, that the future 
of this government is not going to be assured if you cancel 
uranium mines, and you cancel out an oil industry, and you 
cancel out a Rafferty dam project. That's not building for the 
future, Mr. Speaker. That's not a vision for what this province 
can be. That's an example of a government from the old days 
that has no new ideas, that has no innovative approaches. They 
are bankrupt, Mr. Speaker. Bankrupt. 
 
(1645) 
 
And the best example of their bankrupt state is what they 
announced today, Mr. Speaker, what they announced today. 
They announced a housing program today, Mr. Speaker, and I 
have to chuckle. Where were they in 1982 when the people 
were having their homes taken away from them, and they were 
in government, and they could have helped people keep their 
homes? Where were they, Mr. Speaker? Where were they? 
They were sitting in the movie theatres of this province 
watching their grand Crown corporation ads. That's where they 
were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today they announce a program that isn't a new idea, Mr. 
Speaker. It's an old idea. No new ideas, no vision, Mr. Speaker 
— none. Bankrupt. The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
they see through that kind of a cynical vote-buying attempt on 
the part of people that have no new ideas, that have no vision, 
that are so desperate to get back into power that they're willing 
to run up another $800 million of deficit in the province in a 
cynical attempt, Mr. Speaker, to just buy votes. 
 
Well the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, they don't want a 
government that buys votes. They want a government that has a 
vision, that can build for the future of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, when they were in power, 
they had an opportunity to do many of the kinds of things that 
should have been done. I want to take the last few minutes of 
my speech, Mr. Speaker, to talk about one area where the 
members opposite were bankrupt. They are bankrupt of new 
ideas today, and I would recommend to you that they will 
continue to be bankrupt. 
 
And I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to the area of welfare reform. 
When the former government was in power, Mr. Speaker, did 
they do anything — anything — did they lift a finger to attempt 
to get people off of welfare? I'll tell you what they did, Mr. 
Speaker. They handed out a cheque and they turned around and 
walked away. And not only did they just hand out a cheque, but 
they didn't even care if that cheque went to someone who didn't 
deserve it. They could have cared less. They were much more 
interested in keeping people on welfare than they were in 
getting people off. Mr. Speaker, they handed out a cheque; they 
turned around and walked away. You almost think that they had 
a vested interest in seeing that welfare treadmill just keep on 
going around and around and around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did they ever mount any training or education activities for 
people on social assistance? I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that if we 
had the opportunity to sit in their back pocket 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

175 
 
 

during those 11 years and sit around the cabinet table, that we 
would have seen that not once did they ever talk about the need 
for a welfare reform program in the province. Not once did they 
ever talk about the possibility of seeing whether or not there 
was significant levels of fraud and abuse that needed to be 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are the party of welfare. We are the party of 
opportunity. And I want to show you why, Mr. Speaker. Here is 
just a small example. The member opposite says to go back to 
the private sector. Here is just a prime example, Mr. Speaker, of 
the difference between those members over there and these 
members here. They are the party of big government. They will 
always be the party of big government. And when you're a party 
of big government, Mr. Speaker, you believe in only one thing. 
You worship at the shrine of big government, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's where they worshipped for 11 years, and they haven't 
changed. They haven't changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of this province know that the big government 
approach is not the way to go. People understand, Mr. Speaker, 
that that's the way of the past. It was a new deal 30 or 40 years 
ago but, Mr. Speaker, it's an old deal today. In fact, it's no deal 
for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, no deal. Did that 
government ever provide a new deal for those people who were 
on the welfare treadmill? I don't think so. 
 
But I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, an example of some of 
the things that we are doing to reform the welfare system. In 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker — and the members from Moose Jaw 
who are here today will be interested in this —in Moose Jaw, 
for example, we took eight students on social assistance and we 
enrolled them in a short-order cooking class at the 
Saskatchewan Technical Institute. They graduated in 
September, and six of those eight students continue to be 
employed today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We developed dry-wall courses in conjunction with the 
dry-wall industry in Regina, in Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
We took 18 people on the welfare rolls and we put them 
through these training programs. Today, Mr. Speaker, the 
majority of those people have either secured employment or 
they have started their own business, Mr. Speaker, or they are 
continuing their upgrading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a furnace maintenance program by Sask Housing 
Corporation in northern Saskatchewan trained 18 individuals, 
and all 18 of those people today have employment. Since 
August, Mr. Speaker, we took 33 individuals and we put them 
through a five-week course on job search techniques. Seventeen 
of those, Mr. Speaker, are employed full-time, five are enrolled 
in further training, eight have been referred for further 
counselling, and only three are still seeking employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the record of this government in 
attempting to turn around the welfare reform here in the 
province of Saskatchewan to put welfare on the tracks that it 
should have been running for a long time, I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that the effort is well accepted by the people of this province. 

Mr. Speaker, I know that it's well accepted because even the 
Leader of the Opposition, when he was questioned by welfare 
reform, he himself had to grudgingly admit, Mr. Speaker, that 
welfare reform was a good idea. The only question we have, 
Mr. Speaker, is: if it was a good idea, why didn't the NDP 
government do anything to reform the welfare system? 
 
And when the Leader of the Opposition was asked whether or 
not it was a good idea for welfare clients to have to come down 
occasionally to pick up their cheque if they're employable, to 
see whether or not their circumstances have changed, what did 
the Leader of the Opposition say? Well he grudgingly thought 
that that perhaps wasn't a bad idea. 
 
Well I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the quiet members 
opposite on the NDP benches: why didn't your Leader of the 
Opposition, why didn't the former Finance minister, why didn't 
their caucus, whey didn't their cabinet, Mr. Speaker, once in 11 
years ever implement a program which required employable 
social assistance clients to come down and pick up their 
cheques? Why, Mr. Speaker? Why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We know why, Mr. Speaker. We know why, Mr. Speaker: 
because that party for 11 years — 11 years — conned, they 
conned the people of Saskatchewan into believing that they 
really had a heart and soul of compassion for people on welfare. 
 
Well what kind of heart and soul is it, Mr. Speaker, when you 
take a cheque, and you turn around, and you walk away? You 
give them another cheque, and you say, we don't care if you 
ever get off of welfare; in fact, maybe we're kind of interested if 
you stay on welfare, because we know we'll get your vote next 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the kind of sound social policy and 
innovative and imaginative programs that Saskatchewan needs. 
The throne speech of this Progressive Conservative 
government, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is an example. And in the 
short time remaining I want to focus in on what I believe likely 
is the most innovative example in this throne speech of a 
government that believes in opportunity and a government that 
believes in building for the future. 
 
When the former government was in power, Mr. Speaker, for 
11 years, I ask them now, as they sit quietly, I ask them this 
question. Did they once, ever — ever — seriously consider 
implementing a pension plan for home-makers, for people who 
work in small businesses, for part-time employees, or for farm 
families in the province of Saskatchewan, in order that those 
people could have long-term financial security? 
 
Did the Leader of the Opposition ever once seriously consider 
implementing that? Did he ever, Mr. Speaker, bring forward a 
Speech from the Throne which said: we will provide a pension 
plan for home-makers? Did he ever once bring forward a 
Speech from the Throne that said: we will provide a pension 
plan for people in small business? Did he ever once bring 
forward a pension plan that said: we will provide a pension plan 
for farmers? 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

176 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, the former government, the former premier, the 
now Leader of the Opposition, never — never — brought 
forward in their 11 years of power a pension plan to provide 
that kind of security. It was a Progressive Conservative 
government that announced in its throne speech just a few days 
ago that this province will have a long-deserved pension plan 
for home-makers, for small-business people, and for farmers. 
Long overdue, Mr. Speaker. Long overdue. 
 
And why is it, Mr. Speaker? Why is it that when they were in 
power, not only did they not bring forward that kind of a 
pension plan, Mr. Speaker, but they didn't even adequately fund 
the teachers' pension plan? They didn't even adequately fund the 
public servants' pension plan in this province. In fact, they ran 
up deficits in the billions of dollars in those pension plans — 
billions of dollars. And instead, Mr. Speaker, instead of taking 
that money and putting it into the pension plans where it should 
have been, they took that money and they callously said, we 
don't care about your future; we want to buy potash mines; we 
want to buy uranium mines; we want to build this shrine that we 
can worship at — the shrine of Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, shame. What else can we say? Six hundred 
million dollars wasted. They put all their eggs into the basket of 
Crown corporations when the farm wives, when the 
home-makers, when the small-business men were saying, we 
sure could use some pension support. But they weren't there. 
They weren't there when the families were suffering with high 
interest rates; when income tax went from 37 to 51 per cent — 
Mr. Speaker, 37 to 51 per cent. When that gas tax kept on going 
up and up, higher and higher and higher, where were they, Mr. 
Speaker. Where were they? 
 
They were not paying for a pension plan, Mr. Speaker. They 
were not providing assistance for home owners. They were 
allowing the taxes to go up dramatically. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
point needs to be made: the reason why they were allowing 
those taxes to go up so dramatically year after year after year is 
because that's the only way they could fund and finance their 
big government approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this throne speech is a prime example of 
a government that has a vision for the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


