


















































December 4, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 December 4, 1986 
 

7 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I hereby lay on the table the following petition by 
Mr. Johnson, of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
Special Committee Appointed to Prepare Lists for Standing 

Committees 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. McLaren, from the special committee 
appointed to prepare lists of members to compose the standing 
committees of the Assembly, presents the first report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee recommends that, pursuant to rule 91, the 
quorum on all standing committees be changed to a 
majority. 
 
Your committee recommends that the size and 
composition of the standing committees of the Assembly, 
under rule 86, be as appears on the lists that will be printed 
in tonight’s Votes and Proceedings. 

 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the first report of the special committee appointed to 
prepare lists of members to compose the standing committees 
of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to comment in 
respect to the motion that has been put forward by the hon. 
member, and I want to, at the conclusion of my remarks, 
remove an amendment to the motion that has been put forward 
by the hon. members. That amendment that I will be proposing, 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, is that the motion be 
amended by adding the following: 
 

with the exception of the recommendation to change the 
quorum to a majority. 

 
I want to make some comments in respect to the particular 
question before us, and I want to go briefly, Mr. Speaker, and 
deliberately, into the history of what we did this morning. This 
morning we met as a nominating committee. A nominating 
committee, Mr. Speaker, is made up of five members — three 
from the government side and two from the members of the 
opposition. 
 
The purpose of the meeting this morning from all intents and 
purposes and from the precedent of the past is that the 
nominating committee then on behalf of their respective 
caucuses meet, this committee meets and makes  

recommendations in respect to the membership of the 
legislative committees. And that was the intent and purpose that 
my colleague and I went to the meeting, to in fact put together a 
list of members on the respective committees. 
 
And there’s a large number of committees of the legislature. 
And I just want to, for background, indicate that there’s 
non-controversial Bills; there’s the agricultural committee; 
there’s communications committee; Crown corporations; 
education; there’s estimates; municipal law, private Bills 
committee; privileges and elections; public accounts. And there 
are other committees of the legislature also. There’s the Board 
of Internal Economy and regulations committee. And as I say, 
Mr.. Speaker, this morning we went for that purpose, to 
nominate our respective members of those committees. 
 
I want to say that the rules governing the operation of the 
committees is set out in the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly 1981. And I want to say that the 
nominating committee is but five people, three from the 
government side, two from our side. In dealing with a quorum 
in respect to all of these committees, the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 1981 set out this: 
 

Quorum in committees: 90(1) (and it says): One third of the 
number of Members of a select, special or standing 
committee shall be a quorum unless the Assembly has 
otherwise ordered. 

 
I want to say in looking at how these rules were formulated and 
how they were adopted, there was a special committee 
established prior to 1981 who looked at the rules that should 
govern the Legislative Assembly and they, in fact, 
recommended section 90 as I have read here which says the 
quorum shall be one-third of the members. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and that was done, as I understand, 
with the unanimous consent of all members of that committee. 
What we have today, Mr. Speaker, is one member from the 
government coming down to the nominating committee and 
saying: what do we want? And maybe he has concurred and 
maybe he has caucused. I don’t know if the Premier set him 
down or whether he in fact thought it up himself. I don’t know 
that. But I’ll tell you, in my discussions with him that was not 
mentioned until this morning. And today, three . . . a 
five-member committee he is recommending to this legislature 
— five members should change the rules which were 
established by a legislative committee. That’s what he is 
proposing. A unilateral change is what he’s proposing. 
 
But even more perverse in the direction that he’s taking is that 
if you look at the Speech from the Throne, you will find in here 
this paragraph: 
 

My government believes that changes can be made to 
enable the Legislature to better meet the needs of the 
members and the people. Accordingly, it proposes to refer 
the matter of a  

  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

8 
 

revision of the Rules of this Legislative Assembly to a 
Special Committee of the Assembly. 

 
Now that’s what they told us here yesterday in the House. 
They’re going to set up a special committee to do a revision of 
the rules. But what happened? Predetermining what they want, 
circumventing the very provision that they put in the Speech 
from the Throne, they come in to the committee this morning 
and say, well, we want to unilaterally recommend now, without 
going to the committee which is going to look at it, we want the 
legislature here to immediately supersede this regulation which 
says a quorum will be one-third of the members.  
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in respect to this, that I have 
outlined a bit of the history of how the rule came about. The 
reason obviously was, members are very busy. The committees 
are meeting, other committees are meeting, members have a lot 
of business to do. And so in the wisdom of the regulations 
committee, they said, well, one-third will be fine; we can go 
ahead and proceed. 
 
And so what I want to do is just take a look at two aspects of it: 
one, the unilateral proposal that was put forward by the member 
of the government in light of the fact that they have a 
committee they’re recommending, a special committee of the 
assembly; and secondly, to look briefly at the effect. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that we’re having a revision, the 
special committee, and what we should be doing is not coming 
in without full discussions — without full disclosure of the 
intention, without it being discussed, without looking at 
precedents across the country — to unilaterally bring before the 
House and to force through that particular revision by the 
majority on the opposite side, the government side. What they 
are doing, I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker, is they are arrogant, 
they’re being unfair to this House, and they’re contradicting 
precisely what they set out in the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you an example of what can happen. 
The Crown Corporations Committee is 20 members — 12 and 
eight. Under the present rule it says that you need one-third. 
That means, about seven, you can go ahead with the people’s 
business. But they’re saying no. I don’t know why, but they 
want the provision that you have to have half to be a quorum. 
And so what if means is that if they get in a hot spot, ticklish 
situation, what they can do is to walk out of that committee and 
there is no quorum and the business of that committee 
discontinues. 
 
That’s the fact of the matter. And I ask — let us be fair, the 
rationale for it. And I’ll tell you I can see no other rationale that 
what this government is starting to do. And throughout this here 
throne speech I’ll tell you there are other instances 
demonstrating the arrogance, the heavy-handedness of this 
government and the approach that they’re going to take. And 
you can look at constituency boundary legislation. But here is 
another intent to circumvent the very committee that they said 
they would establish. 
 
And so what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, to you, is that what we’re 
primarily concerned with is basically the unilateral  

approach of the government. No discussion; came to the 
committee and said, I’m moving this here. And then they can 
put it before the legislature here. And they do have a majority, 
be it all much reduced — much reduced — but they do. And 
what they want to do is shove this through before it gets to the 
very committee that they said they’re going to establish — the 
special committee to study the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Now why, I say, would they want to do that? And I’ve given 
you the reason. It can be, in fact, the arrogance. Maybe no more 
than that. The heavy handedness. Maybe no more than that. 
 
But I have a feeling that this government, this newly elected 
government, is running scared. And if they can’t control it in 
the House with debate, then they say, let’s legislate so we can 
control the opposition. And I say that’s what is happening in 
this particular piece of legislation, or motion, to change the 
number of a quorum. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do here is to remove, 
seconded by my colleague the member from Regina Centre: 
 

That the motion as submitted be amended by adding the 
following: 
 
with the exception of the recommendation to change the 
quorum on committees to a majority. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have listened to 
my colleague and I have watched members opposite with 
growing annoyance. I don’t know what it’s going to take to 
wipe the smirk off the face of the member from Meadow Lake 
and other members who I’ll name, but it’s got to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was one who believed that the 20th Legislature 
was one that we were, in a sense, well to end. I thought it was 
too noisy; the behaviour was too rowdy; it was too fractious. 
And I had hoped that the Premier meant when he said when he 
indicated in the throne speech that we were going to make a 
new start at a more productive legislature. I’ll tell you, this is an 
awfully poor way to begin. 
 
This morning, without any warning — and he had all kinds of 
opportunities to — my colleague from Quill Lakes called him 
yesterday, asked him for a discussion of what was going to be 
discussed. Never once did he mention changing a fundamental 
rule of the Assembly. This is not a trifling change; this is a 
fundamental rule of the Assembly affecting the way our 
committees work — and I’m going to get to that in a moment. 
Never once was there the slightest indication that he thought 
that was something that should be discussed. For good reason. 
A nominating committee is not where you make rule changes. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake walks in this morning, 
proposes his motion. When we asked him why, his response 
was — with the same smirk on his face — because we think it’s 
a good idea. And that was all we got out of him in 
three-quarters of an hour of discussion — I like it; we think it’s 
a good idea. 
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

9 
 

 
To our comments, this was the wrong time and place to be 
discussing such a change in the rules, we got the same silly 
comment — we like it; we think it’s a good idea. 
 
I’ll tell the member from Meadow Lake and the Premier that if 
this is your way of getting this legislature off to a new start, 
then it is a very, very strange way of doing it. I don’t know 
what could be more designed to alarm the opposition, to annoy 
us, than to make a fundamental rule change with no warning 
and little opportunity for discussions. I don’t know what you 
could do that would be more likely to get us upset than this. If 
this was a hare-brained scheme of the member from Meadow 
Lake — and those of us who have been here a while can believe 
it because we’ve seen him before — and I ask you to withdraw 
this report or hold it until tomorrow. 
 
If this is some sort of grand design on your part to change the 
rules, if this is a precedent, then there is going to be quite a 
rumble over this because this is the wrong way to be doing it. 
 
There is something called fair play that is fundamental to this 
Assembly. And one of the elements of fair play which has 
always been observed is that important rule changes are (a) 
discussed in advance; and (b) they are only adopted after there’s 
a measure on consensus. 
 
Fundamental rule changes are not adopted by the government 
using their majority. That’s never been done. And if any of the 
members opposite who have been here a while can think of a 
precedent for that, I invite you to join the debate. I invite you to 
join the debate and give us the precedent for this — a 
fundamental rule change over our objection, with no discussion. 
There is no precedent for that; it’s never been done. 
 
I find it alarming, not only because of what’s at issue here, but 
because of what we’re going to be doing this spring. I 
understand from a question put to the member from Meadow 
Lake this morning that the Premier plans on having the House 
Leader introduce a resolution to set up a special committee on 
the rules, and that that will likely take place before we adjourn 
at Christmas, and that that committee will begin its work in 
January, February and March. 
 
If that committee is going to operate with a simple majority — 
whatever the government wants, the government does, no 
matter what the opposition says — then that is going to be a 
very, very unfortunate change in the way this place is operated. 
 
Once again, it’s a question of fair play. With respect to rule 
changes, this House has always observed the ultimate in fair 
play. We’ve always had as much discussion as we think we 
need, and they’ve only been adopted with a large measure of 
consensus. 
 
With respect to the particular change itself, I think it is most 
unfortunate. I’ll give you a couple of instances. With public 
accounts in the last legislature, we got behind in our work. It 
was my hope, and the hope of the former member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that we might find a government 
member or two who would be prepared to  

put in a day’s work between the end of May and the first of 
December. We wanted the committee to sit intersessionally. 
 
Even with a quorum of three, we couldn’t get that group 
together. How much harder is it going to be to meet and get our 
work done with a larger quorum, particularly when they control 
it? There are some members opposite who are crass enough to 
believe that it isn’t in the best interests of the government that 
these committees meet and do their work effectively. 
 
If that’s the case, it’s going to be pretty easy for the government 
members with a larger quorum to simply not show up. Get into 
a difficult issue, as we have on occasion, whether it be SGI or 
Pioneer Trust or whatever it might be, it’s going to be pretty 
easy for the government members to simply decide that they’re 
too busy to show up, the committee meeting fails, and so the 
issue gradually subsides over a week or so before the committee 
meets again. 
 
We asked the member from Meadow Lake this morning what 
he had in mind — he was too arrogant to tell us. Once again we 
see in members opposite a disregard of the customs of this 
House. I remember standing here last in June last year when the 
member from Meadow Lake told us he would table the 
documents with Weyerhaeuser. There was a day, Mr. Speaker, 
when that meant something, when a minister gave an 
undertaking in this House, when that meant something. It was 
done. The member blatantly disregarded it and didn’t do it. 
 
We see the same attitude today, the same disregard for the rules 
of fair play, the same disregard for the customs of this 
Assembly which has served us well over the years, coming 
from the same member. I would suggest to the Premier and the 
members opposite, you ought to give some serious thought to 
all of this before you do it. 
 
I was one of the people who were intrigued, shall we say, 
yesterday with the comment in the throne speech that you 
planned a new Act to deal with the electoral boundaries 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well it relates very directly 
because it goes to the way this legislature operates. It’s the 
same attitude. You’re not prepared to let this legislature operate 
in the fashion which it has; you want to change the rules so they 
favour you. 
 
That, I suggest, is what you’re going to do with the electoral 
boundaries commission. You’re going to change the rules so 
they favour the government. And that’s what you’re doing here 
today. You’re changing the rules so they favour you. That’s 
something that governments in the past haven’t done. However 
bad, however arrogant they may be, they have not changed the 
rules of this Assembly to suit themselves as they go along. 
That’s what we see happening opposite. I, for one, find it 
alarming, and I hope the Premier and the members of the 
government caucus reconsider what I think was a very, very 
poor move this morning. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t intentionally want to get 
my maiden speech in the provincial legislature through this 
forum, but I do feel compelled to rise and give some comments 
in support of this amendment that’s  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

10 
 

been moved by member from Quill Lakes and seconded by the 
member from Regina Centre, because I think what we’re having 
happen here today is that we’re going back several hundred 
years. The parliamentary system that we operate under, of 
course, is modelled on the precedents the House of Commons 
and going back further to the British parliamentary system. And 
the reason that parliaments and legislatures came into being was 
to stop the monarch of the day from changing the rules 
whenever that monarch wanted to arbitrarily change rules 
because the person didn’t necessarily like them. If it didn’t suit 
their situation, they just changed the rules. 
 
So parliament started to assemble, members were elected, there 
was authority delegated to the Canadian House of Commons 
and then on to the legislatures within the provinces, and now 
we’re back to the situation where a government can come into 
the legislature and arbitrarily change the rules without going 
through some kind of a due process. And I think that that 
process has to be adhered to; it’s very important. 
 
I had the pleasure of serving in the House of Commons for a 
period of time, Mr. Speaker, and when rule changes were to 
come into effect there, and during the terms that I was there, 
there was an all-party committee that was set up to look very 
closely at the rules of the House of Commons, and I had hoped 
that when the throne speech came down yesterday — and I 
listened very closely to it — that the government believes, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . Government believes that changes can be made to 
enable the Legislature to better meet the needs of the 
members and the people. Accordingly, it proposes to refer 
the matter of a revision of the Rules of this Legislative 
Assembly to a Special Committee of the Assembly. 

 
And what do we find? As a new member I’m shocked that one 
day later, after making such a profound statement in the throne 
speech, that the government wants to come in and arbitrarily 
change the rules. And I’m not so concerned if the government 
wants to show disrespect for the members opposite, but it 
troubles me deeply when you show such deep disrespect for the 
Crown. And that’s what’s happening because the Crown, over 
the years, has allowed our system of parliament, our system of 
this legislature, the freedom of speech, the freedom of elections 
to develop right across our country. 
 
And I’m proud to be from Saskatchewan; I’m proud to be a 
Canadian. I’m happy that we have the system that we do, Mr. 
Speaker, to express freely what our feelings are, what the 
feelings of our constituents are, through this Assembly. And 
when that starts to stop, we’re moving so much closer to a 
dictatorial system. 
 
And it’s not only the monarch in days before parliament came 
about that could just change rules. It happens by people like 
Pinochet; it happened by people such as Hitler; it happened 
during the revolution in the Soviet Union. And I’m sure the 
hon. member from Rosthern constituency knows why his family 
left that country to seek a freer place in Canada, and to settle in 
Saskatchewan, and to have the freedom, and to be away  

from the oppression of people who could just individually, 
arbitrarily change rules. 
 
And that’s what I see happening here today, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it presents us with a situation that we cannot allow to pass, 
and I think the hon. members opposite, especially some of the 
newer members — I would certainly hope that they were 
elected and came here to voice the concerns of their constituents 
and to keep that freedom of speech, and to give representation 
to their constituents regardless of whether those constituents are 
political supports or whether those constituents and political 
opponents — because it’s important in terms of democracy and 
to have democracy preserved in this legislature, in our province, 
and in our country. 
 
It’s no good to have situations where whoever is in authority 
can just change rules on their own, Mr. Speaker. I’m, as I said 
earlier, a little bit shocked that, one day following the throne 
speech debate, we have the government making an amendment, 
a change to the rules. 
 
Now the point is not so much of going from one—third as a 
quorum of a committee, to 50 per cent. That concerns me 
because of course the government who have the majority of 
members in all committees can stonewall, can stop progress 
that’s in committee. In fact, they could do it to this House as 
well — to the Chamber. And it seems to me that once they start 
on one rule, where do they stop? Do you then go to another rule 
tomorrow? Do you then start trying to rewrite Beauchesne’s and 
Erskine May which we fall back on for precedent and in your 
rulings, Mr. Speaker. The Clerks use that. We use that as a 
guide so that we have a truly . . . a system where we have 
freedom of speech. 
 
I think that we must in good conscience support the amendment 
— or to have the member who introduced the report this 
afternoon to have it withdrawn — so that we can get off to a 
good footing. I, as a junior member of the legislature — only 
my second day in the Assembly — want to start off on a good 
foot so that all members, whether they’re on the opposition side 
or on the government’s side, can be viewed with respect from 
the people, from the constituents of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that when we start doing underhanded things like this 
. . . it may be just an oversight on the government that was done 
in error. But I hope that the comments that we have brought 
before you today will encourage you to look at what’s been said 
just one day ago in the throne speech, and that the throne speech 
set out there a system that would be good. If the government 
will bring that in, fine. 
 
I think that there is always room for change in the rules in the 
way this Assembly operates; those rules have changed many, 
many times over the hundreds of years that our Assembly and 
the House of Commons, the parliamentary system has 
developed. And that’s not saying that all of a sudden we’ll have 
a perfect set of rules, but it’s the way in which we change those 
rules, Mr. Speaker, which becomes very important in our 
society. I don’t want Canada to become another country that 
people feel oppression; that they don’t feel the freedom of  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

11 
 

speech that they should be able to feel. And I think that the 
thing that’s important is the procedure by how we change the 
rules. 
 
I look forward to being able to possibly serve on the special 
committee to look at the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
As I said, in my time as a member of the House of Commons, I 
did have some involvement in the committee that looked at the 
rules there. We have to been able to deal with each other on an 
even basis. When you can start changing rules arbitrarily, 
without going through a set procedure, then I think that we are 
all in danger of losing respect of people about this Assembly, 
and losing the freedom of speech in our society, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to 
have a minute or two to introduce the Canadian football 
champion Regina Rams, and subsequent to that we can carry on 
this debate as long as we’d like, but I’m sure that they have 
some other things to do and they are going to be presented with 
some gifts and awards, and I would respectfully ask for leave to 
do that and we can carry on after that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, speaking on the same 
request that the Premier has made, I think all members of the 
Assembly have guests here or quite a number of them, and we 
would welcome the opportunity to introduce any guests that 
have time strictures on their stay in the Chamber. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the legislature, a number of very distinguished young men who 
have brought national attention to sport in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
These young athletes are the essence of team work and 
dedication. Together they have won a Canadian championship 
and upheld a tradition of excellence which has earned nine 
championships in the past 20 years in the province of 
Saskatchewan: 1966, ’70, ’71, ’73, ’75, ’76, 1980, 1981, and 
again in 1986. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are very proud of these young men 
and all they represent. Please welcome the Canadian champions 
of junior football, the winners of the Armadale Cup, the players 
and coaches of the now-famous Regina Rams. Ladies and 
gentlemen: The Regina Rams. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I might just say a word 
to the same welcome and add a couple of words to what the 
Premier has said. 
 
I had the distinct honour 20 years ago to play on the first 
national championship Regina Ram team, and I would like to 
say to all of the players on that team, you are now  

part of a very proud tradition. You’ve heard a good deal about 
that here in Regina, and indeed across this country in the last 
number of weeks. 
 
Certainly that tradition began with some directors a good 
number of years ago and they’re well known to you. And I 
would like to say a special word to the directors that are here as 
well today because the tradition that carries on is, in a good 
deal, the responsibility of those directors who maintain that. 
And I would say to all of you, 20 years from now and beyond 
that you will still consider yourselves a Regina Ram. Thank you 
very much and congratulations to all of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to add our words of 
welcome from the members of the opposition and words of 
congratulations to the members of the Regina Rams football 
team. We appreciate your presence here in the legislature. I 
assume that you can understand the debate that is happening 
here in terms of fairness and rule changes and so on, from your 
perspective, and hope that we do not remind you too much of 
the field that you left earlier. 
 
Again, welcome to the legislature and our congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will very briefly add my 
words of congratulations. I think at least some member from 
Regina ought to speak when the Regina Rams are here, and the 
numbers are relatively few except on this side of the House. 
 
So I do want to congratulate the Regina Rams. I’ve had tickets 
for many years. I confess I haven’t been to many games, but I 
have a son who has used the tickets, has been at some of the 
games, and we all, whether or not we’re able to get to all the 
games or not, appreciate the very fine manner of play and 
traditional sportsmanship that the Regina Rams have brought to 
football in Regina and in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
I had an opportunity on one occasion to watch another Regina 
Rams team win the Armadale Cup playing against the 
Burlington Braves in Hamilton some years ago, and that same 
fine tradition wherein the Rams have carried the banner for 
Regina and Saskatchewan is being continued by this team of 
Regina Rams, and I congratulate them heartily. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of this Assembly, 47 grade eight students from 
Centennial School, which is located on Dalgliesh Drive in 
north-west Regina. Accompanying the students in the 
opposition gallery are their teachers, Dave Nevill, Bill Forrest 
and Lori Godwin. 
 
I’d like to also take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to express 
my appreciation for having been invited to their  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

12 
 

 
school earlier to be subjected to a host of questions which I 
thought I answered adequately, but if they were on this side of 
the House questioning the government in the same tone and the 
same competency, I’m sure they would be very competent 
members of the House indeed. I would ask members to join 
with me in welcoming them and I look forward to seeing them 
shortly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to introduce 
to you and other members of the Assembly an old friend of this 
Assembly and a former MLA from the Glentworth district in 
Saskatchewan, who, at Agribition this week, is the proud owner 
of the grand champion female and the grand champion bull in 
the Piedmontese category. I’d ask you to welcome Roy Nelson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce, on behalf 
of the Deputy Premier, to you, and through you to this 
Assembly, a group of eight grade 12 students from the 
Whitebear Education Complex in Carlyle. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Mark Eggleston, and bus 
driver Kelvin McArthur. 
 
The group of students are seated in the west gallery, and at 3 
p.m. it will be my pleasure to join them for pictures on the front 
steps of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I would ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming the grade 12 students, their teacher and bus driver 
from the White Bear Educational Complex, to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee Appointed to Prepare Lists for 
Standing Committees (continued) 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Any may I 
take this opportunity to congratulate you on your appointment 
as Speaker, in your election as Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several points I’d like to make with 
respect to this proposed motion and specifically with respect to 
the proposed change in the rules. 
 
The rule that is currently established, and the one that is 
particularly under debate at this time, was established in 1981 
after full consultation with all members of the Assembly at that 
time and due consideration over several weeks. And what we 
have happening here this afternoon is that after a brief morning 
meeting, the purpose of which was simply to establish who the 
members of various committees of the legislature were going to 
be — and that was the only purpose held out for the meeting — 
with no notice to the opposition of any kind, Mr. Speaker, that 
meeting has been used as an opportunity by the government to 
change a very fundamental rule, a rule with respect to the 
quorum of  

committees and how committees of this legislature shall 
operate. And that attempt has been made with no attempt to 
consult with the opposition caucus, with no attempt to consult 
with the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and with no 
notice for this topic was even going to be discussed at the 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was enough in a morning to expect that members of the 
legislature would come together and choose what the 
membership of the 10 or 11 committees of this legislature were 
going to be, without also expecting at the same time that on the 
first full day of our activities that there would be a fundamental 
change in the rules of this Assembly proposed, Mr. Speaker. I 
really find that to be quite improper and bordering on being out 
of order. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the first point that I would like to make is 
that I see no urgency for this rule change. I see no reason why 
this rule change should be pushed through today, Mr. Speaker. 
These committees of the legislature are not even going to 
meeting until the spring. So my first question would be, to 
members opposite, what’s the urgency? What’s the problem? 
 
I see no reason for urgency, unless, Mr. Speaker, unless we’re 
to assume that this is an attempt to change the rules for the 
purpose of benefiting government members. Because, of 
course, under the proposed rule change that government 
members are asking us to accept, they could easily shut down 
any committee of the legislature whenever there’s a topic of 
discussion that puts them in question, that puts their 
competence in question, Mr. Speaker; they could simply all 
walk out and shut down the activities of the committee. No 
further questions could be asked that day. That’s the implication 
of the rule, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the only reason 
that I could see why there’s a need to change this rule so 
quickly. The rule’s been working nicely; there is no need for an 
immediate change. 
 
The second point, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to make is that the 
fundamental issue here is not the specific change in the rule, in 
my mind; it’s rather the precedent that is being set by changing 
the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, without due notice, 
without consultation with other members, and without taking 
the matter to the rules committee. 
 
There has been a tradition of this legislature and of legislatures 
across Canada and of the British parliament — and many other 
legislatures across the glove that practise democracy, Mr. 
Speaker — that the way to change rules is to go through a rules 
committee; that the way to change rules is to consult fully with 
the members of the House; that the way to change the rules is 
what, wherever possible, attempt to reach consensus among all 
members of the House on the proposed rule change. And that 
tradition, Mr. Speaker, has served assemblies across this 
country well. 
 
And what the members opposite are proposing to do — what 
the government members, in my mind, are proposing to do, Mr. 
Speaker, at least what I fear — is that they’re attempting to 
change that precedent, and that is what I see is the fundamental 
problem. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I believe that members 
of the Assembly  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

13 
 

should support the proposed amendment instead of the 
government motion that we have before us. So the activity 
that’s being proposed, Mr. Speaker, the motion that’s being 
proposed by the members opposite is, in my mind, 
inappropriate. 
 
Now one of the things that I’d like to say is that I think that 
parliamentary tradition is important, and more important 
perhaps still in the minds of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this Assembly be conducted in a co-operative manner. 
 
I think, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, members of the public are 
basically feeling that often the activities of the Assembly have 
been conducted in an unparliamentary manner, that the 
activities of the Assembly have shown not enough respect for 
the Speaker and not enough respect for other members. And 
I’ve had many of my constituents raise concerns about that. 
 
So I come into this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, wanting to conduct 
myself in as co-operative a way as possible for the mutual 
benefit of public business, and the first item that we find on the 
agenda is an attempt to change the rules in a completely 
unco-operative way, Mr. Speaker with no attempt to co-operate 
with other members of the Assembly at all. And I’m 
disappointed in that, and I find it inappropriate. 
 
(1445) 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Why would they do it? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well I’ve already put forward my own 
suggestion, Mr. Speaker, on why it be done. Some members of 
the Assembly are saying, why are they doing it? I’m not sure 
why they’re doing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess what I would want to say to members opposite, to 
members of the government, is: there is no need to push 
through this rule change today. Why not, first of all, withdraw 
that part of your motion? Because then, all members of the 
Assembly on this side of the House will be happy to vote on the 
rest of the motion, other than the proposed change in the rules. 
Simply withdraw that part of your motion, and then take the 
proposal that you’re making, with respect to a change in the 
rules, to the rules committee, and let the rules committee 
examine the matter. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s a very good proposal that the 
government has made in the throne speech, to set up a new 
special committee on the rules. We saw that in the throne 
speech yesterday. Why not take that proposal to their proposed 
special committee on the rules and let that special committee on 
the rules, with due representation from all members of this 
Assembly, consider the proposed rule change and, if possible, 
reach a consensus on it and perhaps adopt it later? But not this 
afternoon — not on the second day of the Assembly’s business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen an example today of an attempt by the 
government this morning, without due notice to the opposition, 
to push through a proposed rule change at a meeting where the 
agenda of the meeting certainly made no provision for 
discussion of the rules whatsoever. 
 

We saw in addition to that a situation, Mr. Speaker, where the 
opposition was given no notice of the proposed rule change. 
 
In essence, we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, this morning, and now this 
afternoon, an attempt to set a new precedent in this Assembly 
with respect to the changing of the rules. And we’ve seen, in 
my view, Mr. Speaker, an attempt by the members of the 
government to violate one of the fundamental traditions of this 
Assembly and of assemblies across the country, and that is that 
rules are to be made and to be changed after full consultation 
with all members of the Assembly and after going through the 
proper procedures. And therefore it’s for those reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would urge all members of the Assembly to 
defeat the government motion and to support the opposition 
amendment that’s been put forward. 
 
I thank you very much for your attentiveness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wanted to take a few moments of this 
legislature’s time, Mr. Speaker, to debate this very important 
issue. I was extremely surprised today to find out that this 
proposal was being put forward to the legislature. I was 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, for the simple reason that I was on the 
committee that reviewed the legislature rules last time. And I’m 
sure, Mr. Speaker, you have acquainted yourself with this 
particular report which is before us. 
 
I was in a second way surprised because I heard that the 
member for Meadow Lake is the one that moved the motion. 
And I thought to myself, of all the members on that committee 
— and they’re listed in this report — who worked together 
harmoniously in this committee, it had a good effect on them. 
We came in with a very good report. And I took a look at who 
the members were on that committee. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Who were they? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, one of the members on that 
committee was, according to the list here, Mr. McLeod, the 
member for Meadow Lake. I thought, well, that can’t be true 
that the member for Meadow Lake was on that committee and 
didn’t benefit from the harmonious relations in that committee 
and helped to bring in this unanimous report. 
 
And I got checking a little further, Mr. Speaker, and I find that 
Mr. McLeod was substituted from the committee by Mrs. 
Duncan, and it was made retroactive to September 1, 1979. 
Now that is why the hon. Member from Meadow Lake didn’t 
benefit from the effect of going through this committee on the 
rules. 
 
And this is not the only time it was done, Mr. Speaker. If you 
go to the library as I did, you’ll find many, many reports such as 
this over the years that have re-examined the rules of the 
legislature. And it’s become a parliamentary practice in this 
legislature that major rule changes are examined by a bipartisan 
committee of the legislature with an opportunity to give cool, 
calm  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

14 
 

 
consideration to any rule changes which are suggested. 
 
And one of the rule changes that was suggested, Mr. Speaker, 
comes under standing committees, and it’s that a quorum on all 
standing and select committees of the legislature shall be 
one-third of the members on the committee. 
 
So in fact this committee did give deliberation to that rule 
change at that time. And if you check the rule book, Mr. 
Speaker, you will find it was a majority before. The committee 
considered it very carefully over a long period of time and came 
in with an unanimous recommendation that it be one-third, 
which we now find in the rules. 
 
Now I would be surprised if the Premier knows about this or 
knew about this in advance. I am prepared to be charitable, Mr. 
Speaker, and say that the Premier didn’t know about what his 
members on this committee were doing. I realize the member 
from Meadow Lake is between a rock and a hard place. He has 
some of the responsibility of running this House through as 
quickly as he can, with the least amount of damage to the 
government. He’s faced with an increased opposition, a 
decreased number of members on the government side, and he’s 
seeking a way in which he can put some controls on the 
committees.  
 
Now I suggest that I’m prepared to be charitable, that the 
Premier didn’t know about this change, because why would the 
Premier, whose major document was delivered yesterday in the 
throne speech, suggest that we’re going to follow the 
time-honoured practice in this legislature of setting up a special 
committee on rules to consider changes in a cool, calm and 
detached manner, and not here in the Chamber. And I suspect 
that the committee that the Premier would set up would be a 
bipartisan committee of the House where all sides would be 
represented and we would thoroughly air any rule changes 
which would be suggested. And if, in fact, this rule which is 
under consideration now to be amended has been creating a 
problem, I’m sure all of those arguments would be brought out 
in the committee. And it’s unfortunate that the member for 
Meadow Lake and the hon. member who moved the motion 
have neither one brought forward one reason why the rule 
should be changed. 
 
In a committee, that would not happen, Mr. Speaker. The 
consideration would be given; the arguments pro and con to a 
rule change would be aired. But it’s not being done here, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is wrong. That is not in the interest of 
fairness; that is not in the interest of parliamentary democracy; 
and that is not the practice that this Chamber has followed over 
many, many years — long before I was here — about rule 
changes. 
 
And I think that the members of this House would be wise to 
support the amendment and defeat the motion — or alter the 
motion by supporting the amendment. I would urge all 
members to consider that seriously. 
 
And in sitting down, Mr. Speaker, I want to say I want to hear 
the reasons, because if we’re going to substitute this Chamber 
for the special select committee on rules, then  

we want to know the reasons why the rule changes are being 
recommended. And I would suggest that those two members 
consider seriously. 
 
And I would suggest to the Premier, who is not in his seat at 
this time, that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Hon. Members 
are not to draw attention to whether other hon. Members are in 
the House or not. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’m afraid I have to draw attention to the 
Premier because the Premier has put forward something that is 
of a higher order than what is suggested by the members 
opposite now — namely a rule change. He has said, we are 
prepared to set up a special select committee on the rules. Is the 
Premier being undercut by this small committee of five people 
who bring forward not a unanimous motion to this House? 
 
I think — and being charitable towards the Premier again — I 
think that the Premier doesn’t know about this. And it’s 
unfortunate that the Premier doesn’t rise and say something 
about this, Mr. Speaker, because I think he has an obligation to 
make this House function smoothly, as do the members on this 
side, and that is our intention. We want fairness in the rules of 
this House. We’re not prepared to accept any less. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, your job will be made much easier if the 
rules of the House or the rules pertaining to committees are 
decided in a special select bi-partisan committee of this House 
and not here in this House. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like the member from 
Saskatoon University, may I extend first of all, on behalf of the 
constituents of the constituency of Regina Rosemont, my 
congratulations on your election to the Chair. And may I extend 
to all other members of this Assembly congratulations to the 
election to this Assembly and to this House, a House in which, I 
was told prior to coming to this place that the rule of 
democracy, that the rule of fairness, permeated the proceedings 
and would guide us in our work in representing the people of 
our constituency and in conducting the business of the 
government of Saskatchewan — which is why I raise this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, because I see here today, in the rules 
outlined by the member from Meadow Lake, an attempt to 
subvert what is an important part of the democratic process, a 
subversion of precedent, the precedent being that in this House, 
rules which govern our conduct so that we may work together 
in terms of doing the business of this province, a spirit of 
co-operation, a spirit of consultation, and a spirit which says to 
the people of Saskatchewan, who see us not only in the 
galleries, but now through the electronic and print media, a 
spirit which says: we are here to do the best job for you. 
 
(1500) 
 
This attempt to dictatorially impose the rule changes  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

15 
 

upon this Assembly without consultation, without co-operation, 
and without following the democratic precedence followed, for 
example, in 1981 when the rules of this House were drawn up, 
that precedent of the democratic tradition is being subverted by 
the government of the members opposite. 
 
So I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, primarily to the new members 
of this Assembly on both sides of the House. Both the new 
members from both sides of the House in the swearing-in 
process, Mr. Speaker, when we were sworn in to this Assembly, 
were cautioned by the Lieutenant Governor to do what was 
right and to put aside what may indeed be short-term political 
gain. It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, as a new member of this 
House, that the members opposite are running for short-term 
political gain and not what is right — not what is right in terms 
of consultation, not what is right in terms of co-operation in this 
House, and not what is right in terms of upholding the 
democratic principles by which we all swore to abide. 
 
I’d like to speak on the question of consultation first of all, Mr. 
Speaker. In the Speech from the Throne given yesterday, the 
government made great to-do about the need for consultative 
process throughout the province. They said, for example: 
 

My Government is aware that programmes to diversify the 
province’s economy will require the support and 
co-operation of all sectors. It is therefore its intention to 
consult widely on the establishment of specific defined 
targets for economic development and to encourage all 
citizens to take part, and benefit. 

 
Well I suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest most strongly to the 
member from Meadow Lake and to the other members involved 
with the political operation on the other side of the House, that 
consultation begins here at home. Where is that consultation? 
You promised it. Are we going to get it? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’ve seen, in fact, in terms of dealing with the 
consultation of how this House operates, the reality belies the 
rhetoric. 
 
We turn . . . Again on the question of consultation, the 
government said the tasks to which our educational system 
much respond cannot be achieved by the efforts of government 
alone. Continued consultations with students, parents, teachers, 
business leaders, administrators, will be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government says that its intention is to consult 
with those in the educational system, yet it will not consult here 
with the elected members of this Assembly. I say to the 
members opposite: gentlemen, consultation — and ladies — 
consultation begins at home. Where is that consultation? Once 
again, the rhetoric of the government belies the reality of its 
actions. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there’s the question of co-operation and 
continued co-operation in this House. It was evidenced in the 
last general election past, that the people of Saskatchewan 
wanted this Assembly to work. They wanted a new spirit to 
appear in this Assembly. They didn’t want the same kind of 
fractious and rowdy debate to continue, the same kind of noise, 
the same kind of, let’s  

say, unprofessional decorum that appeared in the last House. 
And I will say, Mr. Speaker, that it appeared on both sides of 
the House. It appeared on both sides of the House. 
 
The people of this province want this legislature to work. I truly 
believe that. And they want it to work because they realize that 
there are a number of significant problems facing them as 
citizens of Saskatchewan, whether they live in the city, whether 
they live in the country, whether they live in small towns. 
Whatever their station in life is, they want the problems of this 
province to be dealt with in a manner which is sane, which is 
rational, which is co-operative, and which can, in fact, deal with 
the urgent problems which press down upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the attempts to dictatorially impose the rule 
changes on this House openly break and defy the kind of spirit 
of co-operation that the people of Saskatchewan, all 
constituents of all constituencies, told us as elected 
representatives. They told us, Mr. Speaker, to co-operate, and 
what are we getting? No co-operation; no consultation. And so 
the people of this province obviously are not being listened to 
by the government of the members opposite. 
 
But there is to me a greater danger in the imposition of these 
rules than the lack of consultation because we have seen, in the 
four previous years, a total lack of consultation with this 
opposition. We’ve seen in the past four years a total lack of 
co-operation in terms of dealing with the matters of the House. 
My colleagues who attended that former legislature can 
certainly attest to that much better than I can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a principle and there is a precedent being 
established here that shows that is a danger, and which I take 
objection to as a new member. When I was elected to this 
House, I was elected on the understanding that in dealing with 
the business of the provincial government each and every 
member was a private member ultimately, ultimately was 
responsible for the actions, not in a partisan manner, but was 
responsible for doing a job in order to be able to represent the 
constituents, the people of their constituency. 
 
What this rule change does, Mr. Speaker, in my mind, subverts 
the rights of me as a member in order to be able to carry out that 
task. And I refer specifically to one of my assignments as a 
member, and that is my assignment as a member of the public 
accounts committee of this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, we all 
know that the public accounts committee of this province is the 
committee whereby the expenditures of the government are 
scrutinized and are open to scrutiny by members of all political 
parties acting on behalf of the public of this province. 
 
And I look and I see what the government is attempting to do. 
Now they have a 10-member . . . a membership of 10 members 
on the public accounts committee, six from the government, 
four from the opposition. The rule changes being proposed by 
the government would say that the quorum on the public 
accounts committee would be a majority. What is means, Mr. 
Speaker, in reality, is that the government, the members 
opposite, would have to leave  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

16 
 

 
two members at home and, through any unavoidable 
circumstance, if the members in the opposition were not able to 
provide more than two members, the work of the public 
accounts committee would be brought to a halt; that the 
examination of the issues which come before the public 
accounts would not be able to be dealt with. That, Mr. Speaker, 
any time a controversial subject was brought before the public 
accounts committee, or was dug up in the public accounts 
committee, any time the spending of the government that was 
brought to an examination that the government didn’t like, all of 
a sudden two or three members from the government side 
would disappear. 
 
The work of the public accounts committee would come to a 
halt and the right of the public to know the spending of the 
government would be frustrated. So it is not, Mr. Speaker, just a 
. . . this question is not just a quarrel among politicians. It, in 
fact, goes to the very heart of the right, of the public’s right, to 
know. 
 
And I may say, Mr. Speaker, on the subject of the public’s right 
to know, this government for the last four or five years has 
promised to bring in freedom of information legislation — has 
promised to bring it in. It has not appeared in this legislature, 
and I have to ask why — and I have to ask why. Is this just 
another method of covering up the right of the public to know 
the conduct of the business of Saskatchewan? 
 
So it is for three primary reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I rise in 
support of the amendment and that I urge the members 
opposite, particularly the new members, that your rights as 
members will be violated, or could be violated by the 
introduction of these rule changes. So I would urge you to 
support the amendment and we get on with the job in the spirit 
of co-operation, consultation, and for the maintenance of a 
democratic process here in the House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I had not thought that I 
would have the opportunity so early to formally congratulate on 
your appointment as Speaker. I have had the opportunity 
informally, but I think, on behalf of the people of Regina 
Victoria, it’s appropriate that you be congratulated. 
 
Knowing you as I do, and I think that’s in concert with other 
members, I think that we can have high expectations of the 
stewardship of this House. I think that we can expect from you 
a fair hand, indeed a compassionate hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how quickly reality replaced the rhetoric. How 
quickly the true colours of the government show. It was only 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier talked about 
co-operation, and I assume that to mean co-operation between 
both sides of the House. And I assumed that to mean that as 
members of the House we would be working in concert to deal 
with the business of the people, to deal with the serious 
problems facing this province to find solutions to those 
problems. But I guess it just wasn’t to be, even if I was under 
some illusion at some  

point yesterday that maybe he was serious about all this and 
we’re really going to work in a co-operative fashion. 
 
I think my first statement, and as an MLA in my capacity as a 
critic, was to say that I would be prepared, and my caucus 
colleagues would be prepared, to co-operate with the 
government in dealing with a specific matter, and that was to do 
with some recommendations arising from the local government 
financing act. And we’re prepared to co-operate. And yesterday 
I heard the Premier say the he was prepared to co-operate. But 
how soon those illusions are shattered, Mr. Speaker. How soon 
we deal with the reality, and how soon we deal with that sleazy 
bunch over there. What we have today, Mr. Speaker, is an 
unnecessarily disputatious move to insure that there will not be 
any co-operation in this House — unnecessarily disputatious. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligan: — And I say disputatious because surely 
that’s what the motion is all about, picking a fight for no reason. 
To bring it in now without any prior consultation; to bring it in 
now even when these committees will not be sitting, in large 
part, until the spring; to bring it in now even while the 
government talks about setting up a rules committee, surely that 
is picking a fight, surely that is disputatious. 
 
I have to ask myself, but why is the government acting this 
way, Mr. Speaker? Why are they moving in this manner? Why 
in one day would they be saying we want to co-operate, we 
want to set up a rules committee, we want to do all those kind 
or wonderful things? Then why the next day are they moving in 
this manner aside from it apparently staving off question period 
at this point in time? 
 
I ask myself, is this to be the first of a series of procedural 
assaults designed to create a smoke-screen in which a new 
electoral boundaries act might be introduced and debated. Is 
that the reason? It certainly appears that way. You’ve created 
enough of a smoke-screen. Public perception being what it is, 
these politicians are just simply discussing procedures and 
rules, not important things — bring in a change to the electoral 
boundaries act or a new act. However repulsive those changes 
might be, it’s lost in the smoke-screen that’s beginning to be 
created here today. 
 
(1515) 
 
Well I for one am prepared to deal with that particular assault, 
Mr. Chairman. Now the public may not be enamoured with 
their elected representatives dealing at length with questions 
related to procedures while important public questions, public 
issues like jobs, like fair taxation, like the state of the farm 
economy, were seemingly overshadowed. The public will not 
be amused by this. 
 
But I think the public also understands, Mr. Speaker, as you do 
and I think some members of this House seemingly do, that we 
have a democracy, and democratic institutions; and that 
whatever feelings there are in our democratic institutions, we 
love those institutions  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

17 
 

because it exemplifies our society which is a democratic 
society. And we will make every effort to preserve those 
democratic institutions, and certainly that is part of your 
mandate and part of your responsibility. 
 
I think the public also understands simple concepts such as fair 
play. The public doesn’t like bullies. The public likes to see 
people have equal opportunity. And certainly that’s in part what 
this rules debate is all about, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s something 
that school children — and I’m sorry that they’re gone now — 
learn every day in their school clubs. If we must work together 
to deal with the thing that we have before us we need some 
rules in which to do that, and it should be fair, and we should 
discuss how those rules are set and how those rules might be 
changed. 
 
I think the public also every year on Remembrance Day gets 
some sense of what this debate and what this House and what 
our democratic institutions are all about when we think about 
those who sacrificed to ensure that democratic institutions 
would be maintained in this country. The government’s 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, will not work. They can fool themselves 
that by creating this smoke-screen we’re going to slip some 
things in, but they’re not going to fool the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should be dealing with our rules in a manner 
which does credit to the trust and responsibility that’s placed in 
us by the people of this province. We need to deal with 
questions of rules and changes to rules co-operatively, working 
together to give real meaning to that word. We should be 
dealing with changes to rules as a matter of consensus. There 
should be broad agreement on how we govern ourselves and 
how we conduct our behaviour in this House. Rules are not 
meant to be changed by simply a majority saying we want to 
change them regardless of what the minority might have to say. 
That’ s not how we govern ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m especially concerned that on your first day, Mr. 
Speaker,, you should be faced with a majority that seemingly 
displays no respect for the rules that bind us in reasoned debate 
in dealing with people’s business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from The Battlefords talked about 
how another House in place far away also dealt with the 
question of rules. And he indicated — and that little I 
understand, I think that he’s right — that that House, when they 
contemplate any changes in the rules, that again it’s done in a 
consensual manner. That is to say, the government tries to get 
broad agreement from all the parties on the rules that are to be 
changed. Because after all, the House belongs to all the parties 
on behalf of all the people. And it’s the rules that govern our 
behaviour, so therefore, whether or not one has a majority, it’s 
important to have all members, to the extent that that is 
possible, agreed on any changes in the rules. Now that’s how 
one particular House deals with changes to the rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one who has experience in a more junior 
democratic institution, I can tell you that the approach being 
fostered by the government is also alien to my experience. Even 
a junior democratic institution like the city council, Mr. 
Speaker, that is governed by procedural by-law, takes the 
approach that if we want to make  

changes to those by-laws, to those rules, we need to do it in a 
co-operative fashion. And we need to sit down and really 
understand what changes it is that we’re making, why we’re 
making those changes, what kind of effect those changes will 
have in the long run. Because once the rules are set, those rules 
can work to our benefit. Those rules can also hamstring us. 
 
So we need to be very careful about changes in those rules. The 
rules can help us; the rules can hinder us. So therefore rules or 
changes in rules are not made quickly. Those changes are made 
after some real thought has been put into all the implications of 
those changes — certainly not something that we’re seeing 
here. 
 
This unseemingly rush to make what seems to be an innocuous 
change, but may well be, upon further reflection, Mr. Speaker, 
may not be that innocuous at all. And what I’m saying is that 
we should have the opportunity to reflect on what the proposed 
changes mean. And certainly as a rookie member of the 
legislature, one who, I wouldn’t say hardly understands but is 
only beginning to understand the rules of the House, I need 
some time, Mr. Speaker, to fully understand what it is that the 
amendment is all about. I want time to look at that and I want 
time to debate that with my colleagues. I want to debate it with 
government members. What does it mean and how will it help 
us? Will it make for a more effective House? Will it mean that 
the Assembly will be much more able to deal with the people’s 
business? Those are the things that we need to know. But yet 
they say, let’s disregard that; let’s just deal with the rule of the 
majority here. That’s the only rule that they seem interested in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even on Regina city council — I think maybe we 
went to extremes — it seems to me we spent five years revising 
our procedural by-law. And every rule was looked at; every 
minor change was reflected on; every minor amendment was 
debated, discussed. What does it mean? Will it make for a more 
effective council? Will it hamstring us in the future? How will it 
affect the public? Will it mean that the public’s business can be 
better done if we put in this rule? It took us a long time to look 
at all those changes that we were making at that particular level. 
And again I ask: why are we making this change so suddenly, 
so quickly, without any consultation here at all? 
 
You know, come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, the House of 
Commons approached things in a consensual fashion. Certainly 
Regina city council approaches things in a consensual fashion. I 
would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, almost any organization, 
almost any organized collective of people deals with things in a 
consensual fashion. 
 
We have the Regina Rams here, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon. I 
don’t think that the Prairie Junior Football League would let a 
simple majority without any consultation with the other 
members say, well, here’s a new rule change; or that the new 
referee would say, well, welcome to the game but here a new 
rule today. I don’t think they’d approach things in that fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

18 
 

 
Mr. Van Mulligan: — I know that the Canadian Football 
League deals with things in a manner which provides for notice 
and plenty of debate and discussions about how we’re going to 
conduct ourselves on the field. And it seems to me that almost 
any organization, any institution, Mr. Speaker, provides for that 
kind of opportunity, provides for that kind of debate, provides 
for that kind of reasoning to ensure that the rules we have are 
good rules, to ensure that the rules we have work for the benefit 
of all of us, to make sure that the rules that we have work for 
the benefit of the people of the province, not just simply for a 
majority in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t think that this was the way I was going to 
be getting my feet wet, to be making my maiden speech. I 
suppose in a way it’s appropriate that the first time that you do 
speak that you deal with the core and the essence of our 
democratic institutions and how we govern ourselves. Perhaps 
it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I for one will be supporting the amendment. I 
think it would be an even wiser action yet if the members 
opposite would withdraw the motion that they have before this 
House, to take it back, to look for an opportunity to get it to a 
rules committee so that we can sit down in a co-operative 
fashion, so that we can work together to understand the 
implications of this rule change, to see how it’s going to benefit 
the House, to see how it’s going to benefit the people of this 
province, not just how it’s going to benefit the government 
opposite. I think that would be a wiser course Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m just sadly disappointed that one day 
after a great deal of discussion, and especially words from the 
Premier about co-operation and about all the members working 
together to deal with the problems facing this province . . . And 
they’re very serious problems. One only has to refer to the state 
of the farm economy. One only has to refer to the state of 
unemployment — especially in our urban centres. And we’ll be 
hearing more about that tomorrow I would think. One only has 
to refer to the inequitable taxation system that we have in this 
province and across this country to understand that there is 
serious business facing this House and there are serious 
problems facing the people of this province, and that the sooner 
that we get on with dealing with those kinds of items, the better 
it would be for the people of this province. But we cannot do 
that if every time we want to do that the members opposite 
throw up a rule log-jam which prevents us from getting on with 
the people’s business. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the government would 
have the good sense to withdraw the motion, to come back with 
a more reasonable motion, one that can be supported by the 
House. If they’re not prepared to do that then I would hope that 
perhaps some would have good sense enough to vote for the 
amendment. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by 
congratulating you on your appointment. You and I  

have not known each other in the past but your press clippings 
are good. The members who have known you speak well of you 
and I look forward to working with you throughout the life of 
this legislature. 
 
I am very proud to be here, to have been elected to come to this 
House by the people of Saskatoon Fairview. I particularly look 
forward to working with the hon. members of this House, 
members on both sides of the House, who have been my friends 
for many, many years and with whom I expect to be able to 
work in a spirit of co-operation for the good of all of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I come to this House with some concern because of the rather 
raucous and noisy nature of the last legislature, Mr. Speaker. I 
would look in from time to time on the public channel in my 
home in Saskatoon and see what was going on and ask myself: 
do I want to go there and take part in that particular show? 
Would I be able to make the contribution that I want to make in 
that particular environment? And I came here and I must say 
that I’m pleased with the way in which members on both sides 
of the House have conducted themselves in the first few hours 
of the life of this legislature. And I sincerely hope that nothing 
happens to upset this attitude and the mutual respect that I see 
so far in this House. 
 
(1530) 
 
One of the things that I had expected, Mr. Speaker, was to hear 
some debates and to participate in debates. But the problem that 
I’m having today is that this is not a debate. Mr. Speaker, 
member after member on the opposition side of the House have 
stood up and have in one way or another made the same points. 
The points are simple but I will review them briefly to give 
some context to my remarks. 
 
The government this morning introduced, in the nomination 
committee, a new idea which would involve a change in the 
rules governing quorums at the various committees. They 
offered no explanation to the opposition members at that 
committee. They come to the House and through the chairman, 
the minister form Yorkton, make a motion to this House that a 
quorum from now on be 50 per cent of the members, and no 
explanation is given to this House as to why that change should 
take place. 
 
Now we have been debating this question for some hour and a 
half today in this session. Speaker after speaker on the 
opposition side of the House have stood up and asked: what’s 
happening; why is this necessary; what’s going on? And there’s 
not a sound from the other side of the House. I means there is 
just a total silence over there. The odd smile, the odd grimace, 
the odd wave, but not a word of explanation as to why we’re in 
the predicament we’re in. 
 
Now what’s going on, Mr. Speaker? Why can’t we have a 
debate on this matter? If something which was unanimously 
agreed to as a change in the existing rules back in 19 — when 
was it? — 1979 . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — ’81. 
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

19 
 

 
Mr. Mitchell: — If that was unanimously agreed to at the time, 
then why is it necessary to change it today? Will someone over 
there, Mr. Speaker, please stand up and tell us. 
 
As long as they don’t . . . They sit there just dumb, quiet; the 
cat’s got their tongue; no word of explanation coming forward. 
And what are we to think and what are the people of the 
province to think? Is it now simply arrogance to sit there quiet 
in these circumstances and rely upon your majority to change 
the rules of the game? And is it not also contemptuous of this 
House to take that approach? 
 
So I want to conclude my remarks because I want to give 
someone over there, the minister from Yorkton or the 
government House Leader, the opportunity to get up and to 
explain to this House why this change is necessary, why it has 
to go now, why it has to be done in this unusual way. Why can’t 
the idea be simply referred to this rules committee that we’re 
going to set up to be considered along with a lot of other 
proposals respecting rule changes? And as I say, would 
someone over there stand up and give this House the courtesy 
of an explanation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to join 
my other fellow colleagues in wishing you well as having been 
chosen the Speaker of this House. But I want to also indicate to 
you that a week or so ago I was asked by some people in the 
city of Saskatoon as to why we were having a fall session, since 
the Premier, through the media, had not indicated that any 
significant things were going to happen in the fall session. And 
we can only speculate as to what the government had in mind. 
 
Yesterday, when I listened to the throne speech, I was not 
convinced until the very end as to why this session had been 
called, because really there was nothing in the throne speech 
that indicated any urgency, except until you came to the very 
end where we had one sentence where it said that they were 
going to establish a new election boundaries commission, or a 
new Act would be presented. And, Mr. Speaker, even then I 
was not too concerned, because I know a number of the 
members on the opposite side, in the government side. But 
today my fears have been borne out. 
 
I was a member of the Crown corporation. In fact I was the 
chairman of the Crown corporation for a few years back in the 
early ’70s, and if my memory serves me well — and the 
member from Lumsden will bear me out in this — I believe 
there was a time when he was a member of that Crown 
corporation when I was the chairman, but he represented at that 
time a different political party. But there were times, Mr. 
Speaker, as chairman it would have been very nice to have a 
majority as your quorum. But in a democracy, Mr. Speaker, we 
cannot always do that which pleases us the best at that 
particular time. 
 
What the member from Yorkton is presenting today, and what 
the member from Meadow Lake is seconding — and I’m 
surprised at the member from Meadow Lake, that he  

would do that — you are hitting at the heart of democracy 
today. There would not be a legislature here today in this form 
if there was no opposition. And what are you doing by this 
motion, you are stifling the opposition. You are saying to the 
people of Saskatoon South, who saw fit to re-elect me, that we 
don’t want him to speak for us. We will not give him the 
opportunity. If he embarrasses to any extent, we will use our 
majority and we will shut down those committees. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen of the government, you are hitting at the 
very heart of democracy, and democracy cannot work I you do 
not give the opposition the opportunity present their views in 
this legislature to the people of Saskatchewan. And by this 
motion that you have presented, you are saying to us: we are 
going to reduce or annihilate your role as an opposition. 
 
You do not have that right in a democracy. You were given by 
the people of this province a mandate to govern, but to govern 
in a legislature where there is an effective opposition. And you 
may not like it, but the people of the province said that there 
would be an effective opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And it is incumbent upon us here today to fight 
with everything that we have to make sure that democracy can 
function in this Assembly. And I ask the members opposite to 
please come to your senses; know what your role is as a 
government. In the last four and a half years I have dealt with a 
number of high school students, and one of the things that was 
always embarrassing me was that I at one time had been a 
member of this House and had to explain as to why we act as 
we do in this House from time to time, which is not keeping 
with the wishes of the people of this province. But I tell you I 
am not afraid to go back and tell the people of this province that 
my first words in this House were on a motion that I found 
fundamentally opposed to the principles of democracy. And I’ll 
go back and tell the people what you were attempting to do. 
 
You have a majority, and on most committees you have a 
majority. Why do you want to change this rule? And I think the 
reason you want to change this rule is so that you can stifle us, 
so you can muzzle us in committees, and if it gets too hot for 
you, you can simply walk out and let things cool down. But 
that’s not democracy; that is not your function. Your function is 
to legislate, to govern, and listen to the people through the 
opposition. You may not like it, but that is your function; that is 
your duty. 
 
This change that is made today is not a trifling change. It is a 
significant change. It is a significant change. And as I said 
before, I think you are changing the role of the opposition, 
which you do not have the right to do. 
 
In the 11 years that I was a member of this House — and it has 
been stated by my colleagues a number of times — we worked 
to consensus. I didn’t agree with all the changes that were 
made, but because we knew there had to be co-operation, 
because we knew there had to be consensus in consultation if 
we wanted this House to work, all of us gave a little bit of what 
we didn’t really believe in. And we came up with rules that we 
could all  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

20 
 

accept to make this House function. And you cannot 
unilaterally come in and without any explanation — without 
any explanation — change the rules of this House. 
 
I would ask the member from Meadow Lake, who I know, to 
please stand up in his seat and explain to the members of this 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan why you need this 
change. You may have some logical explanation, but please 
stand up and tell us; tell the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sorry for what’s happening today. I am truly 
sorry for democracy; I’m sorry for the government. I can’t 
believe that the architect of the throne speech yesterday is the 
same architect of the motion today. If it is, then that persons has 
a very serious problem because he is nothing but a 
schizophrenic. He can’t ride in both directions. He can’t on the 
one hand say, I will support the principles of democracy by 
consultation, by co-operation, and then the very next day stifle 
the opposition, which is a fundamental part of democracy, by 
bringing in unilaterally, without any explanation, a rule change 
which means that the whole role of each member — not only in 
the opposition, but the back benches there — your role is going 
to fundamentally change. And I’m saying to you now, please 
stand up. 
 
It had been my sincere hope that I could come back to this 
House with a spirit of co-operation and work with you people 
so that the people in Saskatchewan and our high school students 
would be proud of the way we act in this House and the way we 
function. 
 
(1545) 
 
But you must give us that opportunity to be an effective 
opposition, and in that way we safeguard the principles of 
democracy that people for hundred of years have fought for. 
And the people out there will respect you for that decision; 
they’ll respect you for it. And what I’m asking you to do today, 
to please let’s not start this session of the legislature in such a 
manner that you force us to fundamentally change our role. I 
want to be an effective member. All my colleagues want to be 
an effective member, and it’s incumbent upon you to see to it 
that we can function in that role. And I urge again the member 
from Yorkton and the member from Meadow Lake to withdraw 
this motion and to tell the people of this province that we are 
going to protect and fight for the fundamental principles of 
democracy; and not only that, but we will make certain that you 
and the members in the opposition can play your role and carry 
out your duties for which you have been elected. 
 
I ask you, please, remove this motion, but at least get up and 
give us an explanation. Tell us why you need this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that I can at least talk to the member from 
Meadow Lake. He’s a former principal, a former teacher of a 
high school, and I know that he has talked to his children in his 
history classes about what democracy is all about. And I’m 
certain that he went through the principles of democracy, that 
there has to be an opposition — an effective opposition — and 
that the  

opposition have a role to play. And I’m sure that he would not 
want his former students to think that he has forgotten about 
those principles. So I ask him to please stand up and explain to 
us and to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan why 
this motion is necessary. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to 
congratulate you on my behalf and as well on behalf of the 
people of Regina Lakeview. I look forward to working with you 
in this Assembly, and with the other members. And as a new 
member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, who strongly believes 
in democracy and our democratic traditions, I am surprised at 
what is happening in this Assembly today. I am surprised and 
appalled at the unparliamentary and unfair manner in which the 
government members are seeking to change a fundamental rule 
of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — A rule that was fashioned some time ago by a 
special committee, and a rule which was, I understand, agreed 
to unanimously by that committee. 
 
I am surprised that the government members have not stood up 
and debated this issue today, Mr. Speaker. There hasn’t been a 
sound from the other side. They have refused to enter the 
debate. And that reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of a situation in a 
criminal court of law. When a criminal is guilty, his lawyer will 
tell him not to say anything. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask myself whether this is 
a calculated move on the part of the government to railroad the 
opposition and this Assembly, and to avoid the demands and 
requirements of a true democracy. I have to ask myself, Mr. 
Speaker, whether this is a calculated move on the part of the 
government to avoid the business of the committees, and 
thereby accountability to the people of the province. 
 
Out of common courtesy, Mr. Speaker, simple common 
courtesy, important rule changes should not be made or dealt 
with in this manner but in the traditional manner. If government 
members think they can silence the members of this side of the 
House by unilaterally changing rules of the Assembly so they 
can preclude debate in committees and avoid the business of the 
committees, they have another thought coming. Let me say, Mr. 
Speaker, I am deeply disappointed that such Machiavellian 
disregard for our customs and traditions is recurring in this 
Assembly today. And I am deeply disappointed that this 
Assembly has got off to this start, particularly in light of the 
comments from the throne speech, and referred to earlier in this 
debate.  
 
We are here, Mr. Speaker, to conduct the business of this 
province, and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, wanted 
and elected a strong opposition. It appears to me, however — 
and I hope I am wrong — but it appears to me that the 
government is attempting to overcome the will of the people to 
have a balanced House, and the will of the people to have a 
House that works together to solve the many problems that we 
are now faced with. It appears to me that the government is 
attempting to overcome the  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

21 
 

will of the people by using its majority of seats to unilaterally 
change the rules and attempt to gain dictatorial control of this 
Assembly. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly will see that the only 
fair thing to do is not to amend the rules in this manner but to 
refer the matter to a rules committee where proper discussion 
and consultation can take place in a manner that does justice to 
our democratic traditions, and I therefore urge this Assembly to 
adopt the amendment put forward by the member from Quill 
Lakes. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for recognizing me and 
I, too, congratulate you on your recent election and selection as 
Speaker of this honourable House. I regret, Mr. Speaker, the 
occasion, the reason for my joining in this debate today. It is 
indeed unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note with some interest we are being heaped with volumes of 
Weyerhaeuser material which the opposition has requested for 
nearly a year now. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I don’t believe that has 
anything to do with the motion. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, historically the fact of the matter is, 
historically rule changes in this legislature have been made by a 
special committee of the Assembly. This is not what is 
happening right now. Mr. Speaker, a consensus means that 
there is no substantial disagreement, in fact no disagreement 
whatsoever. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that even the members 
opposite must recognize by now that there is no consensus. If 
there is consensus, it is a consensus that the rule change is 
ill-conceived, ill-planned, or it is ill-willed. I wonder which? 
 
The fundamental issue here today that we’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, is that of fairness. This province is governed by a few 
people who say one thing and then they do the opposite. They 
said in their throne speech, and I quote: 
 

My government intends to implement its programme in a 
spirit of co-operation and participation. 

 
It goes on and the quote continues: 
 

My Ministers will continue this consultation process as 
new options are proposed and evaluated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they said it, but it is not happening, and as a new 
member of this legislature, I object. Fairness and consultation 
has indeed not taken place. That should be fundamentally clear 
to everyone in the legislature at this time. 
 
The question is not is one-third or one-half fair. But the 
question is how do we go about changing the rules? Now, Mr. 
Speaker, if I can refer to the throne speech, and I again quote: 
 

My government believes that changes can be  

made to enable the Legislature to better meet the needs of 
the members and the people. Accordingly, it proposes to 
refer the matter of a revision to the Rules of this 
Legislative Assembly to a special committee of this 
Assembly. 

 
Why then, do we have this proposal before us today? I 
understand why we have the amendment, but why do we have 
the original proposal? It should be referred to this special 
committee. Mr. Speaker, is it simply a matter of majority rules 
on everything? Is that what we’re coming to? Is it a question of 
might is right? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I lived in a country in South 
American where the Leader of the Opposition was under arrest, 
and the Leader of the Opposition happened to be Dr. Cheddi 
Jagan, and others who had been in his cabinet were also under 
arrest and held in the interior of the country away from 
telephones, and their mail was gone through. They were indeed 
muzzled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are being muzzled here by the proposal put in 
front of us. I plead with every individual member to ask 
yourself if the change proposed is a part of a democracy that 
you want to be a part of. Of course, it is not. That’s the only 
answer that we can come to. Protection of democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, is not always served best by force. Today we as 
members have the privilege of upholding democracy by voting 
for this amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have noted at various times in this debate the 
members opposite giggling and having generally a good time as 
though this is not a serious matter. And I don’t know how we 
members of the opposition can get it across to the members 
opposite; we are serious about this. This is a serious matter. It is 
not something to be taken lightly. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan a serious 
movement away from free speech. Public employees have been 
hampered in the recent election unfairly and now, Mr. Speaker, 
we are being hampered in a similar way the same calculated, 
callous disregard by the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, again 
I urge every fair-minded member and, indeed, I still have some 
faith and some hope that there are fair-minded members 
opposite. I urge that all fair-minded members support this 
amendment that is before us now. It is a matter of utmost 
importance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to address just a few remarks just to the magnitude that the 
members opposite are placing on this debate. What we have 
before us is a simple motion which suggest nothing more or 
nothing less than whether or not a majority of the members of 
any committee, regardless of what committee we’re taking 
about, a majority of the members of the committee should be in 
attendance for the committee to conduct the public business. 
That’s the simple fact of what this motion is about. And we 
have members going across the waterfront here everywhere 
from going back in parliamentary tradition. I would suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’re going back in parliamentary tradition as 
far as 1981, not as far as a  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

22 
 

couple of centuries ago. In 1981 the rules were changed, and 
rule no. 90 (1) states the following: 
 

One third of the number of Members of a select, special or 
standing committee shall be a quorum unless the 
Assembly has otherwise ordered. 

 
Now there’s nothing unilateral about what we’re going here. 
What we’re doing here is coming to the Assembly, which is 
what we’re doing now, and asking the members of the 
Assembly on all sides of the House to vote on the very simple 
matter that I’ve just started. 
 
Now people have made suggestions — members opposite have 
made suggestions — that it would be harder to get the work 
done. I ask any fair-minded person in Saskatchewan or any 
member in this House how can it be harder to get the work done 
if you’re an elected member of the legislature and you’re 
assigned to a committee, appointed to a committee — why 
should we not expect that 50 per cent of the members should be 
in attendance at the committee when it’s conducting public 
business regardless of what committee is in operation? I’ve 
heard that it somehow favours the government, the proposal 
that’s here. How can it somehow favour the government to have 
half of the members of the committee in attendance when the 
committee is conducting public business? I fail to see the 
arguments raised by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Quill Lakes, in moving his 
amendment, saw fit to re-visit the committee meeting this 
morning, and I want to do a little of the same, because what we 
have, and the reason we’re debating it now, is because it’s the 
first opportunity in this new legislature, the 21st Legislature, this 
is the first opportunity to address this issue, or any other, as a 
matter of fact. This is the first opportunity to address it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this morning at the very meeting that was 
referred to by the member for Quill Lakes, as it should have, the 
subject of the membership of the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on committees — he’s obviously not a 
member of the nominating committee — but the subject of his 
membership on the committees in the House was raised by 
myself as a member of the government. 
 
In this spirit, Mr. Speaker, with the idea that a new legislature, 
the rules and whatever happens here should accommodate the 
make-up of the new legislature, well it happens that the 
make-up of this legislature has a member, one lone member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who is not a member of the 
nominating committee. And the two members from the official 
opposition came to that meeting with the express purpose of 
freezing the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from the 
committees of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of the co-operation to which I 
refer, the government side of the House — and I refer now to 
the Crown Corporations Committee because the discussion 
became: should the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg be on 
one of the major committees? And I think all members will 
agree the major  

committees are considered to be the Crown Corporation 
Committee and the Public Accounts Committee, which most 
often meet concurrently. And the suggestion made by myself at 
that committee meeting was that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should perhaps be on one of those. The 
members opposite suggested that he would not have one of the 
positions which is allocated to the opposition, which the 
member of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is a member of the 
opposition. And so, in the spirit of the kind of co-operation that 
this house should operate on — not only now in the 21st 
Legislature but in legislatures to come — we, the government, 
who have an allocation of 12 members, said one of those 12 
members will be the member from the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the spirit of co-operation to which I refer 
and to which the Premier has referred in the past and to which 
the throne speech referred yesterday. 
 
(1600) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the matter before us is a very simple one. A 
very simple matter of a simple majority. Should members of 
this House — from whatever party they represent — should 
they be expected to attend at the meetings of the committees to 
which they are appointed? I say yes, they should. And I say the 
public business is better served if at least 50 per cent of those 
members are in attendance, and I would ask all members of the 
house on that very simple question to vote against the 
amendment and to vote for the motion. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, will the member from 
Meadow Lake permit a question before he resumes his seat? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member has requested . . . asked if the 
member from Meadow Lake will permit a question. Apparently 
he will not permit a question. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this House today to 
speak for this amendment. But before I speak to the 
amendment, let me first congratulate you as being chosen the 
Speaker of this legislature on behalf of myself and of the good 
people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, who I am fortunate enough 
to represent. 
 
I didn’t expect,, Mr. Speaker, to have my first speech in this 
House one defending the basic principles of democracy and 
fairness. Rather, I expected to be debating the throne speech. I 
was amazed this morning when my colleagues came back from 
their committee meeting and reported to us that the members 
opposite are determined to undermine the very principles of 
democracy in this province, the very principles of why we’re 
here in this legislature. I was amazed; I was shocked, and I was 
disappointed. I fully expected, Mr. Speaker, that the direction 
that the members opposite would take would be that of fairness 
and of co-operation. I am also amazed, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member from Meadow Lake didn’t see fit to explain what this 
proposed change means. 
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

23 
 

 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, to give you an example of what they are 
about and what they’re trying to do, and why the members on 
this side of the house are opposing them. The education 
committee, as an example, has nine members on the 
government side; it has six members on the opposition side. 
Surely the member from Meadow Lake must understand that if 
his party, his government, was in a difficult situation and didn’t 
want that committee to meet, that if the nine members from the 
government side didn’t attend, there wouldn’t be a quorum. 
 
That’s what we’re talking about here. We’re talking about 
democracy; we’re talking about a commitment from every 
legislator in this body, and we’re talking about a lack of 
commitment from the opposite side — a lack of commitment to 
democracy and to fair representation to the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he speaks of large numbers of members being at 
committee meetings so that we can best serve our people, and 
the members on this side agree with him. We agree fully. That’s 
why we’re adamant that the one-third rule stay, because we’re 
afraid if it’s changed, that there won’t be committee meetings 
when the government doesn’t want them. They’re trying to 
muzzle the opposition. But what they’ll find is it’s a little 
different than it was last term because we have a few more of us 
on this side who are willing to speak against your kind of 
government, your kind of unfairness, and your kind of 
misrepresentation of the things that the people of this province 
want. And you want to know that we’re not going to be sitting 
back. We’re going to be speaking on behalf of democracy and 
the people of this province. That’s why we’re here. And you 
want to count on it — we’re going to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I rather smelled a rat the other day in 
terms of fairness when I saw included in the throne speech the 
idea to change the electoral boundaries act. Mr. Speaker, I refer 
to fairness. I refer to a one-to-one representation in fair, honest 
government from the legislators in this body, and I’m afraid, 
Mr. Speaker, this government in on the wrong course. 
 
I would have thought that the member from Kinistino and other 
new members would have come to this body realizing the 
mistakes of the past administration, coming here with the idea 
of changing it, of telling the old members that you’re wrong, 
you’ve got to stop it, we’ve made errors but we’re here to 
correct them. But I didn’t see it. 
 
I see them sit there quietly as these guys try to pull the basic 
fundamental principles of which this House is designed for, 
under the feet of everyone sitting here. And I’m urging them to 
get up and support this amendment. I’m urging them to get up. 
Take a little courage. Never mind worrying about whether 
you’re going to be in cabinet down the road or whether you’re 
not. Do what’s right — do what’s right for your people. Do 
what’s right for the people of Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this wasn’t a speech that I  

expected to, or wanted to have to make. We’ve got a new 
generation out there and some of them were in this gallery 
today. And what they’re expecting from us is decent, fair 
government. We’ve got a problem. We’ve got a major problem. 
And the members opposite are the ones that should be 
correcting it — the new members as well as the old. The old 
ones should know better, and the new ones shouldn’t let them 
do it because they don’t apparently know any better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand the government’s fear, the 
government’s fear of what’s about to happen in this term of 
government. I can, because I don’t think they’re strong enough 
to defend themselves against the kind of opposition that the 
New Democratic Party and the members of this opposition are 
going to mount. You’re not used to what we’re going to be 
giving you. You’re used to a little of it, but you’re going to get 
an awful lot more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — It’s our responsibility to keep you on 
track, and when you’re undermining the basic principles of 
what this legislature is about, I’ll give a commitment to the 
people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, as well as to the rest of the 
people of this province, that we’re going to be here fighting on 
their behalf to make sure that this government operates fairly, 
effectively and soundly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there’s urgency. There’s a 
feeling of urgency on this side of the House, and it’s because of 
the types of things that the members opposite appear to want to 
do. 
 
Why don’t you do the right thing? Stand on your principles. Do 
the right thing if you have any principles. Do the right thing. 
Why don’t all of you support our amendment to the motion? 
That’s what your job should be. Do what’s right. I ask the 
member from Meadow Lake to stand up, and stand up on the 
side of right, not on the side of trying to set it up so you can win 
the next election through misrepresenting the people and 
through changing the rules that this House stands for. 
 
The people of this province expected a fair government. They 
returned you to office with some expectations, not with the kind 
of a majority that you might have liked, but they’ve still got 
some expectations that you’re going to turn things around from 
where you’ve been and do the right thing. It appears that their 
faith in you has been misplaced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to this House that I will be 
supporting the amendment. And Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 
to this House that I am against the motion. I am against any 
action by members of this government that would undermine 
the future of our children and their children. 
 
Democracy is a sacred thing, and it’s our job to protect it, and 
you can bet that the members on this side of the House are 
going to work awfully hard to see that those principles and 
those rights are protected. Thank you, Mr.  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

24 
 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there will be a whole lot of folks in 
Moose Jaw who will attest to the fact that I did not seek 
representation in the public office because of a burning desire 
and an innate passion to debate rules of the House. And I must 
admit, Mr. Speaker, that they would be correct in attesting to 
that. And I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I had anticipated that 
with the first opportunity to stand address this Assembly, that it 
would be on a topic that is a little more exciting, a little more 
meaningful in the lives of Saskatchewan people than this 
motion appears to be. However, it would be all too easy to 
assume that because we are talking about rules that it is 
unimportant, and that is simply not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the recent election campaign I had the 
privilege of speaking with a large number of high schools in my 
riding, and high school students who were shocked, Mr. 
Speaker, to learn that in this world of ours those of us who 
enjoy the freedoms and the privileges that come with the 
democratic system are in the minority; and that, as was pointed 
out last evening, about only one-quarter of the countries in this 
world enjoy the privileges of democracy. Students who were 
shocked to learn that in many parts of the country — many 
parts of the world, I should say — that rules are made by those 
who have the greatest amount of power, without consideration 
and respect for the voice and the feelings and the concerns and 
the dreams of the minorities. And I was impressed with the 
commitment of those young people, many of whom sat in the 
gallery here today, believing that it is only right that the voice 
of the minority should be heard and should be respected when 
the democratic decisions are made. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is a basic principle upon which all of us have 
committed ourselves in arriving at this Assembly yesterday and 
taking our seats in this honoured House. 
 
I talked to a good number of people, Mr. Speaker, over the last 
number of months, who have expressed concern about the 
conduct and the decorum of this House and its members, and 
who have said that they want to see in this House people 
conduct themselves with the objective of fairness and putting 
the interests of Saskatchewan people, first and foremost, ahead 
of partisan political concerns. And I listened very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker, on that momentous day for many of us, on both sides 
of the House, when we were sworn in. And the Lieutenant 
Governor, in his address to us, when His Honour asked us to 
keep uppermost in our minds when we serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, to serve the people of Saskatchewan, not our 
partisan political interests. 
 
And I listened with a great deal of respect to yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday when you asked us again to consider 
conducting ourselves in that same manner, putting first and 
foremost the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, not our 
partisan political interests. And I listened with pleasure last 
evening when our Premier spoke and again asked all the 
members of the Assembly to put first and foremost the interests 
of the people of Saskatchewan and not our partisan political 
interests. 
 

(1615) 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the message that was imparted 
to us by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, by yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, and by the Premier and by the people of 
Saskatchewan, are messages that are important for all of us to 
consider as being our careers — for those of us who are 
beginning — and as we extend our careers for those who are 
extending, to serve the people of Saskatchewan from this 
honoured Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a new member I don’t pretend to have an 
intimate working knowledge of all the committees of this 
Assembly, but I do know that they deal with matters of 
importance to the people of this province. Let me just refer, for 
those who may not be familiar to the committees and what they 
are, and listen as to whether they are the kinds of things that 
you see as being important for the people in the Assembly to 
consider. And there are 10 committees that we’re talking about. 
The function of 10 committees is to do their business outside of 
these halls so that when we gather here we can work with 
efficiency, as was referred to as a highlight of yesterday’s 
throne address, Mr. Speaker. The committees we’re referring to 
are: agriculture, communications of the Assembly, Crown 
corporations, education, the estimates of this Assembly, 
municipal law, non-controversial Bills, private members’ Bills, 
privileges and election, and public accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be in error to treat those topic 
areas as being insignificant to the members of this Assembly 
and as insignificant to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I do know, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the committees and 
how they are made up, that there is a formula which allows that 
the government, which has the majority of members sitting in 
this Assembly, makes up the majority of members of each 
committee. And I do not debate that principle, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that is correct and I support that principle that the 
government should have the majority of the members on each 
of these committees. 
 
But then we come to the critical question, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is: what happens when any one of these 10 important 
committees is dealing with a topic that is sensitive to the 
government of the day, that does not fit the political agenda of 
the government of the day? It may fit the political agenda of the 
people of Saskatchewan but it doesn’t happen to fit the partisan 
political priorities of the government of the day. And so let me 
answer the question that was raised by the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
What happens of course is that when you have a majority of the 
members of each committee being members of the government 
and you’re dealing with the topic that the government does not 
wish to address, with the proposed rule change, what happens? 
The government members all stay home, the all find other 
things to occupy themselves, and the committee cannot speak. 
Somehow there is a proposal here that if it is in the best 
interests of the government, the political priorities of the  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

25 
 

government, not necessarily the political priorities of the people 
of Saskatchewan, they can simply stay home and somehow by 
staying home they are serving the people of Saskatchewan by 
not speaking, by not dealing with these issues together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t pretend to have an intimate knowledge of 
the workings of this Assembly but somehow that seems to 
smack, to me, to be somewhat contradictory for the reasons that 
we all stood for election to this Assembly and that we came 
committed to serve. And I don’t believe that that is what the 
people of Saskatchewan want when they say that they want us 
to conduct ourselves in a manner that is fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan and putting fairness ahead of our partisan 
political concerns. 
 
And so I ask again, the member from Meadow Lake or any 
member from the other side, to say why it is that the rules as 
they exist now are not working. The rules as they exist now will 
enforce that when there are important topics to be discussed and 
the members from opposition show up to discuss them that the 
government members must also be there. The proposal is that if 
the government members do not wish to discuss the important 
topics of the committee agenda they merely stay home and the 
topic gets dropped; there is no discussion. 
 
And so I ask again: what is it about the rules as they exist now 
that does not serve the people of Saskatchewan the best, Mr. 
Speaker? And I ask the government members then to tell us 
why, why is it that the government members see this change in 
conduct of the rules as in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because I must admit, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
obvious to me. I believe it is also not terribly obvious to the 
people of Saskatchewan who may be paying attention to this 
debate and wondering why in the world are we starting the 
beginning of the Legislative Assembly with a procedural 
debate. 
 
And let me conclude, Mr. Speaker, by addressing my comments 
to the members opposite and, in particular, to the newly elected 
members opposite. I believe that the members opposite, and in 
particular the newly elected members opposite, stood for the 
election to public office for many of the same personal reasons 
as the members on this side. I believe that you stood for election 
to this Assembly because you came wanting to serve the people 
of Saskatchewan and the people of your constituency the best 
you could. I realize we have differences in philosophy but 
surely we all have that same basic commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan that motivates us in being here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — For the new members elected opposite, I ask you 
not to fall into the trap of engaging in partisan political conduct. 
Put first the interests of your constituents and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and please do not make the first time that you 
stand to vote in this Assembly to be doing that for purposes of 
partisan political advantage as opposed to the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, that members from both sides, not just  

the members from this side but the members from both sides, 
seriously consider the implications of this rule, a proposal that 
has been made. I invite, Mr. Speaker, for members from both 
sides to support this amendment, and in carrying the 
amendment to carry the resolution in its amended form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity. I certainly wish that it 
was on a topic that was closer to the hearts of Saskatchewan 
people, as they feel them. I believe that in dealing with this rule, 
indirectly we are addressing that issue, and I look forward to 
many more opportunities, Mr. Speaker, with your consent, to 
address this Assembly and to do that in the interests of my 
constituents and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too congratulate 
you on your appointment. I think with the co-operation of this 
body you have a good chance to do a tremendous job. 
 
And I’ve looked forward to this — looked forward to 
representing the people of Humboldt. I had great expectations, 
but on the first day I sit in here, instead of getting on with what 
I perceived would be important business to the people of this 
province, we are being caught up in a whim, reasons for which 
have not been explained. We have a strong point in our 
parliament and our democracy and in our official opposition. 
We use this system because the people of the province ask for 
it. And at one time second best was a long way behind us. But 
do I hear footsteps of second best to democracy? An effective 
way to stop the democratic process is to implement random 
changes just like we’re seeing here today — the people’s right 
to effective representation being stymied, changing the rules, 
changing the precedent. Then what? Rule by decree? 
 
I would like to make a quote from Hansard, December 3, 1986, 
page 1, part of the throne speech from yesterday: 
 

My Government is not intimidated by the conditions it faces 
because it knows that the people of the province are not only 
accustomed to change, but have also consistently been able to 
find new opportunities as their circumstances altered. 

 
Is what we’re seeing in this proposal an interpretation of not 
being intimidated by conditions this government faces? No 
wonder. No worries mate, if we don’t like it we’ll change it. 
And the people’s circumstances will certainly be altered if this 
practice of setting dangerous precedents like this continue. The 
precedent is set and we must assume it will continue. And I’m 
very disappointed because if I lose my confidence in the people, 
the members opposite, at this early point in time, it’s a terrible 
way to start, Mr. Speaker — terrible for us, terrible for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member opposite said it’s a simple motion. I tremble to 
think of a serious motion or a major motion. Where is the 
consultation that was preached yesterday? No consultation, 
even when the process has been  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

26 
 

established. Where’s the government’s responsibility with 
respect for this Assembly and ultimately respect for the people 
of this province? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what about those young people that were 
looking down on us a few minutes ago? If we show no respect 
for the traditions of this Assembly, what are they to expect 
when explained what is going on here? They are born with an 
innocence that is trained to adhere by all the rules, by all the 
laws. If this Assembly does not respect those rules and 
traditions, what are we breeding? We’re breeding a generation 
coming up that will have less respect if they follow this. 
 
The young people must not lose their respect, because we will 
degenerate. This democratic system should not be allowed to 
degenerate with motions such as members opposite have 
presented. 
 
Respect is earned and respect is lost. We start at zero, I like to 
think. And this applies for every seat in this House, including 
that of Mr. Speaker. Earned or lost. This Assembly must earn 
the respect of the people of the province by showing good 
direction, by adhering to laws and principles and rules, by not 
taking the majority rules and bullying its way through the 
system as we know it. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to 
extend my congratulations to you — my warm congratulations 
— and those of the people of Saskatoon Sutherland. It was a 
pleasure to meet you for the first time last night, and I look 
forward to working with you in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on a point of principle against the 
improper ordering of public business reflected in the proposed 
change to the rules of this Assembly. Although new to this 
Assembly, and its debate, I’m not new to the concerns of the 
public, their concern that their business be conducted properly, 
and their public business, their public accounts, can be 
scrutinized and the government held accountable. 
 
Now to alter the existing rules of this House with respect to the 
quorums is not only to foil the democratic process, as has been 
mentioned many times previous today, but I believe is to stymie 
or to tie in a knot the prescribed processes that this Assembly 
has previously adopted to deal with the public business. And I 
think that the public then can only wonder why these changes 
are being proposed. 
 
The people of Sutherland, and indeed the people of the 
province, want to know that their concerns about agriculture, 
about municipal law, Crown corporations, public accounts, can 
and will be reviewed and addressed by committees, committees 
that in fact meet unimpeded by absence due to illness, absence 
due to forgetfulness perhaps, or perhaps due to political 
manipulation to partisan purposes. They want to know that their 
business can and will be reviewed, that they can be represented, 
that their business can be dealt with adequately. And the 
existing rules concerning the quorum facilitate precisely  

this process. And it was the wisdom, I believe, of this Assembly 
to have adopted the rules which presently exist to facilitate this 
process, rules which work and don’t need to be changed. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore believe that to change the rule on 
quorum is an insult to the public; it’s an insult to the democratic 
process and to the people we represent. It ignores the right of 
the public to see that their public business is adequately and 
judiciously addressed by committee as expeditiously as possible 
without delay. And so I say a point of principle is involved, that 
public business is ill served by the proposed change, and that 
the public itself will readily recognize this very fact. So I come 
to this Legislative Assembly for the first time prepared to do 
public business. I think that the people of Saskatoon Sutherland 
want to see that I do that, that other members do precisely that. 
They don’t want to see partisan political purposes interfere with 
the conduct of their business. They’re entitled to that, and I 
intend to support the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon 
Centre and myself to congratulate you on your election to the 
position of Speaker of the House, a new position for you. And I, 
too, am here at the legislature taking on a new job, honoured 
and privileged to represent the constituents of Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Over the past month since the election, I and the many other 
new members on this side of the House have been fortunate to 
have some meetings with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 
and his staff who have informed us in some detail about the 
rules and regulations conducting debate and the procedures of 
this House. And I found those rules and regulations very 
interesting and have been impressed by the discussion of what it 
means to have democratic and open discussion in the legislature 
on issues of very great importance to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I assume that the new members opposite also took the time to 
meet with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly and his staff 
and to have the same instructions. And I assume the member for 
Meadow Lake at some point also went through the same 
procedure — a procedure which took the time of the Clerk of 
the Legislative Assembly and cost the taxpayers some money in 
the process — money that I would like to think would be well 
spent in encouraging us and educating us as to how to conduct 
ourselves in this Assembly. 
 
I found what the Clerk had to tell us about the history of 
democracy quite interesting, and in some ways deeply moving, 
because it is a long tradition. And while the member from 
Meadow Lake may say it’s a simple question that we’re 
debating today, I wonder where he has gone to school that he 
doesn’t understand that a simple questions can have fairly 
profound implications,  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

27 
 

and that these decisions must not be made lightly. 
 
I found it interesting to hear in the throne speech yesterday that 
the government proposes to refer the matter of a revision of the 
rules of this Legislative Assembly to a special committee of the 
Assembly — presumably something that is going to be done in 
the future. And yet when we go to a meeting this afternoon we 
find out that suddenly a change in a rule has been proposed, one 
that we have not had time to discuss or been warned about 
ahead of time. And I suggest that’s a very serious change and 
one that we must oppose by supporting this amendment. 
 
There has been no notice of motion of this change, and it has 
not been taken to a rules committee. The idea of a rules 
committee where it can be considered makes a lot of sense to 
me, and I think it would make sense to the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre that we have time to consider the changes that 
are being proposed to us. 
 
I understand that the rules that were written in this red book, 
which we’ve gone through in great detail with the Clerk of the 
Assembly, were drawn up in 1981 by a committee representing 
members from all parties, and that they were agreed to in a 
consensus. I like that idea when it involves agreement on the 
rules that we are going too use here in the legislature when we 
are speaking. I think that’s very important. 
 
I know that the constituents in Saskatoon Centre, as I have gone 
door to door meeting with them during the election campaign, 
told me very often that they wish that there could be more 
co-operation among people here in the legislature; that it was 
crucial that we have some consensus, and that we have a spirit 
of consensus and of willingness too co-operate; that 
consultation is important and can’t be over-emphasized. 
 
I would urge that the members withdraw the motion, that 
someone speak to withdraw this motion and take it back to a 
rules committee. That would be the very best things that could 
happen to it. I would urge the new members opposite to get to 
their feet and speak on this issue and, no other action coming 
forward, I would like to also speak then in support of the 
amendment and say that I think that we must get on with the 
business of this House in a spirit of co-operation, realizing that 
these simple questions have profound implications which we 
must consider so that we can proceed with a spirit of democracy 
that’s so important to the history of this legislature. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I rise to speak, Mr. Speaker, in support of the 
amendment. 
 
I think first of all, Mr. Speaker, this procedure and the process 
that we are going through appears to be quite unfair. I think that 
the way that they have proposed this new procedure today will 
be the way the committees will start operating in the future. 
 

When a simple majority governs, there is no real opportunity 
for true debate to take place because the simple majority may 
just sit there and not pay attention, Mr. Speaker, because they 
know they have the automatic majority. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I deem this procedure to be highly unfair. I 
think that debate has to be combined with consensus and a 
consensual process. In that way people can have the input in 
regards to the important decision making that we have to go 
through in this legislation. 
 
I feel that by allowing it to go through like this, we will have a 
more or less unilateral decision-making process. I think it has 
impact, Mr. Speaker, in regards not only through the procedures 
that we are going through, but also the contact of the 
procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with extremely important issues in 
this committees, such as education, such as agriculture, such as 
public accounts. And, Mr. Speaker, we are even dealing with 
issues such as communication. This new procedure will not 
provide the required and co-operative communications system 
that was said about and mentioned on yesterday’s throne 
speech. I firmly believe that if this legislature will support this 
new motion, it goes against the essence of our democratic 
system when minority and small groups and small nationalities 
in this province could have the right to a voice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a person, as a Cree-Métis in this province, and 
well recognizing the impact that simple majorities have on our 
people it gives me great determination to stand up here and 
fight against that procedure that was introduced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that this process is not 
meant to demean. It is not meant to belittle. This is a true 
democratic process we are going through and that amendment 
that we are putting forth makes sure that inputs of minority 
people can be brought forth and properly dealt with, whether it 
is in education or in communication or elsewhere. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, I stand here and ask the legislature to give 
us this chance for debate and consensus decision-making at the 
same time. That we would like to co-operate and make the 
legislature something that not only our school students and not 
only the elders of this province can say we are proud of the 
process that is gone through this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So, Mr. Speaker, I stand here in strong support 
of the amendment and I hope that the initial resolution will be 
dropped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to add my 
voice of congratulations on your recent election as Speaker of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. I  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

28 
 

hope that I can honour the rules of this legislature and abide by 
your rulings. 
 
I echo my colleague’s concerns, particularly my colleague from 
North Battleford, when he said that instead of speaking to the 
contents of the throne speech, we find ourselves today speaking 
to a rule change put forward by the government. Instead of a 
spirit of co-operation which was referred to yesterday by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and which the people in 
Saskatoon Nutana really genuinely wish to see, we have what 
appears to be an attempt to railroad through this Legislative 
Assembly a rule change which appears to do nothing other than 
to protect the government’s own partisan interests. 
 
And what, Mr. Speaker, could those interests be? What could 
they possibly be? As I understand it, the change would in 
essence mean that a quorum of committee of the legislature 
would be changed from the present one-third to a simple 
majority. This change could mean that every time we get close 
to an issue in the committee, all of a sudden we could see the 
members opposite walk out and leave us with a lack of a 
quorum. 
 
(1645) 
 
The members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, have chairpeople 
that have been appointed to those committees. Every time one 
of the chairpeople called a committee meeting, the members 
opposite could fail to show up. How, Mr. Speaker, would this 
deal with the crisis in agriculture? How, Mr. Speaker, would 
this deal with education and health — important issues to the 
people of Saskatchewan. How does this stymieing of the 
committee process help farm families who are facing social and 
economic crisis in their communities? How does this help? 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, how it helps. The committee 
wouldn’t be able to meet. The work of the committee wouldn’t 
be able to occur. And I really wonder whether we would have 
true committee representation in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Saskatoon Nutana have said to 
me over and over again that they want both sides of this 
legislature to co-operate. They want us to come together to 
grapple with real problems, serious problems, economic and 
social problems, and yes, Mr. Speaker, partisan political 
problems. 
 
I think it is fair to say that we do have philosophical differences 
in this Chamber. I think the one area that we can agree on is our 
commitment to democracy. We can agree that we cherish the 
electoral process which we’ve all just been through. The right 
of the people to go to the polls on a regular basis to elect their 
government is something we cherish. Many citizens of the 
world right now are fighting for that right. Many of them, Mr. 
Speaker, are dying for that right. Many of our own citizens, 
members of our own family, have fought and died for our right 
to sit here today. I want to remind the members of the 
government that we on this side of the House were given a 
mandate to protect the interests of Saskatchewan people. How, 
Mr. Speaker, will the change to the rule  

protect the rights of the people to effective representation? 
How, Mr. Speaker, will this change protect the people’s right to 
know? I, Mr. Speaker, will be supporting the amendment put 
forward by my colleagues from the Quill Lakes and Regina 
Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 
Assembly this afternoon to support the amendment put forward 
by the member of Quill Lakes. But before I do that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to preface my remark by saying that on behalf 
of the constituency of Regina North West, on behalf of the 
women and men and the children of the constituency, please 
accept our congratulations on your selection of Speaker. I know 
it’s going to be a very formidable job to chair the Assembly 
over the next four years, but I look forward to the next four 
years with having you in the Chair, because I believe that you 
have the ability to be fair. 
 
Earlier in the afternoon we had some students here, students 
from my constituency. They were 47 in number from the 
Centennial School. And I was quite concerned about what they 
had witnessed in the Chamber this afternoon, concerned 
because two weeks ago they invited me to their school to talk 
about parliament; to talk about the history of parliament; to 
explain to them how the traditions of parliament were set up 
and what important traditions had been set throughout the 
centuries and decades previous. They wanted to know how the 
legislature works, and how the Speaker fits into the role, and 
how committees were set up, and how the cabinet operated. 
 
Today when I went to meet with them to get my picture taken 
— to meet with them to answer questions that they had been 
trying to ask me after they had seen the question period which 
didn’t arise — they were very perplexed, very puzzled. They 
were puzzled because they couldn’t understand, after I talked to 
them for a few minutes, why an Assembly of hon. members 
such as this would try and change rules in the middle of a game 
without having to follow the traditions and the history of 
parliament and the legislature of the past. They were quite 
concerned because the arbitrary move this afternoon on behalf 
of the government showed to them that perhaps they shouldn’t 
be living by the rules of life either; that perhaps rules they don’t 
like — rather than raising their hand in school to interrupt the 
teacher to express a question or to express a comment — 
perhaps they can change the rules in the middle of their class. I 
think when that happens we see chaos not only in schools but in 
our lifestyles as well. 
 
When I came out of that discussion I felt truly embarrassed for 
this government; I felt truly embarrassed for the Conservative 
Party and the cabinet members in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. You have an awesome responsibility to lead by 
example, and I think that this afternoon you have provided a 
very bad example, not only to the 47 grade 8 students from 
Centennial School but to all the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the issue this afternoon is  
  



 
December 4, 1986 

 

29 
 

not just democracy, but fairness. The government doesn’t seem 
to know what fairness is even though they talk about it a great 
deal in their Speech from the Throne. They talked about it a 
great deal when they were issuing press releases through their 
cabinet positions. 
 
But what is fair? What does being fair mean? What is fair in my 
view, and in think in most people’s judgement, is following the 
rules established by precedent. What is fair is amending rules 
which were originally written by consensus, to be amended by 
consensus through a rules committee. 
 
What is unfair is the autocratic move of this government to 
amend the rules without notice, and I think we have had ample 
discussion on that. What is unfair, as well, is that the proposed 
rule change has not been out forward by the consensus of a 
rules committee of this Assembly which has been established 
by the past precedent and tradition of parliament. 
 
What we are witnessing in our province and in our democracy 
today is exactly what has been witnessed in other countries 
where there are no democracies. What we are witnessing today 
is what has been witnessed in countries which are run by 
autocrats — the countries the member from Regina North 
referred to earlier in his remarks — run by those who are afraid 
of democracy, run by autocrats who are afraid of participatory 
democracy. What we are witnessing today as well is a major 
fundamental mistake in judgement of the government opposite. 
And I believe this government, if it does not reconsider its 
position, will live a very short life to regret it’s autocratic, 
unfair decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon — Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my 
remarks by saying that I will support the amendments put 
forward by the member of Quill Lakes and seconded by the 
member from Regina Centre. And I ask members opposite — 
those of you who are not in cabinet, those of you who are not 
going to be in cabinet unless you get up and put forward your 
viewpoints in public to your constituents — put forward your 
viewpoints, not only in this Assembly on this issue which I 
think is a fundamental issue of our Assembly, not only today, 
but I think for many years to come. 
 
So please take some advice — and it’s worth every penny 
because it’s free: don’t sit back and follow this cabinet which I 
think is making a fundamental error in where they are leading 
you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, a few words before I move 
an adjournment. I’ve been in this Assembly for eight years, and 
to my knowledge in that eight-year period I have never yet seen 
a committee that the members walked out of and there was no 
committee meeting. It doesn’t happen that way, Mr. Speaker. In 
all the time that I have been here, the only time that we see 
people vacating a particular committee or the House, and  

it’s been done several times, is when the members walk out and 
ring the bells and the bells on and on for sometimes days at a 
time. I’m not sure that is a position that the public generally 
supports. 
 
As the member from Meadow Lake, the House Leader, says, 
we’re really asking everybody to take some time and attend the 
committees. At least 50 per cent of the people that are put on 
committees should be attending those committees. I don’t think 
that’s an unreasonable request for people that elected their 
members to come down here and sit in the committees. And 
what is exactly wrong with that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have more to say with regards to this 
particular thing and the rules of the House in general. There was 
an agreement, however, between I believe the House Leader 
and the whip, being that tonight is Saskatchewan day at 
Agribition, a very proud show for us, a very proud agricultural 
show for all of Saskatchewan, that there was an agreement that 
the House would not sit this evening so that members would be 
able to attend that. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would 
now move that this House do now stand adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 


