


















































April 18, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 18, 1986 
 
 
 

703 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like, 
through you, to introduce to the members of the Assembly a 
group of people who are seated on the Assembly floor who are 
participants of the life enrichment program and volunteers who 
are with them. There are three volunteers as well as their 
teachers, Lynne Demeule and Robert Yee. This program takes a 
great interest in the activities of the legislature, because as I 
look at the people, I recognize many of them having been here 
about three months ago. 
 
So I would, on behalf of the members, extend to all of them our 
welcome and wish them a pleasant and educational stay. I 
understand they’re staying until 11 o’clock, so they are really 
determined to see what is happening in this place. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government members here in the House today, I would like to 
join with the member opposite in bringing a special welcome to 
the volunteers and the members from the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council who are here with us today. The Department 
of Social Services has had a very good working relationship 
with your organization over the years, and we look forward to 
sustaining that relationship and working with you in the future 
on behalf of all handicapped people here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I would ask all members to once again 
welcome these people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 
the pleasure of having 40 young students from Swift Current in 
with us. They are from the elementary school of St. Joseph’s in 
Swift Current, grades 5, 6, and 7. And they are accompanied by 
their teachers, Mr. Shumay and Mr. Schneider and Ms. Corey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m meeting with this group after, and I look 
forward to some pertinent questions. I would ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to this Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reduction of Federal Transfer Payments 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Health, and it has to do with the 
Mulroney government’s plan, announced in May of 1985, in 
that federal budget, to cut federal financial support for health 
care by billions of dollars over the next five years. 
 

During consideration of the Health estimates in recent days, my 
colleagues have asked you many times what the impact of these 
cuts would be on the Saskatchewan health care system. And we 
have been shocked, and I have been shocked as I read Hansard, 
to hear your suggestions that you don’t know how much 
Saskatchewan will lose in the federal transfer payments as a 
result of the Mulroney government cut-backs. 
 
I ask if the minister has reconsidered that position, and will he 
now tell Saskatchewan taxpayers how much they stand to lose 
if the Mulroney government proceeds with the massive 
cut-backs in established program funding payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see 
the Leader of the Opposition rise in this question. I’m sure in 
his past experience he must have had some awareness of how 
EPF (established program of financing) funding takes place 
between the provinces and the federal government. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, if I remember correctly, it was under his 
administration in 1977 that we moved to EPF funding with the 
Liberal government of that day, away from a 50-50 in cost 
sharing. 
 
However, the question he is addressing to me is: do we know 
what these cut-backs will be and if they will be cut-backs. I 
have indicated in this year that the estimated amount that is 
indicated for Saskatchewan is approximately $13 million in 
EPF; a portion of that is for Health and a portion of that is for 
Continuing Education. I’ve also indicated to the members 
opposite, and I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition must be 
aware of these comments if he’s been reading Hansard as he 
says, that I am going to Ottawa on the 28th of this month to 
meet with my federal counterpart to discuss this very topic to 
see if we can get a better deal for Saskatchewan. My colleague, 
the Minister of Finance, is in contact with the federal minister 
of Finance, and these are under discussion. So to make any kind 
of an estimate or a guess at what may happen in year ’87-88, 
’88-89 would be a hypothetical situation. 
 
We’re not sure there will be a cut-back. I can assure you this, 
and the people of Saskatchewan, that I think the record of the 
Devine government over the last four years, subsequently each 
year, more money contributed to health care year after year 
after year — this year 11.6 per cent, the highest in the country; 
since we took office, 65 per cent increase to the health care 
budget. I think that gives the assurance to the people of 
Saskatchewan — irregardless of what may happen on the 
national scene — that we stand for health care, we stand for it 
strong, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My 
question to the Minister of Health was fairly precise. It seems to 
me, sir, that on the basis of the announced federal government 
policy you know almost precisely what the financial impact on 
Saskatchewan will be over the next five years, and I ask you: 
how much will the Mulroney government’s proposed cuts in 
financial support for health care cost Saskatchewan over the 
next  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

704 
 

five years? What is your estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t know what that 
figure is. We’re going down this year. I’m going on the 28th of 
this month to try and carve out the best deal for Saskatchewan 
that we possibly can. That’s what I’m going to do. I will stick 
up for Saskatchewan health care. I will try and get the . . . Now 
if the members want to shout from their seats and persist in 
shouting, we will let them shout, Mr. Speaker, and then I will 
go on with my answer. But if they feel that this forum is to sit 
and shout continually, cluck and so on, go right ahead and do 
that. 
 
I’m answering the question in saying that I will go down there 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If the members aren’t willing to be quiet 
and listen to the answer, I will sit too. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have indicated to the members . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. When you ask a question I 
believe that you should give the minister an opportunity to 
answer. He couldn’t be heard if he was answering. I couldn’t 
hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
and to the member opposite, I’ve indicated to you that I will be 
going to Ottawa to try and carve out the best deal. It looks like 
it was a $13 million total this year. We may be able to get it 
reduced. I’m not saying we can; I’m telling you that I’m going 
to go there and try. 
 
So until we know how we make out this year, I’m sure, sir, that 
you would understand. How could one say with any degree of 
certainty what will happen three or four years down the road? 
You were a premier of this province. You must have negotiated 
with the federal government. And I’m sure, sir, that you 
wouldn’t be able to say with any degree of certainty what was 
going to happen three or four years hence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, are you telling me that your officials have not 
estimated what the loss will be on the basis of the currently 
announced federal government policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m telling you, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition, that the figures for this year indicate it may be $13 
million — I say may be — and I’ve told you that many times — 
$13 million for EPF funding. That’s both health care and 
continuing education. I’ve indicated to your colleagues in 
estimates that it appears that it may be around $9 million for 
health care this year. 
 
But at the same time I think you know from looking at the 
Estimates that the increase in the health budget in Saskatchewan 
this year is 11.6 per cent — 11.6 per cent in spite of a possible 
cut-back of $9 million in EPF funding — the highest in Canada 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Go ahead and shout. Mr. Chairman, the members opposite don’t 
like to hear those facts. They don’t like to hear that 
Saskatchewan is leading Canada with 11.6 per  

cent increase in this year’s . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I asked 
you, Mr. Minister, a very simple question. Have your 
department done any estimates? That’s the question I asked, not 
what the increase in your health budget will be. Has your 
department done any estimates as to the losses which will be 
sustained if the Mulroney government’s announced policy is 
followed through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — By the very . . . If you listen to the 
member’s question, the answer is right there. His last few words 
were: if the Mulroney policy is carried through — if! I don’t 
know if it’s going to be carried through. I know what’s 
happening this year. I know that there are indications that we 
may be cut back $9 million. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell every member in this 
House and the opposition, I’m going to Ottawa, and I’m going 
to see if I can carve a better deal for Saskatchewan this year. 
That’s what we’re going to do. We will see how we proceed 
from this year. And I can give you the same assurance that the 
next year we will do exactly the same, and the year after and the 
year after. My job is to stand up and fight for Saskatchewan 
health and I’ll do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you have declined to say whether your department has 
done any studies, from which I will conclude that they have not. 
 
Are you familiar with the internal study by the Canadian 
Hospital Association, shows that the Mulroney government’s 
policies will provide cuts in the health care amounting to more 
than $54 million a year in federal payments by 1990? Are you 
familiar with these, Mr. Minister, and are you . . . You say that 
these are — that nobody can make estimates. The Canadian 
Hospital Association has estimated our loss in the year 1991 at 
$54,252,782. They have some information on which they can 
make some estimates. Have you made no estimates with your 
staff as to what our losses will be under the announced 
Mulroney government policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I’ll 
repeat. My staff and I are working at what we can do this year 
to maintain the excellent health care system that we’ve built up 
in Saskatchewan. We have put more money in this year than 
any other jurisdiction. I’m going down . . . The Canadian 
Hospital Association may have studies. The NDP may have 
their own figures — I would have very little faith in them. 
There may be other groups across Canada that have put 
estimates towards this. We in Saskatchewan are dealing with 
the facts today; that is this year. 
 
And once again, let me repeat again and again, we are going 
down to Ottawa to try and carve the best deal fort 
Saskatchewan. And my colleague, the Minister of Finance, is 
doing exactly the same thing on the total picture of EPF funding 
with his federal counterpart. 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

705 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with the commitment made by 
the Prime Minister on the credibility of his budget and the 
integrity of the budget and how the federal government did not 
intend to move off of it. And I quote from that budget on page 
72. And it clearly indicates: 
 

As part of a broad-based strategy to reduce the deficit and 
stimulate economic growth, the federal government is 
proposing to limit the rate of growth of transfers to 
provincial governments in order to effect savings 
amounting to about $2 billion by 1990-91. 

 
Now you’re saying that you don’t believe the budget of Michael 
Wilson. There’s many people who have watched cut-backs who 
do believe that he is intending to cut the $2 billion. And in the 
report of the Canadian Hospital Association, on page 10, they 
clearly indicate that they have estimated a reduction in health 
care funding to the province of Saskatchewan of $153 million. 
That’s their estimate, in total, over that period. And I want to 
ask you whether that number comes close to the number you’re 
estimating that the Michael Wilson proposals will cut back 
health care spending in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s very 
evident from our record in the past four years that we will 
protect health care in Saskatchewan. There may be those that 
may have their own figures — the Canadian Hospital 
Association, the NDP, maybe other ones — that are estimating 
what it may be. I say that in spite of whatever takes place we, 
the Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, 
will protect health care in this province. I think our record of the 
last four years of a 65 per cent — now 65 per cent on a billion 
dollars is a lot of money — a 65 per cent increase indicates the 
stance of this government on health care. 
 
So to stand here and say, do your figures match up with the 
Canadian Hospital Association or the NDP’s figures? — I want 
to tell you our figures are what we’re working on in this year. 
And we haven’t been looking to see whatever this may be, in 
subsequent years, because how do we know if that’s fact or 
fiction? 
 
Let me tell you, this country operates on a year-by-year basis; 
11.6 per cent support for health care this year, I think, is 
commendable. And I stand on that record, and I will stand on 
the record of Saskatchewan Health based on the last four years 
and for the future under a Grant Devine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the federal 
Minister of Finance will be impressed that the Minister of 
Health in Saskatchewan considers his budget to be a fictional 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member is making 
statements. Does the member have a question? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the  

minister in regards to this report of the Canadian Hospital 
Association, which we will be tabling after question period at 
our first opportunity, I will be asking the question again. 
 
Their estimate is that $153 million will be cut out of the transfer 
payments, in total, in the next five years. Does that come close 
to the amount that your department has estimated, based on a 
document that was tabled in the House and called a budget 
speech by Michael Wilson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again let me repeat: my department 
are looking at the funding of health care in Saskatchewan this 
year. We’ve put 11.6 per cent increase in our budget. We 
understand that there may be a cut-back — there may be. There 
may be under the EPF a reduction — a reduction — of $9 
million — may be. Let me stress that — may be. We’re going 
to be looking at this figure. We’re going to Ottawa to see if we 
can have it reduced. I hope we can. I sincerely hope we can. 
 
But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite, 
whether that figure be 9 million or whether we reduce it to 7, 
the 11.6 per cent increase in health care spending by this 
government for Saskatchewan for the coming year will take 
place. And I think the record over the last four years, of 65 per 
cent increase, indicates that we will continue — we will 
continue — to safeguard health care services in this province. 
That’s what I see my mandate to do; that’s what we will be 
doing. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. On page 9 of this report which is being circulated to 
the press and will be tabled in the Assembly, on page 9 it 
clearly indicates that net loss due to the changes, in total, for 
health care to the province of Saskatchewan, the estimates for 
’86-87 is not 9 million, as you suggest, but 10 million. The 
estimate for ’87-88 is 18.9 million; the estimate for ’88-89 is 
29.5 million; the estimate for ’89-90 is 41 million; and the 
estimate for ’90-91 is 54 million. A cumulative total of almost 
$154 million, and you say this is an irrelevant discussion. What 
this means is a 28 per cent cut in federal funding to medicare in 
the province. And I ask you: how do you intend to raise that 
money? Do you intend to cut health care services, or do you 
intend to raise taxes at the provincial level to make up the $154 
million that they’re planning to cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I just once again indicate 
to the members opposite to check the records of the last four 
years. Check the increases in health care. Look at the five-year 
plan in nursing home construction — 1,600 beds. Look at the 
$300 million capital projects. Look at the $100 million staffing. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member has asked the 
question. I cannot put words in the Minister’s mouth. The same 
question has been asked, I think, about six or seven times. 
Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite is asking a line of 
questioning on the financing of health care. I think it is 
pertinent to indicate what has happened in the financing of 
health care. I have indicated time after time that I have the 
responsibility for safeguarding the health care of  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

706 
 

Saskatchewan. They like to raise the bogy man of would-be, 
possible cut-backs. 
 
I don’t know what’s going to happen in Canada in ’86-87. I 
don’t think the Canadian Hospital Association does, and I’m 
sure the NDP don’t. How do we know what’s going to happen? 
I know that this year in Saskatchewan we’re going to spend 
11.6 per cent more than we did last year. I know that we spent 
65 per cent more since coming into government than they spent. 
Those are facts — facts that anybody can see. I know that this 
year there is an indication there may be a cut-back of 13 million 
for EPF, both higher education and health. There may be a 
reduction — may be. Let me focus on the “maybe” part because 
it isn’t hard and firm. I’m going to negotiate the best deal for 
Saskatchewan for this year, and I will do that year after year 
after year. And you can just look at our record in health care 
and compare it to the record of the government opposite when 
they were in power, and you will see the difference between 
black and white. 
 

Report of Advisory Committee on Drugs, Health, and 
Youth 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, after a great 
deal of public pressure you agreed last September to appoint a 
minister’s advisory committee on alcohol, drugs, and youth. We 
discussed it in this House previously. That advisory committee 
was asked to study all of the issues related to the growing 
problem of adolescent alcohol and drug abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, that advisory committee presented you with its 
report, and a number of recommendations for immediate action, 
in February. Not only have you failed to act on those 
recommendations but you have refused to make the report 
public. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in light of these important 
issues, will you undertake to present the advisory committee’s 
report to this legislature later today, complete with a statement 
on what you have done about each of the report’s 
recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have indicated to the 
member previously on this that certainly we undertook a study 
by a number of people around Saskatchewan. The members 
opposite know the make-up of the committee. It was a very 
large cross-section of the population of Saskatchewan. There 
were nurses on the committee. There were students. There were 
RCMP. There was a number of very credible people. They have 
talked to over 300 students firsthand. I think they have had at 
least 144 different briefs. I think they have done a 
commendable job. They have brought the report to me. I have 
indicated to the members opposite that the report will be made 
public in the very near future. It has gone to printing at this 
time. It’s in printing. Just as soon as I have the printed copies I 
will provide my colleague across the way with a copy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I have here a confidential report of that minister’s 
advisory committee which you received in February, the 
committee on alcohol and drug and youth. 
 

This report suggests that one in five adolescents experience 
serious problems with their peers, their teachers, their parents, 
or the law because of drinking or drug abuse. It estimates, Mr. 
Minister, that more than 20,000 Saskatchewan young people are 
in need of help with alcohol and drug abuse, and that more than 
2,000, 12- to 18-year-olds are daily users of alcohol, cannabis, 
and other drugs. This special report states clearly — and I quote 
from it, Mr. Minister: “Saskatchewan does not have the 
intensive counselling or treatment programs to meet their 
needs.” 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve had this report since February. When will 
your government begin to implement its recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I know that the use of 
cannabis is a problem by many children in the schools of 
Saskatchewan, a regrettable factor. It’s just for that purpose that 
I’ve put this study together. Certainly there will be some 
initiatives that we can implement in the very short range that I 
hope will alleviate the problem that exists in our society, not 
only in Saskatchewan, across Canada and across North 
America. 
 
I think it is commendable that Saskatchewan Health would be 
the first Health department in Canada to undertake that type of a 
study. It has gone to printer at this time. As soon as the printed 
copies are ready, they will be distributed to all members of this 
Assembly, and certainly to any members of the public who may 
wish a copy of the report. I think there’s some 
recommendations in there that we can all be proud of, and we 
can work to implement that will be to the benefit of our young 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this report, Mr. Minister, in 
my supplementary which you have tried to hide from 
Saskatchewan people, details the need for improved education 
prevention, intervention and treatment programs for young 
people suffering from alcohol and drug abuse problems. It notes 
that many Saskatchewan families have been forced to leave this 
province to find adequate treatment facilities in emergency 
situations, and the report makes it clear that the current system 
is woefully inadequate. Let me give you an example. The 
committee says at one point in this report — and I quote from it 
again: “In addressing the question of co-ordination of services it 
became obvious that you cannot co-ordinate what does not 
exist.” 
 
Mr. Minister, what can be more important than the lives and the 
futures of our young people and the health and happiness of 
Saskatchewan families? Why have you failed to act on this 
year’s budget on the many important recommendations which 
are in this report, especially in the light of the fact that you 
demanded that your committee provide you this report early so 
that you could put provisions into the budget in response to its 
recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t know where he gets that 
information. That isn’t correct, Mr. Chairman. Let me indicate 
to you that upon becoming Health minister in this province, I 
saw that there were people having to go out of the province for 
treatment. They go out for a variety  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

707 
 

of reasons. 
 
I saw that there was a problem in discussing with high school 
teachers, of which my background was that, that certainly there 
are many young people in the schools that are becoming 
habitual users of drugs and alcohol. So certainly we set a 
committee together to try and get the facts to see what reaction 
could take place. 
 
That committee reported to me. I reported the findings of that 
committee to the cabinet committee on social policy, of which 
I’m the chairman. My colleagues have looked at the report. We 
have decided the report is to go to printing It’s at printing now. 
That takes some time — maybe a week or two — to get it 
printed. And as soon as it’s there, it’s for distribution to the 
public, and I will certainly give the member opposite copies of 
the report. 
 
I would hope that the member opposite in all sincerity would be 
supportive of many of the recommendations that are in there. I 
think this is something that transgresses political lines. I think 
it’s something that any elected representative, if they are 
sincere, will try their best to support the recommendation to 
help the youth of this province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary. Final 
supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you assure this 
House that you will table that report before the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have told the member 
four times today that I will release the report immediately that it 
comes from the printer. Now if that means tabling, I will table 
one. I will send him one personally, deliver it to his office if 
that would make him happy. I want to get on with 
implementing the recommendations of the report to help the 
youth of Saskatchewan. So certainly as soon as it’s printed it 
will be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you want to yell 
and shout from your seats, please persist. 
 
But my concern is to help the young people of this province. 
That’s why I put the committee together; that’s why I’m 
interested to have the report circulated to the population of 
Saskatchewan; and that’s why I’m interested in my colleagues 
on this side in implementing many of the recommendations of 
the report. If the people on the other side want to try to make 
political hay out of a problem that is facing the young people of 
Saskatchewan, so be it. Stand there and let that be known, if 
that is your interest, to play politics with the lives of our young 
children. We’re there to try and bring in and implement policies 
that will benefit them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Licensing and 
Inspection of Amusement Rides 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the minister 
of Labour I move first reading of a Bill respecting the Licensing 
and Inspection of Amusement Rides. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Tobacco 
Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague 
I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan and to repeal the Chartered 
Accounts Act and The Certified Public Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister 
of Revenue and Financial Services, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting The Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered Accountants Act and 
The Certified Public Accountants Act. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to pursue 
with the minister the matter of the established programs 
financing Act and the funds which are usually called established 
program funds, and particularly those which relate to Health. 
 
The minister, I think, will be aware that the material made 
public by the Government of Canada when they brought their 
budget down in 1985 deals at some length with this very 
important matter. And I’m referring now, Mr. Chairman, to a 
document entitled, “Securing Economic Renewal”, Budget 
Papers, tabled, as it says, in the House of Commons by the 
Hon. Michael H. Wilson, Minister of Finance, and dated May 
23, 1985. A portion of the paper  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

708 
 

— I will try to summarize it since I don’t want to take too much 
time of the committee, but I am reading now from page 72, and 
I think the portions which I have selected fairly give the 
substance of the report: 
 

As part of a broad based strategy to reduce the deficit and 
stimulate economic growth the federal government is 
proposing to limit the rate of growth of transfers to 
provincial governments in order to effect savings 
amounting to about $2 billion in 1990-91. The same 
principles of restraint will be applied to transfers to 
provinces as to other expenditures . . . 
 
Even after this adjustment total cash and tax transfers to 
provincial governments in respect of these programs (and 
that refers to the established funding programs) are 
expected to grow, on average by about 5 per cent per year 
over the balance of the decade . . . 

 
That’s what Mr. Wilson says. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you whether your department has done any 
calculations which will indicate what you would receive had the 
existing formula continued? What you would receive if 
transfers grow by about 5 per cent per year? And have you 
calculated, therefore, what the shortfall will be from the 
proposal set out in the budget papers of Mr. Wilson of May of 
1985? And I ask you for the next five years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, let me give 
the member the answer that I provided to him just five minutes 
ago, or ten minutes ago in question period. 
 
We are looking at this year. We are negotiating for the best deal 
we have. When I hear the member wanting to be so concerned 
about EPF, it seems to me that he believes that we should tie 
our health care spending to EPF. Here in Saskatchewan we have 
been spending in excess of EPF for some time, for some time. 
This year is a good indication. There’s a possibility of a $9 
million reduction. I say a possibility. We’re increasing our 
budget by 11.6 per cent. So I am not concerned of what each of 
those years should be at this time because I have no way to 
know exactly what they’re going to be. 
 
I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that we will continue 
to fund health care as we have in the last four years. I can assure 
the people of Saskatchewan that I’ll do everything within my 
power to get the best deal under EPF for Saskatchewan Health. 
But to sit here in this Chamber and speculate about what will 
happen in the year 1990, I think is a waste of time. I think we 
should be dealing with this year and the estimates of this year, 
and I’m quite willing to deal with those. 
 
Certainly we all realize, Mr. Chairman, that the population of 
Canada, and especially of Saskatchewan, is ageing year after 
year — in our province more rapidly than others. People are 
living longer, and thank goodness they are. I think what we 
should be addressing our comments to, and I would like to hear 
suggestions from the other side, as to how we can best address 
and use the moneys available — the moneys available in this 
year’s  

health budget to address those needs of those citizens of 
Saskatchewan. I have not heard one concrete recommendation 
come forward of that type of a nature. I’ve had consultation 
meetings around this province attended by over 2,000 people. I 
have invited members opposite to attend those. Not one has 
been in attendance yet. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we go on questioning about what may 
happen by the federal government in EPF funding in the year 
1990. I say in all sincerity and honesty, I don’t know what’s 
going to happen in the year 1990. I don’t know what’s going to 
happen in this country in the year 1988. I know that this year, in 
Saskatchewan. we have put 11.6 per cent increase into the 
health care budgets. We have a book of Estimates here that 
indicate how we feel that money will be spent. 
 
It may well be that the member, the Leader of the Opposition, 
does not agree that we’re spending enough on this plan or that 
plan — so be it. And he has every right to stand up and ask me 
and question me: why are you not doing this? He has the right 
to question about EPF funding in 1990 if he so wishes. I am 
telling him honestly and sincerely that I am working with my 
officials on this year’s financing. I don’t know what it’s going 
to be in ’88 or ’89 or ’90. 
 
So I think we would be better serving the people of 
Saskatchewan if we got on with discussing what is in this blue 
book for this year. If there are questions, and if there are 
suggestions, and I would welcome a suggestion . . . I remember, 
and the member opposite will recall that, I’m sure he will, when 
a few years ago his then minister of Education, it was the Hon. 
Doug. McArthur, who sat in the seat right to my right here. I sat 
in that one over there. We had a debate on educational 
estimates, a debate in estimates. And I stood in my place as an 
opposition member, and I suggested many alternatives to the 
way education was being delivered in the province. 
 
I want to tell you that a senior member of the civil service who 
had worked for the NDP government for a long time came 
down to one of my colleagues and he said, those are the best 
estimates I’ve heard in 20 years, because there was suggestions. 
There were alternative suggestions. Sure there was criticism 
where I felt criticism should be launched. That’s what estimates 
is for. That’s what this Chamber is for. 
 
We can talk about what’s happening in China. We can talk 
about what’s happening in Alberta. We can talk about what the 
federal government may do in the year 1990. Fine, let’s do that. 
But I think if we’re really interested in talking about and 
discussing the health care and the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan, we would say: are you building enough nursing 
homes? Is there any way you could re-direct some money into 
more home care. Those are the kinds of questions, the kinds of 
suggestions that I think should take place in estimates. 
However, with that, Mr. Chairman, I will entertain more 
questions from the opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize to the 
minister for not making my question clear. I obviously didn’t 
since he answered another question. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

709 
 

My question again, sir, is: have your departments done any 
estimates as to what losses will be sustained over the next five 
years on the basis of the announcements in Mr. Wilson’s budget 
of 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, let me just point out, as a 
lead-in to the answer to the member, just for his understanding, 
that over the last years the EPF has gone up 10.9 per cent, while 
our health care budget has gone up 18 per cent as a comparison. 
But be that as it may, he asked, have we done any types of 
estimates into the future of what EPF would be. I’m just 
indicating to the member — and he knows this, or he should 
know this, having been a premier of this province — that EPF 
covers both advanced education and health care, and that there 
are suggested uses of it by the federal government. 
 
But that money comes into our Consolidated Fund and we can 
shift it whichever way we want. So I mean, how could you ask 
me to say what will it be in ’88-89 when we have that 
flexibility? And you know, being a premier at one time of this 
province, you have that flexibility. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t hear 
the minister’s answer. It could have been yes, it could have 
been no. Are you telling me that you have made estimates or are 
you telling me that you have not made estimates in your 
department? That’s a fairly simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m telling you that we have made an 
estimate for this coming year, which we’re going down to see if 
we can have that estimate reduced. That’s what we have been 
doing. 
 
I also explained to you, which you should understand — maybe 
you forgot; it’s been some time — but I think you understand 
the basis of EPF funding. It’s an amount of money transferred 
from the federal government to the provinces for higher 
education and health. 
 
Now if the provinces have the latitude to move within that 
general pot of money, how then, sir, do you expect a province 
to give a hard and definite figure of what it may be, pertaining 
to health care, in the year 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, did 
you give us an estimate of what it would be this year? Did you 
tell us how much you were going to lose this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I said the estimate at this point in 
time for EPF funding for this year, for Saskatchewan — that’s 
EPF — is $13 million. Our portion in Health appears to be in 
the neighbourhood of $9 million. But as I say, those are 
estimates and nothing more than that at this point in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Obviously if 
you arrived at a figure which said we’re going to lose $13 
million on established program funding and our portion, 
meaning the Health portion, was about 9 million, you have a 
method of dividing them. Applying  

the same method of dividing them, can you tell me what your 
department estimates the health losses will be in each of the 
years up until 1990 based upon Mr. Wilson’s comment of what 
is going to be reduced from EPF funding during that period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Chairman. What we have done is 
looked at this year. And as I say, I don’t accept the $9 million 
as being a hard and firm figure. We’re going down to try and 
have that reduced. Until those negotiations have been 
completed — until I’ve had a chance to talk to the federal 
Health minister on this topic, eyeball to eyeball, man to man — 
until my colleague, the provincial Minister of Finance has 
completed negotiations on EPF for Saskatchewan for this year, 
we wouldn’t have a figure that would be firm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
having a good deal of difficulty again. Do I take your answer to 
be that you have not made estimates up until 1990? 
 
That, Mr. Minister, will not be answered by saying you’re going 
to talk about this year. I am trying to talk about the five-year 
projection of where our health programs are going. You may 
feel that’s irrelevant; I do not. You may feel that any planning, 
four or five years, is beyond the scope of your department. 
Some people in this province might say it’s beyond the scope of 
your government. 
 
But I am asking you, sir . . . I am asking you, sir: have you 
made any estimates of what will be lost in established program 
funding, in the Health portion of it, for the period up until 1990, 
applying the same distribution between the Health and the 
post-secondary which you just did when you decided that of the 
$13 million, $9 million was attributable to Health? Apply that 
same distribution, and tell me, if you will, whether you have 
made any estimates of what will be lost in health funding up 
until 1990, based upon Mr. Wilson’s budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite must realize, why would you use the system that you 
have this year. In two or three years you may want to shift that 
amount. The EPF funding comes to the province for those two 
things; that money comes to us. We may want to shift it. All I 
can say is to look back on our record. Look back over the last 
four years. Look back and see what's happening in health care 
in Saskatchewan. Look back at each budget that has come forth. 
Look back at the amount of money that’s been spent. You’ll see 
that we have spent more money on health than any other 
government; you’ll see that. You’ll see there’s 11.6 per cent this 
year. So for you to sit here and try and raise a bogy man about 
some cut-back or some reduction in the year 1990, I think is 
simply not in the cards. 
 
We will have the EPF funding in years ahead. It may reduce; it 
may go up. You don’t know that, or neither do I, with any 
degree of certainty. So to sit here and say, well, what is it going 
to be . . . If I don’t know what the total EPF is going to be, how 
can I carve it up and give you a figure? Secondly, if we make a 
decision as the government, to put more of the EPF toward 
Health and to continuing ed, we can do that. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

710 
 

But I say to you, you look at the corner-stones of the Devine 
government; you look at the money that has gone into advanced 
education, and you look at the money that has gone into health, 
and I don’t think even you can be critical of those figures 
because they’re far in excess of what you put in when you were 
the premier of the province. 
 
So if you want to continue questioning about what the federal 
government is going to be, I would ask you: why don’t you 
write a letter to Michael Wilson yourself? I wonder if you have 
sent any kind of communication to him. I would doubt if you 
ever have. I doubt if you have. 
 
You know, you smile and grin and think that’s funny. If you 
were a sincere member I think you would go ahead and do this 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Certainly not, you haven’t. And 
if they want to shout and holler insults, and so on, go ahead. If 
you think this place is to shout insults, you just go right ahead 
and do that. I will try my best to explain what we’re doing in 
health care to the hon. member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
you’re not trying very hard. The question was very simple. You 
may feel I ought not to ask this question but we have our 
responsibility to discharge. You may feel that we ought not to 
ask questions about five-year funding for health. We take a 
different view. We think it’s not wrong to at least roughly plan 
five years in advance as to where we’re going to be. We think 
that that is not in any way . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You never did it before, Allan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite are busy chipping 
in. 
 
But I want to ask the minister very clearly, and I take it from 
what you have said and I think this is a fair answer: are you 
saying your department has not made any projections? The 
department, the officers of which are paid for under the vote 
which we are now debating, sir — you are telling me they have 
not made any projections as to what will be lost if the Mulroney 
budget, as announced, is carried forward. You’re telling me 
that. You certainly have not said yes. Am I right in assuming 
that your answer is that no such projections have been made by 
the officials of your department who will be paid for pursuant to 
the vote we’re now debating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
makes a comment about five-year plans. I think he can certainly 
see that wherein we have the facilities and they are under my 
jurisdiction, that there are certainly five-year plans for the 
betterment of health care in this province. 
 
You’ve seen it in nursing homes, you’ve seen it in hospital 
construction, and now you’ve seen it in staffing. So certainly, 
where we control the reins, we make the long-range plans. I can 
tell you sincerely what we’re doing, and I’ll tell you again and 
I’ll tell you again and again and again. And I’ve told your other 
members and I’ll tell you, sir, that we are looking at how we 
can best deliver health care in this year in this province. We 
have an estimate of what it is for this year — only an estimate. 
 

We’re trying to hammer out the best hard figure for 
Saskatchewan. That’s where our emphasis is and that’s what 
you’re looking at. 
 
You have the right to question me on anything you want. Please 
feel free to do that. You may think I should be looking and 
focusing at what the federal government are going to be doing 
in the year 1990. That’s fine. That may be your priority. My 
priority is to go on with providing the necessary service for the 
province of Saskatchewan this year, and we’ll do the same next 
year. And it may well be that the EPF funding will change. I 
don’t deny that. Some indications are that it’s going to go down. 
The federal member of Finance said that in his budget, but you 
don’t know with any degree of certainty what’s going to happen 
in this country two years from now and I don’t know with any 
degree of certainty. I do know with a degree of certainty what’s 
going to happen within the Health provision and the Health 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan this year. And that is 
we’re going to spend 11.6 per cent more money than we did last 
year, with or without a reduction in EPF funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ll 
ask you again. And Mr. Minister, this is a proper question. Have 
your people done any projections? Have your people done any 
estimates of what will be lost? And I tell you, Mr. Minister, if 
you’re telling me the answer is no, then you’re putting your 
officials in a very, very invidious position, since I can’t believe 
they haven’t done it. I can’t believe they haven’t done it, 
notwithstanding your unwillingness to admit it. I can’t believe 
that your officials would be unaware of the ramifications on 
Health over a five-year period, and unaware of the ramifications 
to provincial financing over five years, of the Wilson budget 
announcements. 
 
You are telling me, I take it, that you have not done those 
projections. Before I launch into a criticism of your officials for 
not doing it, I want to hear from you that it hasn’t been done. 
And if it has been done, I want to hear from you an admission 
that it has been done. And if you say that it has been done but 
you don’t want to discuss it, then I want to hear from you a 
reasonable explanation as to why you think this is not relevant 
to the discussion of Health estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite, who 
was once a premier of this province, knows very well the type 
of negotiations between the federal government and the 
provincial government. He knows very well that the 
negotiations on EPF are carried out between the Department of 
Finance federally and the Department of Finance provincially. 
He should know that. Maybe he’s forgot. But that’s exactly how 
it happens. 
 
From a Health standpoint, we are concerned with delivering 
health care in this province. We want whatever portion of EPF 
funding we can get. But the negotiations for future figures on 
EPF take place between the Finance departments. And he well 
knows that. He knows that, having once been a premier of this 
province. And if he has forgot that, well I think that’s rather 
critical too. 
 
So let me indicate to you once again — once again — that  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

711 
 

these estimates that I’m here to defend indicate that for this year 
there is a substantial increase in spending in health care in 
Saskatchewan. There is also the possibility that some EPF may 
be reduced. How much, we don’t know. I’ve given my best 
estimate that my officials have been able to provide me with. 
 
Criticize the officials, if you want, for not looking at figures 
ahead. I can tell you those consultations are going on between 
the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Finance federally, 
as they did under the NDP party when they were government in 
power — between them and the Liberals. There has been no 
change. 
 
But certainly, as I will say once again to the member opposite, 
that for this year the possibility is a $9 million reduction. I 
would like to see less. I will do all in my power to see that it can 
be less. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
since you, I take it, are acknowledging, but I’m not sure, that 
your people have done no estimates, and that you’ve left that all 
with the Department of Finance — and if I am wrong in that, 
you will correct me with precision, I know — are you aware, 
Mr. Minister, and are your senior officials aware, of material 
being circulated by the research and development department of 
the Canadian Hospital Association, which has projected the 
impact of the reduction on federal transfers for insured services, 
that is hospital and medical care, and extended health care 
services. Are you aware of the material prepared and circulated 
by the Canadian Hospital Association with respect to the issues 
which I have enumerated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, to your questions, I think I answered 
the first one last time. As you will know, the negotiations on 
EPF take place between the Finance departments of the two 
governments. And certainly, I’m interested in the health aspect, 
how much we’re going to get for health care each year. I think 
that’s incumbent upon me to be interested in that and to fight 
for the best deal for Saskatchewan, and you have my assurance 
I will do that. But to continue questioning on what the projects 
are going . . . projected figures, I think you would be better and 
more advised, and I think you realize this, to raise that when 
Finance estimates come to the floor of this House. 
 
(1100) 
 
Certainly, I’m aware of the Canadian hospital’s estimated 
figures — again, I say their estimated figures — and you must 
realize the same. And I’m sure you have estimated figures. And 
I know that the Premier of Manitoba, Mr. Pawley, has some 
estimated figures. With your indulgence I would just like to 
indicate what the people in Manitoba and the Winnipeg Free 
Press feel about Mr. Pawley’s movement and his predictions 
and talk about possible estimated EPF figures for the future. I 
would just like to read this into the record. It’s from the 
Winnipeg Free Press on Sunday, April 6th. It says the 
following: 
 

Whatever Premier Howard Pawley would have us believe, 
the federal government’s plan to cut 2 billion a year out of its 
contributions to health and higher education by 1991 will not 
mean an end to  

medicare. It is simply absurd to imagine that a reduction of 3 
or 4 per cent of the funds available will bring about the end 
of public medical and hospital insurance, and Mr. Pawley is 
unconvincing when he pretends that it would. 

 
It goes on in the article . . . I won’t waste the time. I could 
supply you with the article if you so wish. But it goes on to say 
that it isn’t in the best interest to try and raise a spectre about 
this because we all know, irregardless of political affiliation, 
that the provision of health care is an important part of the 
fabric of Canadian society. It just says, in the end of the quote it 
says: 
 

Pursuing that sort of joint effort for the public good would do 
a lot more . . . 

 
And they’re talking about negotiations, same thing I want to do 
with Mr. Jake Epp, and the same thing that my colleagues is 
doing with Mike Wilson. It said: 
 

Pursuing that sort of joint effort for the public good would do 
a lot more for health care in Canada than mounting public 
platforms to scream that the sky is falling. 

 
So I’ll just put that into the record. But I will go on with your 
line of questions, sir, and I hope I’ve answered your last two 
questions for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 
question, as you will recall, was: is the minister familiar with 
the Canadian Hospital Association’s study? The answer dealt 
with the quotations in the Winnipeg Free Press about some 
comments of Mr. Pawley. And they were in order, or they 
would have been called out of order. And I’m happy to have 
that assurance that we have this level of latitude in the 
committee. 
 
Now I ask you again, sir: are you familiar with the study of the 
Canadian Hospital Association with respect to their estimates of 
losses to the health programs from the Wilson budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We know that there’s a study around. We 
know of some of the figures, though my department have not 
analysed those figures at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 
figures indicate . . . As you say, I’m perfectly willing to 
acknowledge they are estimates because they make certain 
assumptions of the growth in gross national product and the rest 
which is a part of the formula. I would have hoped that I could 
have asked your people whether or not they agreed with the 
assumptions built into this study. I take it I cannot, since they're 
not familiar with them. But it is pretty clear that these people 
say that in 1986-1987 Saskatchewan is going to lose $9.048 
million. That's very, very close to your figure of 9 million that 
you say your figures reveal for this year. They indicate that in 
1987-88 we’re going to lose 17.092 million; in ’88-89, 26.7 
million; in ’89-90, $37 million; and in ’90-91, $49 million, for a 
cumulative total . . . I don’t have it before me, but a cumulative 
total approaching $150 million. 
 
Now you tell me, Mr. Minister, that you are going to go  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

712 
 

down and eyeball to eyeball with somebody. I’m not sure who, 
because I thought you told me that the negotiations were 
between the Department of Finance federally and the 
Department of Finance provincially. So will you tell me who 
you are going to eyeball to eyeball with in order to see that 
these cuts are not as great as is now projected by the Canadian 
Hospital Association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’d be glad to. As I’ve indicated 
many times in this House during the course of these estimates, I 
will be meeting with my federal counterpart, the Minister of 
Health, the Hon. Jake Epp, who I have indicated to him on 
numerous occasions that I feel that it would be in the best 
interests of health care in Saskatchewan and across Canada that 
we could pull together a meeting of federal Health and Finance 
officials and provincial Health and Finance officials. I’m going 
to ask for that type of a meeting so that we can look at and 
discuss the best type of funding arrangements in view of the 
economic circumstances in our country, the best type of funding 
arrangements that can be arrived at for health care in Canada. 
 
Certainly at those discussions I and my colleague, the Minister 
of Finance, will put forth the best arguments we can for 
Saskatchewan. So that’s who I’m going down to see. I’m going 
to see Jake Epp, the Minister of Health. We will talk about this. 
 
I assured you we would talk about the patent protection 
legislation. And if you’ve been following, and I’m sure your 
research people have been following the movements in the 
federal House, that that legislation has been put on hold for 
some time, I think that’s due to the fact that they want to 
discuss with their provincial counterparts. We will try our best 
to get the meeting that I’ve asked for time after time for federal 
Health ministers and Finance ministers to sit down and discuss 
the whole future of health care funding in Canada. So that’s 
who I’ll be meeting with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
would you advise us about when you expect the meeting to be? 
I believe you’ve already done so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have said on many occasions — and I 
don’t say that in disrespect to you, because you have other 
requirements than to sit in here all the time, and we understand 
that — I’ve said I’m meeting with them on the 28th of this 
month. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I was aware that it 
was the end of this month. I wanted to hear it from you. On the 
end of this month — it is now about the 18th of the month — in 
10 days you’re going to meet the minister; 10 days you’re going 
to fight for Saskatchewan. 
 
But you tell me your department hasn’t analysed the figures yet. 
You tell me that your department hasn’t even looked at the 
Canadian Hospital Association study yet. And you tell me that 
you’re going down to fight for Saskatchewan with that level of 
preparation. Your officials have not even analysed, so you tell 
me, the five-year projection which was in the Wilson budget. 
You tell me you haven’t even looked at, or at least studied, the 
Canadian Hospital Association projection which has  

been around for some considerable time. And then you also tell 
me that you're going down in 10 days to fight for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why would anyone believe that a minister 
who has not yet reviewed the five-year projections contained in 
the federal budget of May of ’85 — 11 months ago — and has 
not yet familiarized himself at all, nor have his officials, with 
the study done by the Canadian Hospital Association on this 
very subject, is going to leave here in 10 days time to fight for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Don’t you believe, sir, that your officials and yourself, to the 
extent that time would permit, should have been briefing 
yourself? Don’t you believe they should have studies in your 
hands now to equip you to try to go and argue against this more 
than $150 million loss which Mr. Wilson is saying he wants to 
impose upon Saskatchewan? 
 
Now this, sir, is a lot of money. You think it’s worth a trip to 
Ottawa, and I think you’re right. It’s worth many trips to 
Ottawa. Don’t you think it’s worth a little bit of time of your 
officials to analyse these figures? and I have asked you time and 
time and time again whether they have made any projections of 
the losses, and you tell me no, they’re hypothetical. And I asked 
you whether they have familiarized themselves with the 
Canadian Hospital Association’s estimates, and you tell me no. 
No? After all, what’s $150 million? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, in fairness, we gave you every 
opportunity to say that you had analysed this material, or it was 
under preparation, or that you had seen some preliminary 
analyses. But you said it wasn’t even done. And with respect to 
the Canadian Hospital Association study, you made as clear as 
words could that your officials were not familiar with it. And in 
10 days, you tell me, you’re going down to talk about this $150 
million, and you’re going to fight for Saskatchewan. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, that it is incumbent upon you, if you’re 
going to fight for Saskatchewan, to have your officials study the 
issues, prepare briefs, so that when you talk you’re not talking 
airy-fairy comment; you’re not merely arguing from principle 
— although that is useful — but you are also arguing with a 
firm knowledge of the figures, which neither you nor your 
department now have, if I can believe the answers you’ve given 
me for the last half-hour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would not take advice from a member 
who went down to Ottawa on many, many occasions arguing 
the constitution and sat on the fence all the time. 
 
You can be assured that when I go to Ottawa . . . and I can look 
over the last four years when I’ve been in Ottawa many times, 
and I’ve been at Health ministers’ meetings many times. And I 
can go back through the list of initiatives that Saskatchewan has 
developed that we have brought to the national table of Health 
ministers which are now becoming patterns for Canada. And I 
can assure you that when I go down to talk to Jake Epp, we’ll 
have our homework done, and we will put our case as well, if 
not better, than any other province in Canada. We have a  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

713 
 

track record of that. 
 
And I can tell you that we will have the necessary facts and 
figures, that we will be able to negotiate and discuss with the 
federal government. And certainly, if you look back at the 
success of the man that’s questioning me when he was 
discussing in Ottawa sitting on the fence, certainly, Mr. 
Chairman, we don’t need that kind of coaching. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
I wonder if you can advise me whether, when you go to Ottawa, 
you propose to take with you Mr. Ron Barber, or Mr. George 
Hill, or Mr. Staff Barootes, or some of the other people who 
have been fighting for us at Ottawa. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite I indicated, I think, about a week ago who I would be 
taking to Ottawa with me. When I go, I’ll be taking — and I 
believe him to be a very competent gentleman — my deputy 
minister, Mr. Walter Podiluk, will accompany me. I may take 
one of my personal staff; I haven’t decided at this point in time. 
But those are the people who will be going with me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
want to be abundantly clear on this. You’re telling me that you 
will be properly briefed, but that you’re not briefed now. You 
have done no analyses for five years, and you haven’t looked at 
the Canadian Hospital Association analysis for the five-year 
period, but you’re going down there in 10 days to talk about this 
five-year period and the losses which might be sustained, the 
$150 million losses. 
 
You’re telling me — and I think that I am fairly interpreting 
each and every one of your answers — that neither you nor 
your department has done any five-year projections; you nor 
your department has analysed the impact of the Wilson budget 
over five years; you have not deigned even to look at the 
analysis by the Canadian Hospital Association, but that you are 
going down there in 10 days and you will be fully briefed. 
 
Do you again assert, Mr. Minister, that none of this work has 
been done up to now, and all of it is going to be done between 
now and the time you go to Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I feel very confident 
that when we go to Ottawa, the necessary facts and figures that 
we need to present our case in the best way possible will 
certainly be available. And whether we use the Canadian 
Hospital standards estimates or not will be our judgement call. 
There may be other things that we use in our discussions. 
 
There may be something that is rather remote to the member 
opposite, and that’s what the Prime Minister of this country has 
talked about — co-operative federalism — where you sit down 
and you talk to your members, your fellow counterparts in 
Ottawa, and you say look, we understand you’ve got problems. 
 
(1115) 
 

Sure you’ve got problems. Any person in Canada realizes that 
there are problems, that there’s a huge deficit in Ottawa that has 
to be looked at. We’ll look at that, and we’ll sit down, man to 
man, and I will try my best to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, if you want to continue shouting . . . If the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would like to enter into the 
questioning, please rise, but if you want to continue shouting 
from your seat so that your own leader can’t hear the responses, 
you make that choice. You make that choice. I prefer to see you 
stand up and question. 
 
But certainly we’re going down there. We’re going to go down 
there, and we’re going to talk to Jake Epp the federal Minister 
of Health. We’re going to discuss a number of things facing 
health care in Canada and its impact on Saskatchewan. 
 
On the matter of EPF funding, I’m going to urge him and press 
him as much as I can to say, come on, let’s call a meeting. Let’s 
call a meeting of all the federal and provincial Health and 
Finance ministers. Because the member opposite knows very, 
very well that the lead role and the overall planning for the 
budgetary expenditures of any government — be it Quebec or 
be it Manitoba or be it British Columbia or be it Saskatchewan 
or what other province — is the Finance ministers look at the 
general overall budgeting. 
 
My role in this in Saskatchewan is to get the best deal possible 
to maintain and supply the health services in Saskatchewan that 
we would like to see our citizens have and that they deserve. 
And I say that I think our record has proven quite positive; 65 
per cent increase from when they left government to now, I 
think, is a considerable commitment. 
 
And I give you this commitment, Mr. Chairman. I’ve outlined 
that I will see my federal counterpart. I will ask for a meeting of 
federal and provincial ministers of Finance and Health. But in 
spite of that, I give you the commitment that Saskatchewan 
Health will continue, this government will continue to put the 
money into Saskatchewan Health to make it a priority of our 
government. Our track record shows that. 
 
Our pillars of strength that we come out . . . The four pillars of 
strength of the Saskatchewan economy: higher education, 
health, agriculture, and jobs have been the priority of this 
government for some time and will continue to be the priority 
of this government in years ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, it is rather obvious that 
financial planning is not one of your priorities, and it was that 
that I was asking a few questions about. 
 
I believe you have told me that you will be briefed 10 days from 
now but that your department has not yet turned their mind to 
the matter. They have not made estimates; they have not studied 
the Canadian Hospital Association estimates. I have to accept 
that. I have to accept the fact that you do not have any material 
dealing with this issue that you will share with this committee 
because it isn’t  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

714 
 

prepared. I have to accept the fact that this is an important trip 
you’re making to Ottawa on a very important issue, and I 
thoroughly agree with that. And I have to accept the proposition 
that because you have told me over and over again that you 
have done no preparation up to now with respect to your own 
estimates of what the losses would be, or any review of other 
peoples estimates of what the losses will be, the Canadian 
Hospital Association . . . 
 
I must say, Mr. Minister, that I’m very, very surprised to hear 
that you are conducting the department in that way, and that 
when this issue has been in the public forum for 11 months, that 
your department will not have made estimates, and they will not 
have reviewed the estimates which are in general circulation 
from a body such as the Canadian Hospital Association. 
 
I cannot help but feel that this is revealing. I cannot help but 
feel that this tells us something about why the province of 
Saskatchewan is in the difficult financial position it is now in; 
why the minister persists in taking the time of this committee to 
give the speech about how much has been spent in the past 
without indicating what he perceives the problems to be in the 
future. I think that we need to address what the problems are 
going to be in the future in maintaining health care. I want to 
say very, very clearly that the problem is not only to get 
commitments from ministers, but it’s also to get some method 
of paying for those commitments — that’s what government is 
all about. 
 
I think that the minister will find that the public is no longer 
willing to accept fully the proposition that ministers can commit 
far into the future unless they also offer some idea of how those 
commitments are going to be paid for. 
 
I want to tell the minister that any government which 
consistently runs major, and I would say massive deficits, 
threatens programs. And one of the key programs which must 
necessarily be threatened — I don’t say threatened with being 
dismantled — I’m not saying that — but threatened with being 
cut back — is any program like Health which consumes 
roughly a third of the provincial budget. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, when you admit freely that with 
respect to something as crucial as established program funding, 
the money that we get from Ottawa for Health, you have not 
done any work on it over the last 11 months; your department 
has not made any estimates of what we would lose; your 
department has not reviewed estimates by other people, and yet 
you’re going off in 10 days to do battle with the federal 
government on this issue. I am alarmed, and I am sure the 
public is alarmed — not that you aren’t committed to health 
care, but that you’re not committed to raising the money for 
health care, and that you’re not addressing your attention to 
how these programs are going to be financed over the next five 
years. 
 
And that is always relevant with a major program like Health, 
always relevant. The question, where is the money coming from 
with respect to Health? is always relevant because of the large 
sums involved. And you have very, very freely admitted that so 
far as you’re  

concerned it’s not a matter which is of sufficient priority to 
have you do any work on it over the last 11 months prior to 
your trip to Ottawa next week. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, whether or not you would give us 
an undertaking that, at least during the next seven days or so, 
you will instruct your staff to do a little work on this issue; to 
do some projections on what we might lose; to review the 
material from the Canadian Hospital Association and other 
people who have done projections — this is not the only one 
around — that your people will in the next seven days at least 
do a little of that work so that when you go to Ottawa we might 
have some hope that we will have some relief from these very 
large cuts which are threatened by the Mulroney budget of last 
year, and which were not in any way cancelled or ameliorated 
by the budget more recently brought down by the Mulroney 
government. 
 
No doubt that a year ago they said they were going to make 
these big cuts; no doubt that the last budget offered us no help. 
You’re going down to talk about it. Will you give us, Mr. 
Minister, an undertaking that your people in the next seven days 
will do some of the work which, in my submission at least, 
ought to have been done at least six months ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, the 
member indicates there’s been no forward planning or thinking 
by the department at the federal level and discussions at the 
federal level. I would ask him to check with the minutes of the 
federal health care ministers’ meetings. I’m sure you could have 
access to those, and if you can’t I could provide you with some, 
where you will see at least two years ago I called for the 
establishment of a seniors’ health care fund. And I repeat, as 
you look across Canada, if there’s a priority in health care, it is 
looking after the needs of our senior citizens. 
 
I have suggested on numerous occasions to the federal 
government that they should be looking at establishing a 
seniors’ health care fund for innovative pilot projects that will 
help address the needs of senior citizens throughout this 
country. So I think that is something that one . . . And we have 
the proof to show that. 
 
Secondly, we have called repeatedly, called repeatedly for a 
meeting of federal Health ministers and Finance ministers to 
look at the whole package of funding health care in this 
province. I think each and every one of my colleagues across 
Canada echoed the same call. So for this member to stand here 
and say that Saskatchewan has not put forth initiatives . . . I’ll 
tell you one that we put forth. We have led the way on 
non-smoking initiatives and the federal government have 
followed suit and have put a program into place built upon the 
Saskatchewan experience. 
 
The member likes to try and indicate that we should be taking 
the words of the Canadian Hospital Association as the gospel 
— their estimates — or the estimates of the NDP in Manitoba. I 
tell you we will be well equipped, well equipped when we go to 
Ottawa to put forth Saskatchewan’s case, and we will decide 
what factors and what studies and what uses we have. So to try 
and say that we will go down there unequipped is certainly,  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

715 
 

simply not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
would you give us any information that you now have which 
would cast into doubt any of the figures of the Canadian 
Hospital Association to which you have referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said earlier we haven’t analysed the 
study. I indicate that it’s an estimate. Sure it’s an estimate, as 
there are many others. The member opposite just stood in his 
place and said there are many sets of figures around. There are. 
Each and every one is an estimated figure. We are quite capable 
in Saskatchewan to work out our own figures. I have indicated 
we have worked out our figures for this year, what we think it 
may be. They’re not hard and fast. We’re going down to see if 
we can carve out a better deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take 
it therefore that you are saying that you don’t have any grounds 
for either agreeing or disagreeing with the Canadian Hospital 
Association analysis because you haven’t done any analysis 
yourself. 
 
Mr. Minister, the established program funding was, as you 
properly referred to earlier, some time set up in 1977 and then 
renewed for one further five-year period — as we thought, at 
least a five-year period. Mr. Minister, that was something 
developed whereby federal governments and the provincial 
governments could jointly fund medical, hospital, and 
post-secondary education. 
 
We have the federal government paying about 19 cents on the 
dollar, directly, of the costs of medical care and hospitalization. 
Down, I may say, from earlier figures, but I don’t want to get 
into the complexities of that formula. I do say, Mr. Minister, 
that that is a very, very — in my judgement — a very important 
principle and part of the Canadian governmental structure that 
the Government of Canada pay, and pay a significant amount in 
cash of the cost of operating medical and hospital care. It is 
down now, I say, to around 19 cents. And it will go down again, 
I suspect — although Mr. Wilson seems to doubt it — if the 
Wilson cut-backs take place, as I’m sure they will. They’re 
already taking place. 
 
It seems to me that this is a development which ought to 
concern us, perhaps even alarm us. If we believe that we should 
have a national program for hospitals and medical care, and if 
we believe that there should be some national standards, these 
national standards can only be achieved by the federal 
government offering some leadership and being able to give 
some more than cursory guidance because of the fact that the 
federal government is putting money into the pot. 
 
When the federal government gets down to 19 cents on the 
dollar and if it should drift back, as I suspect it will, it may not 
be long before provincial governments will say, these sums are 
so small in the total pot that we will go our own way and never 
mind the federal government. And if one province does that, 
then we no longer have a national medical and hospital care 
scheme. Obviously at 19 cents it’s still too rich for anyone to 
walk away from 19 per cent of the cost of those expensive 
programs. 

(1130) 
 
But as the figure drifts back, that is a clear threat, and I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, whether or not it is the view of your government 
that the federal government ought to continue to participate in 
the cost of medical and hospital care, and whether it is the view 
of your government that this ought to be at the approximate 
levels of the existing established program funding, or whether it 
should be at some lesser level that you would acquiesce in from 
the Mulroney government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to reply to 
that. I think Saskatchewan Health would be far better off today 
if the gentleman opposite had not gone down to Ottawa, and on 
the national scene lost on almost every negotiating stance, and 
I’m going to cite two of them for you. 
 
Number one, on energy, he went down and got a program that 
strangled the oil industry in western Canada. Secondly . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I fail to see the relationship of 
energy pricing in the previous administration with the 
Department of Health estimates today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, energy flows into the coffers of 
this government, and had there been a proper energy pricing 
type of scenario worked out other than the strangulation by the 
Trudeau government of western Canada, of which he agreed to, 
we would have more money for health care. But be that as it 
may, if you want to rule out energy, but I tell you energy is the 
big part of the revenue of this province, and you look back and 
see the difference between our administration and his. 
 
But secondly, getting down to EPF, that member again went 
down on the national scene — he kind of liked the lights of the 
national press. They kind of thought he was the bright boy on 
the scene for a while. That eclipsed pretty quickly when they 
saw the outcome of it. 
 
He talks about funding on EPF.  It was you, sir; it was you as 
the premier of the province with your bed partner, Pierre 
Trudeau, that decided to bring in EPF funding in 1977. If you’d 
have stood up as the leader of this province at that time and 
said, no, sir, 50-50 is what we want and that’s what 
Saskatchewan deserves. If we had the 50-50 funding today, we 
would have a lot more money to do a lot more things in health 
care. 
 
I just want to put it on the record that the man that was the 
premier of the province of Saskatchewan, who went for EPF 
which took away from 50-cent dollars in health care, was the 
man that is questioning me at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
delighted to get into this argument. I’m delighted to get into this 
argument because fortunately, and I say fortunately, there are 
records dealing with those days, and I say that the only province 
which offered any demur with respect to established program 
funding was this province. All of the other Tory provinces were 
hot to trot. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

716 
 

They didn’t want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 
They didn’t want matching grants. They felt that this was far 
too restrictive. And there’s no question. The statements are on 
the record from all of the PC premiers. Every single one was in 
the vanguard for established program funding. 
 
And I can remember a number of my own comments in that 
regard, saying that the danger of this proposal was that we 
would lose commitment on the national level, that the federal 
politicians would not feel committed to a national medical on 
the hospital care plan. 
 
And I recall commenting that while federal politicians under the 
50-50 cost sharing could talk about their contribution to medical 
care and hospital care, I predicted in the future that they were 
going to have some difficulty waxing eloquent about equalized 
tax points. 
 
Those are quotes from the premier of Saskatchewan, as he then 
was, on this issue. 
 
We acquiesced because all the other provinces did. But we took 
that view that this was a direction which was dangerous. And 
some of the very problems which are now arising are problems 
which were predicted. And I am glad to hear the Minister of 
Health state that his government would prefer 50-50 cost 
sharing, because I hope he goes to Ottawa and fights for that. I 
hope he lines up his other Ministers of Health across Canada 
and gets them committed to the idea of 50-50 cost sharing. And 
if you do that, sir, you’ll do a service, you’ll do a service to 
health care costs and medicare costs and these national plans. 
 
But my bet is that you won’t do that. My bet is that when those 
Ministers of Health meet, you will not hear a peep from the 
minister opposite saying he called for 50-50 cost sharing, 
because you won’t get your PC colleagues to agree. But if you 
can, I will welcome it and I will say to you that I’m watching 
the next time you go to Ottawa and see whether we even hear in 
the press a comment from the minister that he wishes to see the 
established program funding idea dismantled, so far as it relates 
to health, and replaced with 50-50 cost sharing. 
 
I hope he does that. And I’ll be watching. And he’s going down 
in 10 days time, and we’ll all be watching the press to see him 
stand up and say, that’s the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and that I have persuaded at least some of my PC 
colleagues to adopt it. And I hope very much that he’s 
successful, but I’m not holding my breath, because I don’t 
believe that he’s committed to that. If he is, he’ll be the first PC 
Minister of Health in Canada who is committed to it. And I 
hope that he will stand up again and state in this House that it is 
the policy of his government to favour 50-50 cost sharing rather 
than established program funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think the efforts of this 
government can be seen in many cases. Our Premier just went 
down to Ottawa, carved out a deal with them for a billion 
dollars in agriculture. I just want to say that the negotiations . . . 
and you can stand here and make protestation of what you said. 
What you said didn’t have an awful lot of impact upon the 
national scene. 
 

Obviously it didn’t. And that’s one of the reasons you’re where 
you are. And that’s one of the reasons you’re going to stay 
where you are because your influence in this province, I’m 
sorry to say, and in Canada, is gone. That’s a fact. That’s true. 
And you know that. And that’s why you rise and shout and yell 
about these things, because you’re a man who sees what once 
was a time when things were looking pretty good, slipping 
away. 
 
So I can tell you when I go to Ottawa I will make the 
commitment that I will fight as hard as I can. And when I say 
fight, I mean I will argue, because I believe there is more to be 
gained by sitting down man to man and talking and seeing what 
we can do within the confines of reality of what can be done, to 
try and safeguard and maintain and, more than that, to build — 
to build — a better health care system across this country. That 
may not necessarily mean always dumping in more money. It 
may mean using the dollars that are there in more effective 
ways. 
 
The member opposite has been on record — I’ve heard him say 
this himself — that he believes that money should be spent on 
types of initiatives that would protect people’s health. I think he 
supports that thing. I certainly do. I think he does. 
 
I think he knows as well as I do, because at one time he was a 
Health minister in this province, that one of the major things 
that can happen to help people protect their health is to have 
young people never start smoking, and people who are smoking 
to help them to quit. We have put forth initiatives at Ottawa for 
this. Saskatchewan has led the charge. Today the federal 
minister has adopted the programs. They’re being instituted 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sure the member opposite . . . Maybe his children have 
shown him the backpacks that the kids get — Break Free 
generation. Volleyball teams, basketball teams across Canada, 
where they don’t smoke or their coach doesn’t smoke, get 
something that kids really like — a beautiful backpack that they 
can carry their books and so on. And I see young people 
walking to the collegiates in this city; I see towns in my own 
constituency, proud of that fact, right there. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, I remember the day you and I were out in 
Nokomis, Saskatchewan. I remember only so well . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, this is a very interesting story. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get back to the program funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I tell you, if you want to talk about 
financing health care, if you want to look at ways to use dollars, 
then I will stand in this Chamber for some time and advocate 
the availability and the cleverness of types of programs that 
prevent people from being sick in the first place. And 
non-smoking initiatives with you . . . If the members opposite 
don’t support it, please stand up and say so. But I can tell you, 
in Nokomis, the day we were at your school . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. It’s almost impossible to hear 
the minister responding to the question, so let’s have some 
quiet. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

717 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I just would recall, Mr. Chairman, 
when you and I were at the Nokomis school, where that school 
is totally smoke-free, they have a United Nations flag — one of 
the 11 in Saskatchewan — flying above Nokomis school, 
saying, look it, no one in this school smokes. 
 
Those kind of initiatives were started in Saskatchewan. Those 
kind of initiatives have been adopted by every other Health 
minister. The rock video we produced in Saskatchewan is being 
used in other provinces. The smoke-free generation came about 
because of Saskatchewan’s initiative. 
 
So, you know, just to stand and try and predict doom and gloom 
— doom and gloom, and that the world is falling in, that 
somebody is not going to bring up their share of finances, and 
not knowing for sure if that is true or not — but to try and pass 
that doom and gloom. Rather than sitting in this Chamber or 
standing in this Chamber and saying, look it, we believe that 
health care is a number one priority of the people in this 
province and we believe that some things that you’re doing in 
health care are simply not correct, I think it would be better if 
you did this, if you took some money from here and put it over 
here, put more money into non-smoking initiatives if that’s 
what they think is correct, build more nursing home beds if 
that’s what they think is correct, open a day-surgery hospital . . . 
 
There’s something we can do in health care that will save many, 
many dollars. We have the technology and the expertise today 
to do procedures that five or six years ago would have meant 
many days of hospitalization. People can go in . . . Let me cite 
senior citizens, for example, and ophthalmology. Many senior 
citizens have cataracts on their eyes. As our population gets 
older, it only seems logical that there will be a need for more 
cataract operations. So therefore we have the technology and 
the expertise today to allow people to have cataracts removed, 
and they can now be done by day surgery, maybe staying in 
overnight at the most, and then back home with support 
services. 
 
That’s the kind of things we should be discussing. That’s the 
kind of things — to build a better health care system for 
Saskatchewan. That’s what I’m interested in. And I ask the 
member opposite to suggest some of these things if he has some 
suggestions to put forward. But to say that Saskatchewan 
Health has no new initiatives, no thought of the future, is simply 
untrue. And I hope I’ve explained to him what I plan to do 
when I go to Ottawa. I can’t say that I’ll be 100 per cent 
successful. I can say I’ll do my very best. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
apologize again because I obviously am not making my 
questions clear to the minister. The question was: is your 
government favouring the dismantling of the established 
program funding system as it relates to health and the 
substitution of a 50-50 cost sharing? That was the point you 
made in the discussion. You introduced that subject into the 
debate. I simply ask you, what is the position of your 
government with respect to federal participation in the costs of 
medical and hospital care? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again I think the member knows, and I’m 
not going to try and say he has to discuss things in other 
estimates, but he knows those are the types of prerogatives and 
discussions in Finance. But so be it, and maybe you’ll want to 
ask those to my colleague when his estimates come. But I think 
you realize that that’s where those discussions take place. 
 
Certainly I will say again, Mr. Chairman, I’m disappointed that 
the 50-50 arrangement was let slip away in 1977. I don’t know 
what the other provinces, what their arguments were. I know 
who was the premier of the province at that time. I think we 
would have a lot more money at 50-50 dollars today. I can’t say 
whether it is realistic to institute 50-50 dollars today because 
things have changed considerably since 1977. 
 
I can tell you that I will look at any type of arrangement that I 
see a betterment for the province of Saskatchewan in. That’s 
what I’ll be arguing for. What it be, I don’t know at this time 
until we get down and discuss. But I give you that commitment, 
and the people of Saskatchewan, that I will be fighting for the 
best line for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
think that we will accept the protestations of the minister that he 
will do his best to fight for the province. I would be amazed if 
he didn’t. It’s not his intentions but his ability that we’re 
questioning. It’s not his intentions but the fact that, as he has 
very, very clearly indicated, he hasn’t done any preparation for 
a meeting which is going to take place 10 days hence dealing 
with an issue which arose 11 months ago. 
 
(1145) 
 
And that may be the view of the member for Weyburn, or 
anyone else, that this indicates ability and competence. But I 
question whether or not that’s the best way to deal with the 
very, very real issues raised by this initiative of the federal 
government — an initiative to cut back on the money which 
flows for medical and hospital care. Can one doubt that the 
federal government is now reneging on the deal which was 
made with respect to established program funding? 
 
Mr. Minister, is it not your view that the provinces had a 
five-year deal whereby the federal government would pay the 
money out pursuant to the formula — pay the money out for 
health care? And is it not your view that that arrangement is 
being abrogated unilaterally by the federal government? I ask 
you whether you believe there has been a unilateral abrogation 
with respect to the EPF agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the member opposite 
knows that the officials from the Finance department are in 
consultation with the officials from federal Finance, as has been 
the case for years and years. That’s the way provincial-federal 
relationships take place. 
 
Mr. Wilson indicated in his budget — all Canadians know that 
— that over the five years he felt there would be,  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

718 
 

necessarily, some reductions. What those reductions are, we 
don’t know. Those negotiations are taking place at this time. 
And how can one stand and say, I think it’ll be this or it’ll be 
that, until . . . You don’t know until the negotiations are 
completed and have taken place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I’m not 
making myself clear. Do you believe there now exists an 
agreement with respect to established program funding? And if 
you believe there exists such a program and an agreement, 
could you give me the dates during which this agreement is 
operative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe there is an agreement. I’ll have 
to check the precise dates for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I put 
it to you that there was a deal made in ’82 which was believed 
to be a five-year deal, and I put it to you that Mr. Wilson is 
cutting off the last year and reducing the amount that would 
have been paid in the last year. And I’m asking you whether 
you agree with that analysis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’m saying you’ll have to ask the 
Department of Finance that question. I mean, they’re doing the 
negotiations on the EPF. I don’t know if they’re cutting off a 
year, or what. I’m sure that the Finance department will be 
arguing that there should be no termination or anything of that 
nature. And I think you well know that those discussions are the 
prerogative of the Finance departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Minister, fair enough. I’m 
aware that much of that is being done by the Finance 
department. As I say, since the intricacies of the established 
program funding arrangement and the shortcomings of it were 
at least commented upon heavily by you with respect to the 
past, I thought that you might be aware of it with respect to the 
future. But I take it that’s not the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have alluded to one other subject which you 
will be raising at Ottawa with respect to the generic drug issue. 
And I think since we were last talking about this in the 
committee, we now have some further indication of what the 
federal position will be. Do you understand that the federal 
position is that there will be protection for patented drugs now 
for 10 years rather than four? And do you have any idea as to 
the likely impact of that decision on the costs of operating our 
drug plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I indicated those to members of your 
caucus the other day; maybe they didn’t inform you of the 
response. But certainly I think, as I pointed out just a while ago, 
the impending legislation for changes to the Patent Act is on 
hold. We have not seen a Bill of any type. As I have suggested 
to you, we will be discussing that at the 28th meeting also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — With respect to this, Mr. Minister, will 
you agree that at least the public announcements indicated that 
the four-year patent protection was going to be moved to 
10-year patent protection? Will you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I have the same information as  

you do, what’s been reported in the press. My officials have met 
with Mr. Michel Côté. I have telexed Mr. Epp on different 
occasions and written to him regarding this. The report, as I 
understand it, from the Eastman commission was a four-year 
period of exclusivity. Reports in the press indicate that there 
may be some move towards a 10-year period of exclusivity. 
Certainly our opposition to that has been well voiced, and we 
will be pursuing that stance when we meet with the federal 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
are going to Ottawa in 10 days, you tell us. Have you done any 
estimates of what the increased cost to the drug plan would be if 
the period of protection was moved from four years to 10 years, 
as is reported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think the most succinct way I can 
put this is just to read to you and into the record the telex that I 
sent to Mr. Epp. And it says: 
 

I am writing to you, and also by copy to the Hon. Mr. 
Coté, Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, to once 
again express the serious reservations that the province of 
Saskatchewan holds towards proposed changes in 
compulsory licensing provisions. The Saskatchewan 
prescription drug plan, because of its universality, would 
be affected in a very dramatic way by the changes being 
contemplated. 
 
Due to the broad nature of our plan, we have been better 
able than most to estimate the cost impact of these 
changes. Additional costs to our drug plan could reach $15 
million annually, or nearly 20 per cent. Because such 
increases could be very damaging to the program and its 
continuing success, and in light of the apparent lack of 
concrete reciprocal agreements, and in the best interests of 
all Saskatchewan residents, I would request a 
reconsideration of the entire issue by the federal 
government. May I also request that this matter be 
discussed in a full and detailed hearing with all provincial 
governments. 

 
And I said that to Mr. Epp with a cover to Mr. Côté and many 
other people in Ottawa as of the 24th of March. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since you 
are arming yourself for this meeting 10 days hence, is the $15 
million figure as close as you can now estimate, or do you have 
harder data that you will use when you’re pounding the table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s the maximum figure. It could be 
less, but that would be the maximum figure — as the best of our 
estimates at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, a few 
questions of a different kind and variety, with respect to the 
costs which are being faced by Saskatchewan hospitals as a 
result of liability insurance premiums. And it’s a familiar 
subject affecting many people who may need liability coverage, 
but it also is affecting hospitals. And I wonder if you could 
indicate to me . . . 
 
And there was some reference, as we recall it, in the  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

719 
 

Speech from the Throne or the budget, I believe, about dealing 
with liability insurance. And you will be familiar with stories 
such as this one in the Star-Phoenix of January 16th: “Hospitals 
face soaring insurance premiums.” It’s the liability insurance 
problem. 
 
And I wonder whether your officials have had any opportunity 
to address this subject as it relates to hospitals; or whether, to 
your knowledge, some other agency of the government has 
been addressing it with relation to a larger group of potential 
people who need insurance who are facing these high 
premiums. It’s going to hit schools and parks, we all know. And 
I wondered whether this has come to your attention and what 
you might be able to say to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll give you two responses to that. 
Certainly you’re correct in mentioning that it’s affecting most 
public institutions: schools; I hear the city of Regina, through 
the press, have some concerns about it; and certainly hospitals. I 
can assure you that, in our discussions of budget reviews with 
hospitals, my officials have been discussing it. So certainly 
those discussions are taking place. 
 
I think your question on the larger scale . . . I believe SGI are 
also looking at it in a larger context, but I would refer you to 
ask the minister of SGI, because I couldn’t comment on that. 
 
But in the hospital sector, we are looking at it as we look at 
their operating budgets. That would be for this year. I think, if 
this continues, we’ll have to look at a long-range plan. Whether 
it be by another avenue or through Health, I think that would 
still have to be worked out. But for the immediate year my 
officials are bringing in the necessary funds within the budgets 
to handle it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
will be aware that, when people look at this problem broadly, 
they feel that we in Canada are now experiencing some of the 
changes which have taken place in the United States over five 
or 10 years— not to the same extent, but it’s the same trend. 
 
And looking to the United States and the very, very large 
awards which have been given for claims, a surprising number 
of those awards have been rendered against medical 
practitioners or hospitals or health care facilities. And I think 
that in some sense it is a particular problem for the health 
system, since some of the big claims have been marked up 
against medical doctors particularly, but also hospitals, nursing 
homes, and the like. All of this is a large extra cost, not huge, 
but significant cost which is going to have to be absorbed. The 
direction of awards seems unusual to say the least, since they 
seem to be attempting to compensate for that which you can’t 
compensate for, and that is loss of enjoyment of life in the 
broadest sense. You’re seeing awards of many, many millions 
of dollars. 
 
I wonder if your officials have been discussing this issue, either 
with the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association or with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association or the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons — and I’m not sure which would be the 
appropriate body to discuss it with so far as the medical 
profession is concerned. I know that the  

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association have raised some 
concerns with me about it. And I’m sure that all of the health 
professions are becoming increasingly alarmed because of the 
broad ambit of liability which has been thrown out there, and 
also the very high awards. 
 
I wonder if you could report on any discussions or consultations 
that you or your officials — no doubt your official sin this case 
— may have had with the health care association or with the 
SMA or the College of Physicians and Surgeons or the Sask 
Registered Nurses Association, or others who may be faced 
with the particular problems which seem inherent in this trend 
which seems to be coming into Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I personally have discussed it with 
the SHA in one of our meetings just a month or two ago. My 
officials have had discussions with the medical community on 
this. We have a task force within the department that has been 
established, an internal task force to deal with it. And I believe 
across government we have a task force made up of SGI, 
Consumer Affairs, and Justice. 
 
But again, for more information on the larger scale I would ask 
you when you have my colleague, the Hon. Rick Folk, in 
estimates, he would be glad to flesh out the larger government 
picture. But I can assure you that within the health field the 
discussions have been taking place — personally, myself with 
the SHA; my officials with some of the medical community at 
this time. I think our internal task force would indicate to you 
that within the department we’re concerned about this. We want 
to work out strategies to address this. And also there is a 
national task force established across the country on this, 
because you’re correct. It seems to have been a trend. I don’t 
know all the reasons for it. We see that many suggest it’s from 
very high awards in some situations. But it seems to be a trend 
that’s moving through the country, and I think all governments 
are concerned about it, and certainly in Saskatchewan Health, 
we’re aware of the repercussions on health care providers and 
are taking a serious look at it. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
dealing only with the health aspects of it, are you able to give 
any indication of what directions might be pursued in order to 
deal with the issue, or is it too soon to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think we can agree, in all fairness, that 
it’s a little too soon to really give any indications of what 
concrete action would be coming out of this. But I can assure 
you that it is under study and there’s many people looking at it. 
And I hope we can come up with some solutions that are 
acceptable to all affected. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the 
minister some questions about the nursing home that’s presently 
under construction in Saskatoon. You will know that in the 
process of planning this building, there was a discussion that 
went on about the location and the cost and the arrangement 
that is being signed between your department and the other 
department in the awarding of contracts. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

720 
 

But what I want to talk about initially is the number of beds that 
will be in that facility both, as they are called, respite beds . . . I 
think there are some respite beds and some that are level 3 and 
level 4. Will you give me a breakdown on the total number and 
how they break out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — To start the discussion, they’re all level 4 
beds, 238 level 4 beds, and I’m getting the information on the 
rest by component. If you want to continue questioning, I will 
provide you with the respite component as soon as my officials 
have provided it to me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue here is increasing the number 
of nursing home beds in Saskatoon, and I wonder if you can 
outline for us . . . You have given us the number on the waiting 
list at the hospitals. Can you give the same kind of a list in a 
breakdown for the nursing homes in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We did provide that to you the other day 
when we were talking about the assessment and placement. I 
gave the Saskatoon figures. You may not have them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hospitals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I gave them for the nursing homes 
also, but I’ll provide it to you as quick as I can. And now these 
figures of course are the ones . . . These are the categories, and 
if you recall our conversation of a week or two ago, where the 
co-ordinating committee or the assessment committee have 
their own category, shall we say. And Saskatoon, and this was 
provided to us as of just about a week ago, I believe, the figures 
— I could check the date. 
 
And I’m going to give you the three categories: there’s priority, 
there’s preference, and by-pass. And priority will be those that 
the assessment committee feel are the ones needing to get in as 
quickly as possible. And in level 3, there are two; and in level 4, 
12; for a total of 14 priority people in Saskatoon as assessed by 
their assessment unit. 
 
Then we go to the preference column, and there are 130 level 
3’s that they classify as preference; and level 4’s, 211. So that 
gives you a total of 341 that they would call preference. So that 
would be, in my mind, the secondary category of getting in. 
 
And then they also give a figure of by-pass, and those are ones 
that, people that were assessed but then were phoned on this 
day and they said, no, we don’t want to go in at this time. There 
were 35 level 3’s and 93 level 4’s, for a total 128. 
 
And so you could best understand what they mean by priority, 
they have a footnote here saying that, physical health and/or 
social support system breakdown; needs can or should be met in 
a special care home. 
 
So 14 priority, 341 that they call a preference, and then 128 
who said, thanks for assessing me, and we appreciate that, but 
at this point in time we don’t want to go in; we want to stay in 
our families. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the process of opening the new level 4 
facility, you will have the closure of the sanatorium and Frank 
Eliason. Is that accurate? And as I understand it, one of them is 
being changed over to be used as a day care centre, I believe. 
But can you fill me in on how many were in the sanatorium and 
how many beds were in Frank Eliason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ve just put a new board in place to 
operate the new facility and the continuation of the Frank 
Eliason Centre during that period of time until the new facility 
opens, and that board is looking at the future of the Frank 
Eliason. 
 
In the case of the san, certainly the san is going to have to be 
closed down because of the condition of the building. And 
when people who are in there . . . It’s been more of a stopgap 
till this other one is built. And the future of the Frank Eliason, 
that is still under consideration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And if you would give me the number of 
beds that are in each of these centres that is, as I believed at the 
present time, under active consideration to be closed down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There are presently 65 beds in the san; 
those will be closed. Frank Eliason, there’s 129. But let me 
indicate to you again that the future of Frank Eliason has not 
been totally decided at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The level 4 beds that you were referring 
to in the new centre: is there 238? And those were all 
permanent level 4 or were they including the respite beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The respite component, they indicate to 
me, is still not worked out. It’s to be determined. But there’ll be 
238 level 4 beds. Some of those — some of those — may be 
respite. But I couldn’t give you the figure of how many at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And there was no respite beds in either of 
the other two institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — A few in Frank Eliason. There were some 
in Frank Eliason. They are still there. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you give me the number at Frank 
Eliason, how many were respite beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We will provide that in a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The point, I guess, is that at Frank 
Eliason and sanatorium, the proposal is to close 194 beds. And 
we are talking about opening 238, some of which will be 
respite, which will cut that number down probably at about . . . 
If you had, let’s assume, 20 respite beds, what we are talking 
about is a minimal number of new spaces. Can you tell me 
about how many new beds, new level 4 beds you will have in 
place when the facility opens — the new one — and when the 
two old ones close? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In the new facility there will be 44 new 
beds, but I think you erred when you added up the  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

721 
 

Frank Eliason and the san to get 194. I told you that the future 
of Frank Eliason has not been decided yet, so you’d be wrong to 
say that that was being closed. But in the new facility, there will 
be 44 new beds. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well clearly I don’t think any 
commitment has been given by the government on the Frank 
Eliason Centre. So here again it’s another issue where we’re 
waiting till after the election to publicly announce what you’re 
intending to do. But everyone in Saskatoon who is close to it is 
assuming that what the government is talking about is closing it. 
And after all the great noise that you have made about 
increasing the number of nursing home beds, when the smoke 
clears away what we will have, in fact, is 44 new beds. And I 
think that I would encourage you to, if you could today, make a 
public announcement that the Frank Eliason Centre would be 
kept open, would be remodelled if necessary and the proper 
work done, that these 129 beds . . . Or if in the remodelling you 
lost 20 beds, keep at least 100 beds open. Because when you’re 
looking at a waiting list of 341 that are needing beds right now, 
increasing the number by 44 after four years of waiting, there 
will be some people who will not think that is great progress 
unless a commitment is made to keep the Frank Eliason Centre 
open. 
 
And I would make that point because there are many people in 
Saskatoon who call us regularly, and I’m sure your candidates 
as well as ours are telling you that we should be keeping those 
beds open. And I would just make that point, that if you can in 
any way find in your budget the money to refurbish and keep 
that centre open, that there are many people who would 
appreciate that in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, in regards 
to Saskatoon I have a joint planning committee on long-term 
care. It’s chaired by a man by the name of Mr. Boris Kishchuk. 
And they’re looking at the long-term care needs of Saskatoon 
the same way that the joint planning facility and hospitals 
looked at the hospital planning for Saskatoon. And I think that 
has certainly been a success. 
 
Also, as I have just said, I put a new board in place to run Frank 
Eliason and the new centre, the Fairhaven Centre, when it is 
opened. So certainly the future of Frank Eliason will be 
determined to a great extend by that board and that long-term 
joint planning committee. 
 
Also I’d like to point out though that I was just present about a 
month ago at Circle Drive Alliance nursing home where there’s 
a brand-new, 50-bed facility that was opened within the last 
month. And for this year of ’85-86 we have the 78 replacement 
beds at the Lutheran home in Saskatoon — the 238-bed facility, 
level 4 facility, that we’ve been discussing; and in the year 
’88-89 the Sherbrooke home — 40 replacement beds. 
 
So I think when you look at all of those, and again remembering 
that the future of Frank Eliason has not been decided, and I feel 
optimistic that there will be some beneficial use made of it, that 
there is a considerable commitment to beds in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister, I think,  

understands the point that the pressure is on to keep that centre 
open, and I think it’s a good idea. And if you can urge your 
Minister of Finance to get the money to keep that centre open, I 
think everyone would be pleased, and it would go some 
distance to making available for those 300-and-some people 
who are waiting for a bed in Saskatoon if you were to keep at 
least 100 beds. If, through remodelling and that, it seems to me 
when you go through that process you always end up with a few 
less because you widen the halls and maybe make more private 
rooms. But I think the minimum that we could look at keeping 
in Saskatoon at the Frank Eliason Centre would be about 100 
level 4 beds, and that would go some distance to easing the 
pressure and the waiting lists that we are now seeing. 
 
The other point that I wanted to raise with you, and I know we 
talked about it last day just ever so slightly, but in Saskatoon the 
summary of the surgical waiting list — you gave us the list and 
we appreciate it very much — with some of the forces creating 
Saskatoon waiting list pressures, and you list out a number of 
reasons why we have a waiting list. And obviously one of them 
is because the proposal to go quickly with the renovations and 
the refurbishing of the Saskatoon hospitals has, in some ways 
— and I know that times are tough, but in many ways it’s also 
priorities — that we’ve been slow-walking some of the projects 
both in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
(1215) 
 
But we are now at a situation where at the University Hospital 
(and these are according to your statistics as of February 28, 
1986) the University Hospital a waiting list of 2,070; City 
Hospital, 3,036; and St. Paul’s Hospital, 2,902. Now that is a 
very significant waiting list of about 8,000 people. And here 
again we have to understand that these base hospitals are not 
only used by the people of Saskatoon and surrounding area, but 
many people from my colleague’s constituency in Assiniboia or 
Shaunavon — if they are in need of emergency care, the 
hospitals are called on to provide services to them. 
 
I wonder, in your planning that you’re under way — and we 
know that these waiting lists have not gotten better over the four 
years. I think we had problems when we were in government, 
and we had announced steps to take care of them and get the 
waiting lists down. And what has happened is, they have 
doubled and tripled since 1982. And I wonder if you could 
outline for us in a concise way the plans that are in place that 
will reduce this 8,000 waiting list to a reasonable number. 
 
And I suppose, while we dream of having no waiting lists at all, 
maybe in the short term that isn't realistic. But in the longer 
term, in a five-year planning process, we simply have to turn 
the corner on these increasing waiting lists for surgery. Because 
if we allow them to grow from 2,000 to 8,000 in four years, you 
can see where we would be if another four years go by, and they 
would then be in the area of 24 or 30,000 people. And then 
people would say, well our health care system isn’t working. 
That’s what they would say. 
 
In fact, there are people who say there’s a sinister plot here by 
the government to increase the waiting list to such  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

722 
 

an extent that people start saying medicare isn’t working. They 
start saying that. And you will know that right-wing 
governments, when they want to get rid of the medicare system, 
they can do it in two ways. One of them is to announce 
publicly, or use deterrent fees as was done in the ’60s with the 
last right-wing government — that they were going to have a 
deterrent fee to keep people from coming to the hospitals. Or 
the other, and I think more sinister way of doing it, is simply 
not to fund the hospitals properly and make waiting lists so long 
that the public starts saying, this system isn’t working. 
 
And I don’t think, or I hope that isn’t your intention. But the 
numbers certainly indicate, when it gets up to 8,000 people at 
Saskatoon, then people will start saying, well this is a strategy 
of the government to undermine the health care system at our 
base hospitals. 
 
And I would like you to outline how you intend to get that 
8,000 waiting list down over the next two or three years, and 
what you would expect it to be at the end of this year, given 
your strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, I’d be glad to 
reply to the member’s questions. And I think, if you’re looking 
at a strategy and a commitment, I will just indicate to the 
members present: when you see $75 million this year, $75 
million into health care construction, and a good portion of that 
towards acute care hospitals, and a very good portion of that 
towards acute care hospitals in Saskatoon — speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Chairman, you happen to represent a Saskatoon seat. And I 
remember you saying to me just the other day the amount of 
activity you have seen in the health field as you go around your 
city of Saskatoon: the level 4 that was just talked about being 
built, the activity at St. Paul’s, the activity at the University 
Hospital, and the activity at the new cancer clinic. 
 
I remember you reporting this to me and commenting and 
saying that some of your constituents and said to you, my gosh, 
we’ve never seen so much activity in health facilities in this city 
as long as I can remember. And I can remember the person that 
you said had talked to you was one of your old acquaintances 
that you had known for 20-some years, who made a point of 
coming in and telling you that. But be that as it may, I want to 
report to the member opposite, rather than any type of slow 
walking, actually the projects are ahead of schedule. The 
projects at the University Hospital and St. Paul’s are running 
ahead of schedule. 
 
You want to know some of the initiatives we’re taking. 
Certainly we have a concern about waiting lists in our hospitals. 
I would like to see them reduced. But we have to take some 
initiatives to try and address this. I think, when you see the 
expansion, the two new floors going on to the University 
Hospital, people realize that waiting lists will be addressed with 
that kind of initiative, and also with the expansion at St. Paul’s. 
 
At University, in the short term, some of the initiatives that 
we’re doing — we’re funding one more in-patient operating 
room; one more day for surgery operating room; and we’re 
having a discharge planning type of  

procedure put into place. And I should say, as I said last night, 
these operating rooms were held vacant for some time 
previously. 
 
At St. Paul’s we’re funding additional operating room time, 
increased day surgery, and a discharge planner. And I, a few 
minutes ago, explained what day surgery did for ophthalmology 
for our senior citizens. 
 
At City Hospital we are funding a day surgery expansion and 
additional in-patient operating room time. These initiatives are 
targeted to reduce an annual increase of about 1,500 in-patient 
surgery cases and 2,500 day surgery cases. The costs of those 
initiatives are about $5 million. 
 
In the longer term — the member wanted to know what we’re 
doing in the longer term — of course, University Hospital will 
have 73 new beds in service in August of 1988; St. Paul’s will 
have 112 new beds, plus increased patient and support services 
in place in 1989; and City Hospital and, of course . . . I 
remember my colleague from the centre of Saskatoon in which 
City Hospital is located, indicates the number of congratulatory 
letters he’s getting regarding this, that the new hospital with 106 
more beds and u-to-date services will be completed in the early 
1990s. 
 
In addition to this, approximately 300 more beds for the City. 
This addition will bring about approximately about 300 more 
beds for the City. And these major improvements will provide 
more diagnostic and operating-room capacity. 
 
Towards that whole issue of waiting lists in Saskatoon, there is 
another initiative that we’re undertaking. 
 
I feel that there is a greater role that the regional hospitals could 
be playing in the northern part of Saskatchewan. I look at 
Prince Albert, Lloydminster, North Battleford, Melfort, Tisdale 
— some of the referral areas to Saskatoon. I think with some 
improved technology in there, such things as ultrasounds into 
those hospitals, perhaps we can do some functions there that are 
presently being put into the Saskatoon hospitals. I think all of 
these initiatives will help reduce the patient or the stay times or 
the waiting list for Saskatoon hospitals. 
 
And then added to that, all these initiatives require staffing. And 
I think the staff enrichment, the $100 million patient care 
enrichment program will go a long way to helping the hospitals 
in Saskatoon and surrounding areas address the waiting lists 
there. 
 
Furthermore to this too, when I think of the hospitals in the area 
outside of Saskatoon that refer to Saskatoon, I believe there will 
be some initiatives coming out of the rural medical practice 
study that will help also with the waiting lists in Saskatoon. 
 
It seems to me that some of the hospitals — and some of them 
right in the member’s seat — are indicating that they’re 
interested in exploring some of the initiatives expressed in the 
rural medical practice study. That may allow hospitals to have 
people who are in the base hospitals now. And with a very good 
ambulance system  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

723 
 

— of which my colleague from Moosomin was the author of 
that program — with that system in place, it seemed logical to 
me that we can move some of the people that are in our base 
hospitals in Saskatoon, and also in Regina, out to their home 
hospitals where they can recover. 
 
I think, if you look at all those initiatives, certainly there are a 
number of things there that are going to address hospital 
waiting lists in the immediate, and also in the long range. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I think I heard the 
minister correct, and I’ll just run through that again. University 
Hospital: you intend to have some beds on stream in 1988? Is 
that when the first new beds will come into the system, 1988, 
when 73 new beds at the University Hospital will come into 
existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the first new beds will be 73 new 
ones, and August of ’88 is the target. And as I’ve said, 
construction is ahead of time at this point in time. That’s our 
targeted date. If things keep rolling along the way they are, that 
might even be earlier, but let’s take that as a firm date. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So I guess the problem will be for people 
who are watching closely that, while we have 8,000 people on 
the waiting list now, it’s two years from now when we’ll have 
any relief valve there to get patients into the hospital for 
surgery. 
 
One of the other main problems that people are telling me who 
practise in the health care area in Saskatoon, and many people 
waiting for surgery are saying, that the waiting lists that you 
have announced at nursing homes are only part of the people 
waiting to get into nursing homes, that there is another large 
group who are presently in level 6 beds in our base hospitals. 
 
I wonder, could you indicate how many beds in each of the 
major hospitals in Saskatoon — the University, St. Paul’s, and 
City — would be occupied by people who would be better 
served, and at much less cost to the taxpayers, in a level 4 
institution? Do you have a breakdown for those three 
institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will get you that figure. But just on that 
point I want to point out to you — and I mentioned the Circle 
Drive Alliance Church home and 35 of the people that went into 
that home came out of the acute care hospitals. That was the 
agreement that we had with the Circle Drive church, and they 
were removed from the hospitals to go into that. And when I 
was there at the opening, I think it was pretty well full. 
 
I want to go back, though, to the initiative that I had described 
here a little earlier about the improvement and the utilization of 
the regional hospitals in the Saskatoon catchment area. I mean, 
here’s a figure that I think I should indicate to you that will 
show very definitely to the people watching, and the people in 
this Chamber, that by doing some changes in the procedures in 
the regional hospitals in the Saskatoon area, we can do quite a 
bit to help the waiting list problem. 
 
It’s interesting to know that in the Regina area — in the  

Regina area here — 60.3 per cent of all the patients in the 
Regina hospitals come from the city of Regina, and 39.7 come 
from outside of Regina. 
 
But you contrast that with Saskatoon, and you see that in the 
Saskatoon situation, 57 per cent of the patients come from 
Saskatoon and 43 come from outside of Saskatoon. So 
certainly, if we could reduce those figures to get them more in 
line with what Regina is experiencing, I think that you will see 
waiting lists decrease. So the initiatives to try and assist the 
regional hospitals in the Saskatoon catchment area will go a 
long way to help the waiting lists in that city. 
 
You’re asking for the level 4 patients in hospitals in Saskatoon. 
The figure that I will give you is as of March 31st, 1986, which 
isn’t too far out of date, and this is for level 4 patients in 
hospitals in Saskatoon. At the University Hospital there are 
two; at City Hospital there are 16; and at St. Paul's there are 19; 
for a total of 37 level 4 patients in the Saskatoon acute care 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will well know that the 
problem exists where many of our hospital beds in the cities, 
the base hospitals particularly, are being used by level 4 
patients. Whatever he can do to move quickly to make sure that 
those beds are used for surgery, I'm sure will be appreciated. 
 
The other issue that I wanted to raise with the minister is a local 
one to my constituency. I think he’s aware of it because it has 
been brought to his attention by a number of people. But I just 
want to take a couple of minutes to read letters from people 
who have been writing about a shortage of health nurses down 
in the south-west corner of the province. While it’s a local 
issue, I think it’s one that’s represented in a number of rural 
areas. And if I could, Mr. Chairman, I have a letter here from 
the village of Frontier, signed by the administrator, and I would 
just like to read some of the important parts from it. Maybe the 
minister could indicate whether or not the problem has been 
solved or is in the process of being solved. 
 
The member from Weyburn is saying, will I table it. It’s 
addressed to the Minister of Health, so he’ll already have one. 
It’s dated March 20th, 1986. 
 

Hon. Graham Taylor, Minister of Health, Legislative 
Building: 
 
Dear Sir: On behalf of the Council of the Village of 
Frontier I wish to express deep concern for the lack of 
Community Health Services along the south-west line. 

 
Basically, that meaning the highway that runs through Climax 
and Frontier and Val Marie. 
 
(1230) 
 

There are two public health nurses hired, living in 
Shaunavon, that serve the area north of Shaunavon, town 
of Shaunavon and Eastend and one who serves Val Marie, 
Climax, and Frontier area and has duties within Shaunavon 
as well. These nurses are responsible for pre-natal, post- 

  



 
April 18, 1986 

724 
 

natal visits, well baby clinics, public education, pre-natal 
classes as well as K-12 school programs. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

In the past three years we have been without “our nurse” 
for periods of between two to six months at a stretch. The 
remaining nurse comes to our area once a month to 
conduct well-baby clinics and are now booked two months 
ahead. That is all the contact we are now having. 

 
Mr. Minister, you will have the letter and it goes on to explain 
and worry about the problem of getting doctors at the Climax 
hospital. And you will be well aware of problems we’re having 
at a number of rural hospitals — Kincaid and Climax; to a 
lesser extent, Eastend. 
 
But I was wondering: have you been able to solve this problem 
of public health nurses? Because it’s one that is ongoing. It is 
now approximately two years old, where we’re simply having a 
very difficult time getting nurses hired there so that the health 
care of the school children and the newborn are being taken 
care of in that area of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In regard to your public health nurse, I 
know that the position was filled last fall. We had a nurse in the 
area. She transferred to another position in February. We 
interviewed Wednesday of this week to fill the position. My 
officials feel that the person will be in place by May, which is 
only a few days away now. Of course one of the first things the 
person will have to do is catch up some of those cases that need 
attending to along that south line. 
 
So I think you can rest assured that the interview has taken 
place, the position will be filled, and service will be restored. 
Certainly I would have been happier to see if we would have 
been able to have continuity, but I think you well know that 
people transfer from position to position, and sometimes there 
are periods of time when you have a vacant position. But we’re 
doing everything we can to fill it, and also I believe that the 
service will be restored within the month of May. 
 
Towards the whole aspect of medical services down in your 
area of the province — and I know that the population there is a 
little sparser than in some other areas — I just quote a letter 
from your area to me having to do with the rural medical 
practice. And it says: 
 

Dear Sir: I have listened and read with interest information 
on the report just released regarding “Rural Health 
Services.” We in Shaunavon could possibly take advantage 
of some of the suggestions with co-operation from the 
communities of Climax and Eastend. Maybe we could get 
a pilot project going. Is it possible to get a copy of the 
report in the near future as at this time Climax is closed 
because of no doctor. If so I would appreciate one. 

 
So I think this is going to be one of the first areas in the 
province where we see the initiatives suggested by the rural 
medical practice — where towns can co-operate  

and work together, and we can have admitting privileges in 
more than one hospital — that will help the viability of 
hospitals in your area. 
 
So I can tell you that I’m certainly interested to have the people 
in your area sit down with my officials, try and work out a pilot 
project. And I ask you as the member from that area to lend 
support to that and see if we can work out a system in Climax 
and Eastend and Shaunavon that will provide continuity of 
medical services to that area. 
 
I say today, I’m willing to look at that as one of the pilot 
projects. We have replied to this gentleman that we would do 
that. And I ask you as their elected representative to lend your 
support to seeing if we can make this work also. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is giving a commitment, and 
I will try to hold him to it, that we will have a health nurse 
rehired down there in May, because we have been without one 
several times over the last four years. 
 
I have one other letter here that I want to read a part of. It’s 
from a Donna Onerheim of Frontier, a mother of children in the 
area who has had that kind of . . . seen the impact, I guess, of 
not having a health nurse. And I would like to read pertinent 
parts of that, because it outlines very clearly and from a user’s 
point of view the importance of health nurses in the rural areas. 
And it starts out: 
 

I would like to draw to your attention the concern of the 
public health care in our area. As a parent of two preschool 
children I am concerned that they are not receiving the full 
health care of the public health nurse program. Our clinic 
has been cut back to one day a month and during that day 
the nurse is limited to the number of patients she may see. 
Appointments need to be made three months in advance 
and if your child is not able to have the immunization at 
that time due to illness, this advance booking means that 
your child could be six months behind. And in my case, 
my son is eight months behind in his immunization. This 
disturbs me and I have talked with my pediatrician and was 
advised that the immunization could be administered by 
her, but the oral (part) must be made by the public health 
nurse. Therefore, this does not help my situation. 
 
I have heard that possibly the health care program would 
be taken out of the area and we would have to travel to 
Shaunavon or Swift Current. I would appreciate if the 
government would make note of the increase in the rural 
population over the last five years (and here referring to 
the Frontier area because that area has been growing), what 
would this influx of population to these larger centres do to 
their clinic bookings. I feel that the cutting of these corners 
would be the reverse, as they would have to increase the 
staff in the larger centres. 

 
And she concludes by saying: 
 

We need our public health nursing programs. We need our 
rural clinics. Please help our children! 

 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

725 
 

Thank you. 
 
And it’s signed: “Sincerely, Donna Onerheim” of Frontier. And 
this is dated March 20th. 
 
I just read that for one purpose, that when we’re talking about 
preventative care in health, one of the areas we presently have 
in place, and I think it was a great step and should be expanded, 
is our rural health nursing staff that was built over the years. 
And any attempt to cut back or to not fill positions in this area 
is certainly going to cause a great deal of problems for rural 
people and I would just encourage you that when you’re doing 
your planning to make sure that if you have to cut in any area, 
that it’s not done in our rural health nurse program. And I let 
that case rest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I concur with the remarks 
of the lady that wrote to you and I believe that the public health 
nurses out in Saskatchewan do a very good service to 
Saskatchewan health, and you said you’ll hold me to that 
commitment. I’ve indicated to you that we interviewed on 
Wednesday. I hope the person selected will fill the position, and 
certainly you can assure the lady that wrote the letter that there 
is no attempt to cut the services in that area. We will do our best 
to fill them. And as you hold me to my commitment, then I 
would like you to also commit to the fact that you will do all 
you can to see if we can make the suggestions of the pilot 
project for the rural medical practice work within your area 
also. 
 
So there’s a couple of commitments. I stand by mine. I hope 
you would stand by yours. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, in light of reviewing the serious 
situation down there, would you also make a commitment to 
take a second look at the Moose Jaw health region and the one 
staff person you cut that was serving in the Coronach area, and 
review that one as well and reinstate that position, because I’ve 
got letters from parents, I’ve got letters from teachers, and 
different ones down in that area that felt that that cut was not 
necessary. 
 
And would you also now give us an assurance that you will 
reinstate that position from the Moose Jaw health region for the 
health region nurse that was covering off in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Go on with whatever questions you have. 
My director of community health services will be here to brief 
me on that position that you’re talking about. So if you have 
some more questions, continue on. I’ll provide you an answer. 
 
Mr. Engel: — This is in relationship to what I discussed 
yesterday where a vice-principal at Coronach wrote to me, a 
Mr. Jacobs, regarding that health nurse that was cut from the 
Moose Jaw health region that was serving in the Coronach, 
Bengough area. The one position was cut out of the Moose Jaw 
health region, and you felt that that was justifiable in the letter 
you wrote me. But we’re arguing and saying that if you’d 
reconsider their position over there, I think you should also 
reconsider the position of that Moose Jaw health region and that 
service in that area down there. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: —We’ll re-examine that situation, see if the 
service is being provided the best possible way, or if we have to 
look at another method of delivery of service, you have my 
commitment we’ll re-examine it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — On behalf of my constituency I would make 
exactly the same arguments that were made on the other region, 
because one position less . . . The Coronach area has grown 
from 350 people to over 1,000 people. And then having one 
worker cut in that region I think is as serious to the people 
there. And the immunization that’s in place, the child care 
program that’s around, is suffering because of the lack of staff 
and personnel there. And they’re raising it with me. And I wish 
you would give us the same commitment as you did to the 
region that my colleague just got a commitment for in his area 
for the additional staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I give you the commitment to take a look 
at it, to make sure that the quality of service in your area is as 
good as in any other area of the province. I think there’s a little 
factor in here that is not coming to light. I think what the 
principal is concerned about is the scoliosis screening. I think 
the nurse used to do the scoliosis screening. But the scoliosis 
screening — we have indicated that that will be done in the 
future by the medical doctors. So in the case of scoliosis 
screening, no we won’t be reinstating that in the schools. That’s 
being done in the hospitals. But I say we examine, and 
constantly my director and my deputies look at the delivery of 
service throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And I want to 
see it the same in all regions. 
 
So if you think yours is some way cut back, I give you the 
commitment we’ll take a look at it and see if we could have that 
delivery the same there as it is in Rosetown or in the Melville 
area, and so on. There’s no attempt to try and have the 
Coronach area or anything of that nature not get the services 
that other areas are getting. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, if I may, that is a different issue. 
There was two issues being raised from down there. One was 
that we were having one health nurse cut from the health 
region, and the other issue is that you mentioned: the checking, 
and especially with the increased number of girls that have 
scoliosis. My daughter has that problem, but I never know 
exactly what you’re saying there. But that screening process 
you’re talking about is another issue. 
 
The issue I’m talking about, and it was raised, is a letter 
previous to that that related to the health region nurse, that one 
position that was less for that area. And we were quite 
concerned about it and weren’t satisfied with the position 
you’ve taken there. 
 
And I think you should take a good look at the Moose Jaw 
health region and the regrouping there. I think it’s creating a 
problem, more miles that the nurses have to cover down there. 
And there’s one vacant position and one position you weren’t 
filling, so it’s an issue that’s been coming up, and I think you 
should review and look at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You have my commitment we’ll take a 
look at it. And as I said, I guess the factor that I look at is that I 
believe the service should be the same in all parts of  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

726 
 

Saskatchewan, and certainly in your area. I don’t want to see 
your area cut back and, say, a better service in Weyburn or a 
better service in your colleague’s seat in Shaunavon. I want to 
see them the same. You may have a legitimate point there, and I 
tell you that we’ll take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — When you’re measuring how many health region 
nurses it takes to provide and cover a certain area, and you’re 
going to compare it and say that the Melfort region maybe has 
so many and the population in the Moose Jaw region is so 
much, I don’t like that kind of comparison because of the 
sparsity factor, how far these nurses have to travel. The trip 
from Moose Jaw down to Coronach is a long way down. The 
Moose Jaw health region that serves that district from 
Gravelbourg and Assiniboia and the Coronach-Bengough area, 
in there — they are covering a lot of miles. The girls have done 
more than yeoman duty, the nurses that have worked down 
there. I know a lot of them, and the service they’re providing is 
just excellent. I appreciate what they’re doing. 
 
Just recently one nurse was transferred out of the area. There’s a 
vacant position, and we understood from the letter we got from 
you that you were cutting one there and felt that it could be 
handled in the region. I’m just making the case now in arguing 
that. I think that shouldn’t be done. Look at more factors other 
than just population — the amount of students they’re serving; 
and the amount of young families that are there having children; 
because of the sparsity factor and how far apart they live; and 
the pressure you’re putting on these people to cover off the area. 
 
So I think you should review the issue and give us a 
commitment like you did for the Frontier-Shaunavon area 
where you would reinstate that position because, I think, living 
with it for a year isn’t going to help the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well there’s little difference here. 
Frontier was a vacant position, and I said I will fill that vacant 
position, and that’s what we’re doing. I’m giving you the 
commitment; I will look at the delivery of services in your area. 
We will re-examine it and review it. It may well result in the 
change in the delivery pattern, but until we take a careful look 
at it, I couldn’t give you the statement that I will put someone 
in, but I give you the statement that we’ll take a look at that. I 
don’t want to see a decrease in service there, and the points you 
raise may well influence my decision. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
question for the Minister of Health relating to a community on 
the east side of Cumberland. I met with members of the band 
council of the Peter Ballantyne band, Mr. Minister, last fall in a 
joint meeting with the Hamlet of Pelican Narrows. The mayor 
for that community, Mr. Melvin Nataweyes, was present at this 
meeting, and important discussions centred around the lack of 
health and medical facilities and staffing. 
 
And at this particular meeting, Mr. Minister, they had resource 
people in there from the federal government,  

and there was a tremendous amount of concern expressed by 
the band and by the Metis and non-status people from Pelican 
Narrows, whereby they were hoping to get help from the 
Department of Health, from this government, to increase 
staffing of the community health worker program for Pelican 
Narrows. They gave me issues, and I’ve jotted down some 
items here that I felt warranted some explanation. 
 
The people that I met with were band council members of the 
Peter Ballantyne band — Gilbert Linklater, Graham Linklater, 
Melvin Nataweyes, and I could go on and on. There were quite 
a number of people present at this meeting. But the major issue 
was a problem that they experienced. Apparently the federal 
government cut back on the community health worker program 
for the reserve. So what has happened when they cut back, 
when the federal government cut back on the community health 
worker program for the reserve, there was just insufficient 
community health workers to look after both the reserve and the 
non-status, the Metis community. 
 
So what happened at this particular meeting in Pelican Narrows 
was, they asked the federal government, via resolution, and they 
asked your government, via resolution from the hamlet of 
Pelican Narrows, to consider funding a portion of the 
community health workers program for Pelican Narrows to 
compensate for the deficiency in staff that the community in 
question had last fall. 
 
Pelican Narrows, Mr. Minister, is a fairly large community. I 
believe the band membership there is somewhere in the total of 
1,300 people. And that’s not counting the Metis community, the 
non-status and the Metis people on the north side of the reserve 
which similarly have problems pertaining to access to health. 
There is a clinic in Pelican Narrows, mind you, but I 
understand, after talking to medical people or the local staff in 
that area, that they definitely are in need of some help. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, at this point in time if you may respond 
to the question before us: can we make some help available to 
those people in Pelican Narrows by way of providing additional 
funding to provide for adequate staff of the local clinic in 
Pelican? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as you know, a lot of the 
responsibility, and I think you outlined this in your comments, 
for the health services in Pelican Narrows is a federal 
responsibility. However, I think that some of the things that I 
outlined to you just the other day in our estimates indicates the 
support we have for health care in Pelican Narrows, in that we 
have put a dental clinic into the area to service the people of 
Pelican Narrows. 
 
I think what you are alluding to is a little bigger thing just the 
one area of the North there in Pelican Narrows. I think there is a 
need to sit down with the federal government and discuss the 
whole delivery of health care services in the North. Because in 
some areas, and you’re well aware of this, being a 
representative, there are a number of people that are treaty 
people and then there’s other people that are non-treaty and so 
on. And we want to see good health care delivered in those 
areas, as I’m sure you do. So I thank you for bringing the 
suggestion to me. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1986 

727 
 

I can tell you that my deputy, along with the deputy of the 
Northern Affairs Secretariat, are looking at having a joint 
meeting with the federal government on this whole topic of 
responsibility in areas such as Pelican Narrows, where I think a 
good majority of the people are treaty and federal 
responsibilities; but again in some of the communities there are 
non-treaty people. So I think it would be advisable that we sit 
down and take a look at that two levels of government and work 
out a system that will be a benefit to those communities. 
 
So I think your point has illustrated what we are actually doing. 
So I thank you for bringing to my attention, and I hope that 
explanation will assure you that certainly we are 
going to be addressing those types of situations in communities 
such as Pelican Narrows, and I’m sure there’s other ones across 
the northern part of our province that illustrate the same type of 
situation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Going on a bit further, 
Mr. Minister, with respect to the health care program for that 
area, could you elaborate further, Mr. Minister, in terms of the 
process you see at the very near future? You know, we can’t 
afford to talk about . . . continuously talk about a five-year 
program. Those services are essential; they’re needed; they’re 
required now. Not a year from now, and not five years from 
now, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would like to accept your explanation and the position you’ve 
taken in accepting the issue that I’ve raised with you and leave 
it at that, but I and many other people throughout the North 
have heard promises made and made . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Promises broken. 
 
Mr. Yew: — . . . and have experienced promises broken. 
Promises made; promises broken. The member, my colleague 
from Quill Lakes, took the words out of my mouth just now, but 
that’s basically what I wanted to say. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, in all sincerity, have you got any . . . 
What is the process, if you have a process? If you have a plan, 
what is it? Where is it? When is it going to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, you know, you may 
question the five-year programs. I think if you would go around 
this province and see the communities that have had nursing 
homes — and we’re in the third year of that process — if you 
look at the ones that are planning their nursing homes, if you 
see the hospital construction that’s taking place under the 
five-year plan — and we just mentioned the other night your 
hospital in your seat of La Ronge which have the green light to 
go ahead with their planning — I think you will find that an 
awful lot of people across this province appreciate a five-year 
program. They see that there is some hope for them on the 
horizon. It gives them time to do adequate planning, and I think 
they’re well-received. 
 
Now you have every right to question, if you so wish, but I 
think that the majority of people believe in them; they have seen 
concrete proof that five-year programs under this government 
develop, and just for proof positive I  

would say, go and check some of the places that have had 
nursing homes. 
 
Certainly our idea for the delivery — let me point this out to 
you — as Health minister of Saskatchewan I don’t want to see 
any people in the North falling through cracks, shall we say, or 
not getting service because of: is it a federal responsibility or is 
it a provincial responsibility? I think that far too long that kind 
of buck-passing has taken place; that someone would say, well 
it’s your responsibility; someone would say, no it’s your 
responsibility, and the person deserving the service didn’t get 
the service because neither would accept the responsibility. 
 
I think the initiative that I have outlined to you, where we are 
going to sit down with the federal government and say, look, 
there are communities like Pelican Narrows where the 
population pattern is changing — it’s changing. There are some 
people that are definitely your responsibility; those are treaty 
people. There are other people in that community that probably 
don’t fall within that parameter. Let’s work out a pattern; let’s 
work out a game plan that is the best for the services of those 
people so that people will not be falling through the cracks. 
That’s what I want see develop, and I think probably that’s 
what you want to see develop as a representative of that area. 
 
I think the only way that can be achieved is for the responsible 
jurisdictions, the provincial and federal government, to sit down 
and take a look at the problem and not be passing the buck back 
and forth as was the case for many years previous. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I thank the 
minister for at least recognizing the fact that, up to date, that is 
basically what has been happening. With respect to many 
northern communities the jurisdiction question has always come 
into the forum. 
 
I recall distinctly, Mr. Minister, last year during estimates and 
the year before we talked about the Lac La Ronge hospital 
whereby you referred to a BCR, a band council resolution, that 
you would be working to negotiate with the Lac La Ronge 
Indian band. But to this point in time, Mr. Minister, I haven’t 
seen any concrete plans. 
 
But I certainly agree with you, Mr. Minister, this is what has to 
be done. We have to identify the problem. We have to have 
official meetings between your officials — between yourselves, 
your officials, the non-status Indians, the Metis, and the 
reserves — jointly somehow or other, to bring a program that 
will provide fair, acceptable health and medical services and 
programs, and facilities that are acceptable and in par with the 
ones that are available in other centres of the province. I agree 
with you. 
 
I ask the minister now: how many discussions have you had 
with the people in question, the people in Pelican Narrows? 
How many discussion meetings, discussions and formal 
meetings and commitments have you made? Have you met with 
the Peter Ballantyne band? Have you met with the Lac La 
Ronge band? Have you met with the Montreal Lake band? 
Have you met with the hamlet of  
  



 
April 18, 1986 

728 
 

Pelican Narrows? 
 
I understand, Mr. Minister, in talking with the local community 
health worker in Pelican, that they service a very wide area. I 
don’t want to mention the community health worker’s name 
because it just may jeopardize his job. You may think your 
government, as far as I’m concerned, it’s dangerous for me or 
my colleagues to associate ourselves with someone out there 
because as soon as we do that you put the finger on that chap, 
and it’s out the door for her or him. That’s basically what 
happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — You’ve got thumbs on people that we associate 
with, and there’s nothing but mass firings. 
 
Just the other day, during estimates on Highways, you people 
transferred 250 people to the private sector. What actually 
happened, Mr. Minister, is that you fired them. And this has 
happened throughout the course of the last four years. But in 
actuality, in confidence, Mr. Minister, if you want the 
information, I could probably give you in confidence the name 
of this person who is genuinely, personally involved and 
concerned about the lack of medical and health services in that 
region. 
 
But you must, Mr. Minister, and I agree with you, you must 
begin negotiations, you must begin to put definite plans — a 
definite formula to provide for those services. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I would move that the 
committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 
 
 


