


















































May 7, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 7, 1986 
 

1123 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication 

 
Clerk Assistant: —  
 

Mr. Speaker, as Chairman of the Standing Committee on 
Communication, presents the Eighth Report of the said 
Committee, which is as follows: 
 
Your Committee has considered the reference of the 
Assembly of April 22, 1986, namely the recommendation 
of the Public Documents Committee under The Archives 
Act contained in the Retention and Disposal Schedules 
comprising Sessional Paper No. 112 of the Fifth Session of 
the Twentieth Legislature. 
 
Your Committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
Schedules Nos. 253, 254, 256, 257 be accepted as amended, 
and Schedules Nos. 252, 255, and 258 be adopted as 
presented to the Committee. 
 
Your Committee has adopted the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library’s annual report for the 17-month period ending 
March 31, 1985. 

 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to move, seconded by the member from The Battlefords: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills 

 
Clerk Assistant: —  
 

Ms. Zazelenchuk, from the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills, presents the Fourteenth Report of the said 
Committee, which is as follows: 
 
Your Committee has considered the following Bill and 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
Bill No. 93 — An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection 
Orthodox Church. 
 
Your Committee recommends, under the provision of Rule 
58, that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing, with 
respect to Bill No. 03. 

 

Ms. Zazelenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member for Quill Lakes: 
 

That the 14th report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like to today introduce to the 
Assembly a grade eight class from Rosetown Division III School. 
There are 31 students in number. They are accompanied today by 
their teachers, Cheryl Harder and Ron Ford and their chaperon, 
Wendy Sawatsky. 
 
These students have come a long way to visit the Legislative 
Assembly, and I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly. I trust 
that you’ll find it an enjoyable afternoon and an educational one. 
I look forward to meeting with you following question period for 
an opportunity to discuss the happenings of the legislature and to 
answer any of your questions. 
 
Would the members welcome the group from Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, some 21 
students from the Balgonie Elementary School in Balgonie. They 
are grade four students; they are seated in the west gallery. They 
are accompanied by their teacher, Elaine Caswell, the chaperons 
Mrs. Haus and Mrs. Tiefenbach. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students about 3 o’clock this 
afternoon for refreshments, questions. I hope they find their stay 
this afternoon enjoyable and educational, and I look very much 
forward to meeting with them after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Domotor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 
a group of grade 7 students in the Speaker’s gallery, numbering 
27 in total. They’re accompanied by their Teacher, Bill Lazaroff, 
and bus driver Elva Turner. 
 
I would particularly like to mention to the members that Watrous 
is on the map. Manitou Beach has been given a go-ahead to build 
a new pool. And for those members in the Assembly, if you wish 
to cleanse your souls and cleanse the wounds from the legislature 
this summer, I welcome you all to Manitou Beach. 
 
I would like to welcome the students. I hope they find the 
afternoon enjoyable, educational, and entertaining. And I will be 
meeting with them at 2:30. And I wish all members here to 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1124 
 

Public Safety in Saskatchewan Correctional Centres 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is to the Minister of Justice, and it has to do with an 
issue of public safety. As you may well be aware, Mr. Minister, 
guards at the Saskatchewan correctional centres have stated 
overcrowding and understaffing of these centres have created 
serious public safety problems. They report that the guards have 
been assaulted at least five times in the past month. 
 
It is my understanding that the guards have asked to meet with 
you and to explain their concern. I ask the minister: have you in 
fact met with them? Have you agreed to meet with them? And 
can you indicate, if you haven’t already met with them, when will 
you be meeting with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have not met with 
the guards, and I don’t believe it’s my place to meet with the 
guards involving issues that should properly be dealt with 
between the management and the union. And those discussions 
are now taking place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a process in place in terms of issues such 
as the one that now takes place. The guards, as you may be aware, 
took advantage of The Occupational Health and Safety Act, and 
in fact took part in a work-to-rule campaign, and unfortunately 
have now issued a press release to publicly highlight the issues 
that are being dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have confidence in the management in their 
dealings with the union on these issues, and I have asked 
management to meet with the union and further discuss the issues 
and work towards the resolution for the safety of both the public 
and the inmates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, do you 
not agree that as Minister of Justice it comes under your purview 
of your department, the responsibility for the operation of the 
provincial correctional centres? I ask you why, when they are 
requesting to meet with you, why then would you refuse to even 
meet with the guards to discuss their basic concerns? Are you so 
arrogant that you won’t even grant them the courtesy of meeting 
with them to hear their concerns, concerns which in fact they 
raised several weeks ago by reducing their services . . . a 
consideration of the reduction of their services? 
 
Will, in fact, you meet with them, or are you too arrogant to meet 
with the people who . . . the guards who are having problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be 
a sad day when the Minister of Justice would bypass management 
whose role it is to deal with issues such as the one raised in this 
Assembly, to deal directly with the SGEU leadership who are 
involved. I find this sudden interest in public safety a little 
unusual, coming from that side of the House. We didn’t hear 
those concerns when the SGEU strike was in place, Mr. Speaker. 
And the strike, as you recall, affected correctional institutions 
plus highways, and we didn’t hear the public safety concern at 
that time. 
 

Now it appears that the union leadership has called on the 
opposition to bring this matter to the Assembly. That’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. The information provided to this 
Assembly by the member opposite is inaccurate. The incidents 
that he speaks of did not happen to the degree as indicated. Those 
matters are under review, Mr. Speaker. There is an allegation of 
overcrowding, insufficient staffing. Those, in our view, are not 
correct, Mr. Speaker. However, we have indicated that we’re 
prepared to look at various mechanisms to improve the situation. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the members opposite are 
bringing the matter here for their obvious political gain, and that 
they aren’t really concerned about the safety of the public or the 
welfare of the people working in the correctional institutions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t need the minister across the way 
indicating any motives for bringing the questions. I’d like an 
answer, though, to some of the questions of concern to the guards 
at the correctional centres. 
 
And I ask you, one of the key points raised by the guards is that 
many of the provincial institutions are overcrowded, and they 
have raised this concern with you before. Can the minister tell us 
what the rated capacity of Regina and Prince Albert correctional 
centres are, and whether or not in your view those centres are 
indeed overcrowded at the present time, and to what extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, our view is that any 
incidents that have occurred are not as a result of overcrowding. 
We’ve looked into that, Mr. Speaker, and that’s simply not 
accurate. The members also are aware that certain expenditures 
are being made by a joint federal-provincial agreement which 
will expand the correctional centres and alleviate some of the 
overcrowding which on occasion does occur, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to put it in terms that the members opposite may understand 
a little better, Mr. Speaker, in terms of guard/prisoner ratios, our 
ratio in Saskatchewan is better than Manitoba, and we try to keep 
consistent with other provinces, Mr. Speaker. These types of 
difficulties are not unusual. And I don’t know why the members 
aren’t listening. They asked the question; they don’t appear 
interested in listening to the answer. 
 
We are dealing with other jurisdictions across Canada to 
determine if we can find more effective methods of protecting 
guards who are at work and are trying to do a good job. We are 
looking at our ratios of prisoners to guards. Their suggestion that 
we should simply hire a whole bunch of civil servants because 
we have an incident, or a number of incidents over a number of 
years, is simply not acceptable, because we think we can do 
things more constructively by working with management and the 
employees to find better ways of protecting people who are at 
work. 
 
However, as police offers and firemen, the guards are in a 
position where they do have a higher degree of risk compared to 
many other occupations in our society. And that is unfortunate 
that we do have correctional institutions, Mr. Speaker; however, 
that’s the reality. And  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1125 
 

we will do what we can. We’ll do our best. However, 
management has to get involved here and attempt to correct this 
situation if there are inefficiencies. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
these guards do a dangerous job which is vital to public safety. 
Their job is being made a great deal more dangerous because of 
overstaffing — overcrowding and understaffing. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you may think it amusing, but guards put their life on 
the line because you can’t govern the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you, in light of the fact that guards are putting 
their lives on the line and that their job has been made more 
dangerous by your government, my question, Mr. Minister, is: 
why are you trying to duck your responsibilities? Do you believe 
that our institutions are overcrowded or not? And if you do, what 
do you plan to do about it besides attack them and us in this 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the members must be aware 
that correctional accounts remain high in Saskatchewan. They’re 
lower in this year than they were in last year, Mr. Speaker, and 
there is a degree of risk involved in guarding prisoners. 
 
However, again I mention that it’s a little unusual for the 
opposition to raise the concern of safety and concern for the 
public in this Assembly. Because during the SGEU strike, we had 
roughly one-half of the people guarding the prisoners than we do 
today, when the RCMP were brought in. At that time the 
opposition remained mute, Mr. Speaker — no concern for public 
safety. Suddenly, when the SGEU leadership requests support 
from the opposition, they’re on their feet, worried about public 
safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I trust the management in this province. They’re the 
best in the country and they’re dealing with the issues. And the 
issues shouldn’t be dealt with in this Assembly because we have 
professionals who are dealing with each and every issue involved 
in the dispute. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, if you talk 
down to guards and attack them for raising these concerns, as you 
do us, I can well understand why you have a crisis on your hands. 
Mr. Minister, the guards have said there have been five assaults 
on corrections workers in the last month. Has the minister been 
made aware of these assaults, and are you suggesting to this 
Assembly that this is the kind of situation which we all ought to 
tolerate and accept as a normal part of prison life? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just clarify, 
because obviously the member doesn’t have the correct 
information. The union, in their press release, I believe issued a 
statement indicating that five violent incidents did occur. The 
description of five violent incidents is inaccurate, although there 
was one situation where a staff was taken hostage by inmates in 
the Regina Correctional Centre; on two occasions there was a 
physical altercation between the staff and inmates at the Prince 
Albert centre during the past three months. A staff member was 
also assaulted at Buffalo Narrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The situation is that the SGEU leadership have taken it upon 
themselves to go into a work-to-rule campaign and, in a sense, 
are probably involved in a self-fulfilling prophecy, because if the 
work system is taking place and is not effective, it’s designed to 
disrupt the programming within the centres, and that probably 
will cause altercations. So I hope that the union leadership work 
things out with the management because I am advised as late as 
this morning that management is involved in each and every issue 
and would like to rectify the situation and the difficulty being 
faced in this province, which we do recognize. 
 

Increase in Advertising in Department of Tourism and 
Small Business 

 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the minister 
responsible for Tourism. In the documents which you were 
forced to supply to us during our estimates review, there’s a 
breakdown in the amount of advertising done by your department 
in ’85-86. These documents indicate that your department spent 
more than $2,224,000 on advertising in the fiscal year — just 
increase — an increase of over 35 per cent. When ordinary 
people of Saskatchewan have already been hit with record tax 
increases, how do you justify that kind of jump in advertising 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, the justification for the 
advertising increase in the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business is that we are on a major campaign to sell the province 
of Saskatchewan. We are increasing the tourism activity in this 
province in a very dramatic way. We have obviously been setting 
a stage for the things that will happen this year and our 
advertising for the year under review, which the member has 
discussed. We have introduced programs in Manitoba, in 
Alberta, in the northern tier states. We have across-Canada 
advertising in magazines. The whole intent is to take the walls 
down from around the province and invite people in. 
 
We see tourism today as a billion dollar business. There are 2 to 
3,000 new jobs added annually, through good times and bad, 
through tourism. And today we have 32,000 people directly or 
indirectly employed in the tourist industry. So a 30 per cent 
increase in our advertising budget, I believe, is very easily 
justified. I only wish, Mr. Speaker, it could have been much 
higher. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, another question. Most taxpayers 
agree that we should be encouraging the growth of tourism in 
Saskatchewan. What they question is whether we have to shell 
out that kind of money in advertising to do it. Two and a quarter 
million dollars a year is a Cadillac advertising program, Mr. 
Minister. To put it in perspective, the two and a quarter million 
dollar advertising bill for your one department is more than this 
province spends in a year on the Saskatchewan hearing aid plan, 
where people have to wait six months . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Nine months now. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Up to nine months now for testing because there 
isn’t money to hire needed staff. Can you justify spending that 
much money on advertising when you’re  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1126 
 

asking those in need to do without and to wait in line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that that 
type of comparison really provides anything to the answer. We 
would like to spend considerably more on our advertising budget. 
The Government of Alberta, for instance, for years has benefited 
from the results of the advertising that they have gone to. 
 
Under the previous administration, Tourism was stuck away in 
the parks . . . in the Department of Parks, and their major job . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m just going to ask the 
Assembly for a little more order. It’s very difficult to hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, however, the point is, as 
I indicated, with the number of jobs that are created in the tourism 
industry, with the amount of livelihood that depends on it, more 
importantly with the significant opportunity that exists in 
tourism, by the year 2000 tourism will be the single largest 
industry in the world and the single largest employer in North 
America. 
 
And it is very important — very important, Mr. Speaker — that 
Saskatchewan be positioned to a benefit. A diversification of our 
economy is obviously a significant element, and I think that 
tourism, in times of low commodity prices, is one area where we 
can continue to benefit. But we’re going to have to spend a little 
money, Mr. Speaker, to get a lot. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
we’re asking you about your government’s spending priorities. 
Taxpayers are asking if the government needs to spend $2.25 
million on tourism advertising when money’s so tight. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware or have you thought of the fact that 
the money your one department shelled out on tourism 
advertising would have been enough to maintain the fresh food 
subsidy for northern Saskatchewan for 10 full years? What’s 
more important to you, Mr. Minister — spending money on 
government advertising or helping northern families put fresh 
food on the table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again, when you 
consider that 32,000 people in this province put the bread on their 
table through the jobs that they benefit from in tourism, when you 
consider that through good times and bad over the last five years 
we have seen a 2,000 annual increase in the number of jobs that 
are directly attributable to tourism, I think that this is money well 
spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may not be aware of some of 
the programs that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to just ask for order. The members 
are continuing hollering, and I would ask for silence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, possibly after tomorrow, 
in both Saskatoon and Regina, tomorrow we will hold public 
shows indicating what our advertising is. We will do them for the 
media and the public, indicating  

exactly what programs we are undertaking this year. Hopefully 
that will lead to a better understanding on the part of the members 
opposite as to exactly what that advertising accomplishes. 
 
And to compare it to other programs, we’re not discussing 
priorities of government. We’re discussing whether in fact we 
are, as a province, interested in selling ourselves, interested in 
being in a position to benefit from this very important industry 
that continues to get more and more important each year. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we make no apology for what we’re spending here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
let’s talk about the real campaign. Mr. Minister, taxpayers 
wonder if the $2.25 million your department is spending on 
tourism advertising is really designed to generate new tourists, or 
designed to fatten the bank account of the advertising firm which 
handles the Tory election propaganda. 
 
Mr. Minister, these documents show that out of an advertising 
budget of $2.25 million more than one and a half million went 
straight to Dome Advertising, the PC party’s political advertising 
agency for the next election, while at the same time you’re 
closing down tourist campsites. 
 
Mr. Minister, that spending represents a 50 per cent increase in 
your payments to Dome in one year. How many farmers, Mr. 
Minister, or working people saw their take-home pay increased 
by 50 per cent? Or do the farmers and working people not figure 
into your election campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again, a clear 
demonstration that the NDP, despite all the noise that’s 
emanating from the benches, have no real interest in what’s going 
on in the province. This is political theatrics we’re experiencing 
here. 
 
The advertising program that we have undertaken is selling this 
province. I would challenge them to explain what the advertising 
program of the Crown corporations that they were selling prior 
to 1982 was doing for the province and whose pocket that money 
was going into. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing, I have clearly explained 
the rationale for it — the jobs that are directly attributable to it, 
and the opportunities that this province has, and must be in a 
position to access in order to diversify our economy and make 
life better for our citizens, and I believe the majority of the 
citizens of the province understand that very clearly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Fresh Food Transportation Subsidy for Northern 
Communities 

 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for northern affairs, and it 
deals with his government’s spending priorities. Today we find 
that over the past year your government spent $2.25 million for 
tourism advertising. Yet at the same time you cancelled the fresh 
food transportation  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1127 
 

subsidy for remote northern families, making it almost 
impossible for those families to buy adequate amounts of fresh 
food for their children. 
 
Is the minister aware that even 10 per cent of what his 
government spent last year on tourism advertising would have 
been enough to maintain the fresh food transportation subsidy for 
northern families for a full year? And can he explain why he 
didn’t lobby his colleagues to rearrange their spending priorities 
to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I am not sure the members want to hear the 
answer, Mr. Speaker. However, when the member from 
Athabasca read the same question several months ago, I indicated 
at that time that I invited him and the other northern member to 
submit proposals to me, to this government, in terms of assistance 
which would be required, which may be required for young 
people in some of the remote communities. It’s my understanding 
that we haven’t received that, unless it hasn’t come to my 
attention. And I’m not sure if the members simply lost interest in 
providing a constructive solution. 
 
However, I’m informed by the Minister of Social Services that 
something is being looked at, at this time, in relation to social 
service recipients, in order to decrease the costs of fresh foods in 
the areas that are not accessible by highway. And I spoke to some 
of the Northerners, Mr. Speaker, when I was attending the gold 
site north of La Ronge a short time ago, and many of them had 
already been employed in the gold activity on site. However I did 
speak to them about the food problem, and they had indicated 
that much of the benefit had been going to fly-in camps. And in 
fact that was confirmed on a CBC program some time later. 
 
So we are looking for something constructive, where the 
assistance is targeted to those in need, Mr. Speaker. And our 
position is the same today. We are prepared to look at something 
constructive. And I believe that the Minister of Health and the 
Minister of Social Services may have something that is 
constructive and simply more intelligent than what we saw 
before under the NDP administration, which put all of its 
aspirations into the DNS basket, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
in charge of Northern Affairs has a very short memory, Mr. 
Speaker. Only two weeks ago, in this House, I questioned the 
Minister of Health and asked him to reinstate that program. And 
you say that you have not heard from us. That simply is not true, 
unless you were not in the House only two weeks ago. I discussed 
this with the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Does the member have a 
question? He is making statements but not asking questions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I ask your government to 
reconsider its arrogant disregard for northern families on this 
issue. 
 
Recently I compared some prices for fresh food in Black Lake in 
my constituency with prices charged in Regina at  

a major supermarket. And that was done just yesterday, Mr. 
Minister. And I am just going to quote for information a few price 
differences between Black Lake last week, Mr. Minister, and 
Regina yesterday. 
 
In Black Lake yesterday for a loaf of bread it was $2.05; in 
Regina it’s 99 cents up to $1.45, depending on the loaf. A litre of 
milk: in Blake Lake, $2.08 a litre; and in Regina it’s 89 cents to 
93 cents a litre — a difference of $1.13 a litre. A small head of 
lettuce up in Black Lake is $3.57; in Regina, 99 cents. And I’ll 
give you just one more item, Mr. Minister, and that is: 10 pounds 
of potatoes up at Black Lake costs $7.33; in Regina, it costs 
$1.29. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are prices in Regina yesterday and 
prices in Black Lake last week. Mr. Minister, a member of the 
clergy from Black Lake recently wrote to me about the impact of 
high food prices on poorer families in the North. And his letter 
said, in part, and I quote: 
 

I wonder what the wife of the minister responsible would 
tell her husband if she had to do her shopping around here 
at those prices. 

 
Do you not admit . . . and need to help bring down fresh food 
prices in the North . . . and if so, what action are you planning to 
take, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
colleagues of the member from Athabasca were heckling at the 
time when he was talking about the individual who apparently 
wrote a letter. Could you please continue your question from that 
point? I couldn’t hear what you were saying. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I was quoting from a letter 
from a clergyman in Black Lake. Did you want me to read the 
whole letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — That’s fine. I got the rest of the question, 
Mr. Speaker. Now if the NDP members are finished asking the 
question, I will answer it, Mr. Speaker. I have some difficulty as 
they’re hollering from their chairs. Mr. Speaker, that was a very 
lengthy question dealing with a number of items, and I’ll try to 
deal with them in order. The member from Athabasca . . . Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure any one of them is listening. 
 
The first issue which was raised is the regional disparity. And I 
know something about that, Mr. Speaker. I grew up in — I didn’t 
grow up in Black Lake; I grew up in Blaine Lake, and we did see 
the discrepancy between prices in a farming community and the 
city of Regina. And what we’re seeing, we’re seeing many 
discrepancies. This is more extreme, Mr. Speaker, the 
discrepancy between Black Lake and Regina. However, what we 
have to recognize is that the Department of Social Services does 
target in on where the discrepancies damage the health and 
well-being of individuals in northern Saskatchewan, and that’s 
what the Minister of Social Services has been working on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now in relation to the indication of a letter from a  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1128 
 

Northerner, I would like a copy of the letter because I would like 
to respond to the clergyman who has written the letter. We did 
receive . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, the members are having 
difficulty listening again. 
 
We did get many complaints in the form of written 
communications and telephone calls from the North indicating 
that Northerners do not want the old program reinstated because 
they were concerned that the total amount of dollars spent by 
government was not getting to the people in need, and that is 
verified by the complaints of some of the northern outfitters, Mr. 
Speaker. So I want to leave the members opposite with the 
answer and the offer that if they can see a better way, a 
constructive way, of delivering assistance to those individuals in 
those remote communities, the few remote communities that we 
do have in northern Saskatchewan, we will look at it. In fact, I 
believe the Deputy Premier visited Fond-du-Lac, or was in 
consultation with the people of Fond-du-Lac when he announced 
the northern power grid, and they had indicated that they expect 
a better program than . . . 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Privilege 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I want to respond to 
a point raised yesterday by the Deputy Premier. On May 6, 1986, 
the Deputy Premier raised a point of privilege to the effect that 
the member for Pelly was in contempt of this Assembly through 
statements he made about a meeting of the board of Internal 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Premier did give me the required notice under rule 
6, for which I thank him. I deferred my ruling at that time. I’ve 
carefully reviewed the remarks of the Deputy Premier and the 
member for Shaunavon. The question of privilege is a very 
important parliamentary principle and it is not to be taken lightly. 
 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, 
page 11, defines privilege as: 
 

. . . the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House 
collectively as a constituent part of the High Court of 
Parliament, and by Members of each House individually, 
without which they could not discharge their functions . . . 

 
Beauchesne’s further states on page 19, paragraph 52(1) that: 
 

The Speaker should be protected against reflections on his 
actions. 

 
The House must always be careful to protect the independence 
of the Chair. 
 
The member for Shaunavon said yesterday that the point raised 
was a dispute over fact and was therefore not a point of privilege. 
The hon. member is correct in saying that a dispute over fact does 
not constitute a point of privilege. I do not feel that there is a 
dispute over fact in this case, but that is not the issue here. What 
must be determined is whether the member for Pelly reflected 
improperly on the Chair and the officers of the Legislative  

Assembly. 
 
On reviewing the words of the member for Pelly, as quoted in the 
point of privilege, one key phrase seems to be in question, and I 
quote: 
 

The PC government is attempting to undermine the 
independence of the Legislative Counsel by forcing the 
office to report to the Legislative Assembly through the 
Clerk’s Office, rather than directly to the MLA’s. 

 
While reflection on the Table, when made, are unfortunate, and 
are against people who have no right to speak or to defend 
themselves, it does not constitute privilege. Privilege is a right 
enjoyed by members and the Chair. 
 
From the quotation by the member, he is levelling a charge 
against the government, which is his right, but I do not feel that 
the member has cast negative reflections against the Chair. 
 
I therefore rule that a prima facie case of privilege was not 
established. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered 
Accountants Act and The Certified Public Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to introduce 
my deputy minister on my left, Mr. Keith Laxdal; Mr. Gerry 
Kraus, directly behind me, provincial controller; and Mr. Terry 
Paton, senior analyst with the controller’s office. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for being so patient 
and so considerate. In respect to this Bill, Mr. Minister, and you 
perhaps have alluded to it, I want to ask you specifically . . . Well 
first I want to go into a little bit of background in respect to The 
Chartered Accountants Act. 
 
As you may be aware, there was a Special Committee on 
Regulations, and one of the tasks that we had — I was chairman 
of that Special Committee on Regulations — and part of it was 
dealing with a white paper on the proposals for a new chartered 
accountants Act. And this was put forward by the former minister 
of Finance, and we finished that off some time in ’85 — April of 
’85, the report is dated. 
 
At that time, as the report will indicate, Mr. Minister, we had 
hearings here in Regina, and we also had hearings in Saskatoon. 
And an umber of interested groups came  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1129 
 

forward representing the chartered accountants and some within 
the chartered accountants association that had some reservations 
with the white paper and the draft Bill. 
 
And I thought the process worked very well, and I want to 
commend all of the members who sat on that committee for the 
effort that they put into it. And I think that, in looking through 
the Bill, I note that many of the recommendations that the special 
committee put forward are incorporated in the Act. And I think 
that sort of verifies the meaningfulness of the work of the 
committee. So I don’t want to take all the credit, but I wanted to 
share it with all members of the committee. I thought it was a 
very constructive effort that we put into it — came forward with 
unanimous recommendations in the report. 
 
(1445) 
 
So I guess what I want to ask is: in making the amendments, Mr. 
Minister, can you indicate what process that you have followed 
in bringing forward this Bill? What I’m really asking you more 
specifically is: what is the method of communication with the 
chartered accountants and others? And did you in fact make the 
Bill that we’re looking at here at the present time in going 
through the Committee of the Whole — has that been presented 
to the chartered accountants? Has it in fact been . . Well, I’ll stop 
there and just ask you to outline sort of the process of 
implementing some of the recommendations in the report, if you 
would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. To 
the member from Quill Lakes, that paper that I’ve just sent over 
to you is a bit of a correlation between that white paper and the 
Act, which may make it a little easier for you to follow back and 
forth. And I think what you can see from there, under the final 
column on the right-hand side “status,” shows where there was 
agreement, where there was modified agreement, and where 
there was disagreement. 
 
I’d like to pick up on your comments regarding the procedure 
that was followed and the report and the committee that you 
chaired. I would concur with your comments that that was a valid 
and valuable working committee and that a lot of good effort was 
made by the people on the committee. 
 
There were 20 items that were raised for concern, I believe, and 
of the 20, 17 of them were either agreed . . . The chartered 
accounts institute agreed with 17 of the 20 recommendations 
made; or at least, if they didn’t fully agree, they acquiesced in 
their persistence and went with the committee recommendation. 
 
In terms of what was done, how did we get to where we are, I 
guess, is really the thrust of your question. You’ve touched on it 
partly with the white paper of the committee on regulations. 
Essentially, there are four accounting bodies in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re the society of management accountants, 
the certified management accountants, formerly the RIAs; there 
are the certified general accountants, or the CGAs; there’s the 
institute of accredited public accountants; and the institute of 
chartered accountants. 
 

We met with all of these groups, and there are 1,841 certified 
management accountants or formerly registered industrial 
accountants. They did not make an oral presentation to the public 
hearings that were held by the special committee, but they did 
make a written submission to the committee in support of what 
was one of the more controversial areas of the committee, and 
that being practice inspection. And they supported that in order 
to keep the quality of accounting up in the province. 
 
There are 340 members of the certified general accountants, and 
they made one comment regarding terminology. So they were 
generally in pretty strong agreement with the Act. There are 47 
members of the accredited public accountants, and where the 
made comments, those comments were considered and taken into 
consideration in the Act. 
 
The institute of chartered accountants, who the Act primarily 
applies to, is made up really of four different areas. There are 
people in teaching through the institutions. There are institutional 
accountants, people who work for government or large 
corporations. There are the private practice chartered accountants 
that most of us would be familiar with, people we take our taxes 
to or to do the accounting work for small business around the 
province; and there are students of the institute. 
 
The institute of chartered accountants surveyed its membership, 
and 93 per cent of the people who responded were in favour of 
the Act, and there are, I guess, 827 members of the institute, 
which I would mention. They had a 69 per cent return rate on that 
survey, and that return rate of the 69 per cent were primarily of 
the practising chartered accountants in the private, you know, the 
private chartered accountants. The return rate was a little lower 
among the institutional or the teaching people involved in 
education. 
 
And I think from a reading of the Act the member will no doubt 
know that this Act has a great deal to do with the private chartered 
accountant, and consequently those people did express their 
approval in an overwhelming way. 
 
Of the people within the institute who were not in support 
initially when they were surveyed, they came primarily out of 
two chartered accounting firms, and we have discussed the 
concerns with those two chartered accounting firms and worked 
around them. I feel there’s very, very strong support for the Act 
among the institute at this time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m glad to hear that you have followed up and 
made the modified Bill with its changes and a significant number 
of changes in accordance with the report available. I’m just 
wondering . . . There were some individual members of the 
chartered accountants’ profession who came forward with some 
concern. And I’m wondering whether you addressed, for 
instance, on sessional paper 210, which is the Bill itself, the white 
paper on the Bill, whether or not you had any communications 
with all of those who, in fact, made representations to the 
committee. 
 
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1130 
 

You know, I look on the sessional paper, the institute of chartered 
accountants, and then there’s the certified general accountants — 
I think I’m on the right one here. And there was Mr. Dunbar and 
Skilnick, and Dean Burlingham, and Professor D.T. Lowery, 
accredited public accountants; and Professor W.J. Brennan, and 
Mr. S. Schopp, Prince Albert. Those are some that are mentioned 
in respect to the list of oral presentations. And I’m just 
wondering: have communications been made at least to all of 
those that came forward and made presentations and some 
concerns in respect to the draft white paper Bill that we looked 
at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The answer to 
your question is both yes and no. All of the practising CAs were 
contacted through their survey. The CMAs and the CGAs and 
people like that, of course, made representation, and we have 
included their comments and remarks, so we’ve dealt with their 
concerns. 
 
As I mentioned, some of the names you mention are people from 
those two accounting firms that I indicated had some problem 
with it initially, and we have worked with them to resolve the 
problems. So I would have to say that although maybe we haven’t 
sat down and talked with each participant on an individual basis, 
we’ve dealt with the other associations; we’ve dealt with the CA 
firms that indicated they had a problem initially with the Bill. 
 
And for example we’ve had members of the Assembly dealing in 
liaison with chartered accounting firms from their constituency 
to make sure that they were well appraised to what was going on. 
I know I contacted, for example, the member from Biggar, the 
member from Melville, a couple of members from Saskatoon, 
and asked that they go and contact the chartered accountants. 
 
So we did take the initiative on that to make sure. And the 
feedback that I got from those members was that the chartered 
accountants that were spread out around the community and 
around the province were quite well satisfied with the Act as 
presented. And of course the chartered accountants of the 
province have seen the Act, and in dealing with the institute and 
the president of the institute, they have been doing a lot of 
discussion within their association and feel that it’s very, very 
well accepted. 
 
Mr. Baker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the Assembly’s 
information, yesterday morning I was having breakfast in 
Saskatoon, and Dean Burlingham, who we all know, raised 
probably the most concerns, came over to visit with me at the 
table and shook my hand, and congratulated us, and he said, I 
believe you have the fairest and best accountant’s Act in Canada. 
And he said, I just want to let you know that we feel, and I feel, 
that it’s probably the best Act in Canada, and he said thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 
member’s comments, and I’d like to thank that member for the 
work he did on the committee and later, on my behalf. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I just want to say to the minister, I appreciate 
him having done an inventory here of the recommendations, the 
Act and the status of the recommendations. It certainly facilitates 
dealing with the Bill. 
 
I’ve gone through the Bill in some detail, Mr. Minister, and 
certainly the one area — and I don’t want to overscore this one, 
but if you can allow me just to speak in respect to it, I think we 
can go through it much faster — and that was a major concern to 
the committee and to some members at the hearings. And that is: 
 

Prescribing investigation and inspection of methods of 
practice and trust funds of members by members, including 
a program of practice inspection subject to the conditions 
prescribed in subsection (2). 

 
That was of concern as to the procedure of having inspections. 
We felt that trying to raise the quality and the standard of the 
work of the accountants was a worthwhile objective, but we 
didn’t want any intrusion of confidentiality, and we wanted to 
limit the extent of the inspection of methods of practice. 
 
And I note, Mr. Minister, that in subsection (2) on section 13, 
following a list of all of the various by-laws that can be made, 
what you have done is incorporate in 13(2) those 
recommendations that we were able to put forward and which 
were agreed to by those that made presentations to the 
committee. 
 
And I am pleased that all of the recommendations that were put 
forward by the committee are included. However, as we go 
through it, there’s just one question that I’ll be asking and that is 
in respect under Section 13(2) subsection (f). We had actually 
indicated that the member shall request the client to give his 
consent, and we had said in writing. I don’t know whether that is 
hard and fast, but I notice that the written consent is deleted. 
 
I think we can move through, and I have just a few questions 
because, as I said, I chaired this committee, and I look at the 
recommendations that have been incorporated in this Act in 
comparison to the white paper Act which we reviewed. And I 
think a great deal of work has gone into it, and I think a large 
number of the recommendations have been incorporated. 
 
As my colleague from Biggar has indicated, he has had some 
communications indicating satisfactions with it. So I think we 
can move fairly fast. There may be some specific questions that 
I have with specific sections. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Koskie: — On clause 8, I just want to make a comment 
there. In the composition of the council, one of the 
recommendations that was made was that a lay person would be 
a member of the council. And I think we commended the 
chartered accountants in making that  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1131 
 

recommendation. And I note that a person can be appointed 
which is not a member of the profession, a lay person, and I think 
that’s commendable. I have no objections to it. I just want to 
make that point. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1500) 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to clause 13, as I indicated before, 
this deals with the powers to make by-laws, allowing the 
profession to make by-laws. And this was the area that we spent 
a considerable amount of time reviewing during our hearings. 
And again I want to indicate that I think I’m satisfied with the 
modifications that have been made. 
 
And I refer again, Mr. Minister, specifically to section 13(1) 
subsection (t), which I . . . “prescribing investigation and 
inspection of methods of practice . . .” And certainly our 
recommendations have been followed as to the procedure there. 
 
I note also that we had requested the deletion in respect to 
reference to classification of specialists within the profession. 
And I believe, in checking this through, that that has also been 
eliminated. 
 
I just want to ask, Mr. Minister, in respect to subsection (y), under 
section 13, and subsection (aa), what I ask you there is: 
subsection (y) is a new subsection, and I ask you, what does it 
cover off as opposed to what is perceived to be covered off under 
subsection (aa)? And why you have the: 
 

creating and administering a special fund by special levy on 
members for the purpose of reimbursement in whole or part 
of persons sustaining pecuniary loss by reason of the 
misappropriation or conversion by any member of money 
or other property entrusted to or received by a member in 
his professional capacity; 

 
So could you give me an explanation in respect to those two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes. To the minister, section (y) deals 
strictly with trust funds and section (aa) is regarding liability 
insurance. So if you, for example, ever found yourself in the 
position to have to sue your accountant, his liability insurance 
would protect him. The (aa) is dealing strictly with trust funds, 
and you know, should someone abscond or misappropriate the 
funds. That’s the difference between them. The one is strictly 
trust funds and the other is liability insurance. Is that what you’re 
looking for? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Other than 13(2) subsection (f). Mr. Minister, I 
refer to this, and it says: 
 

A member may require the consent of a client for inspection 
of the file for that client and, for the  

purposes of this clause, the member shall request the client 
to give his consent. 

 
I think our recommendation was that it be in writing, so that in 
future there would be no dispute. The confidentiality of the 
client’s file was highly regarded by members of the committee, 
and I think we convinced a number of those that were making 
presentations of the necessity of that. And we figured that if you 
are going to clear it up, you should get the consent of the client 
if they’re going to do an evaluation of the work in a given file, 
and that it should be in writing on the file so that there can be no 
dispute in the future. And we’re wondering why it has not 
included in there “in writing,” as we recommended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — To the member, I believe the original 
recommendation was that it should be in writing within 30 days. 
The intent of the Act is that it ought to be in writing, but we 
wanted to provide the flexibility to the practitioner to allow him 
to get it either when the engagement begins or whatever, that 
from time to time there may be practice inspection, and he may 
choose that file to be inspected. But the intent was clearly that it 
would be in writing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think what we were concerned with here is the 
protection of the client and the confidentiality. And I think you’re 
on a . . . not solicitor-client basis, but equivalent — an accountant 
and client basis. And I think that there is a relationship there, that 
any information that he has in that file can only be released to the 
public, even for the examination purposes of determining the 
calibre of work, by the written consent of that person. And if you 
leave it without written consent, you leave it open to where the 
file of the client may, in fact, be inspected without his knowing 
it. It might either be through negligence of the individual 
accountant, or it may be . . . well, whatever other reason that it 
may be. But what we were trying to do is here say, if you’re going 
to inspect a person’s file, you better make sure you let that client 
know and that you have on your file his consent. 
 
If you say, indeed, that the intent was to have it in writing, then 
why don’t you put it into the Act that it should be in writing, 
because that was pretty strongly stressed in our hearings — the 
confidentiality of the individual’s, client’s file. And so I think 
you should consider, Mr. Minister, an amendment here just 
indicating that it shall be in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well to the member, we’d be happy to 
entertain an amendment like that. You know that’s been the 
intent all along. I’m advised that the chartered accountants would 
have no problem with that, and the intent in the drafting of the 
Bill was to leave it up to the individual practitioner to determine 
how the consent would be arrived at, and when it would be 
arrived at. And the problem as I understand it that we really had 
was the timing on it, that it had to be within 30 days. You 
certainly wouldn’t want to be running back and forth to them 
getting consent forms signed over and over again. But if we were 
to simply say that we had the client sign a form authorizing from 
time to time that his file might be audited by the institute to insure 
that practices were of an appropriate standard and highly 
maintained, the institute, I don’t believe, would have a difficulty 
with that, and we  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1132 
 

would accept an amendment to put that in writing. 
 
And in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we’ll do it. 
We’ll do it. We’ll handle it. 
 
Mr. Baker: — The member from Quill Lakes is absolutely right. 
We’ve spent a lot of time on that particular area. We were 
concerned at the time that we may go to an accountant and we 
may get a signature at the time not knowing and fully explained 
that some day our file might be audited. And we did deal with the 
30-day warning because they know when they are going to cover 
over and go at the file, and we specifically spent probably, oh, 
eight or nine hours on that trying to protect the public’s interest. 
And we felt that the public’s interest could only be protected so 
they weren’t entering into a contractual arrangement that was 
slipped in when they were signing the contract to do a firm’s tax 
forms. It was the unanimous consent of the committee . . . And 
not only that, I’ve talked with the president of the association, 
and they have no problem with that. My recommendations would 
be that we do amend it, and I’d be pleased if the Assembly see fit 
to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, we have a solicitor here 
now, and we will do that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to suggest to the committee, in the interest 
of expediency, that we leave this clause, go on to something else, 
and then come back to it when we have the amendment ready. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is that acceptable? Okay. Then we’ll go on 
to clause 14 and come back to clause 13 later. 
 
Clauses 14 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Clause 27; I just want to make a brief comment 
again. Here is another recommendation which we came forward 
with. And it says in essence, Mr. Chairman, that: 
 

Subject to subsection (2), where a criminal charge is laid 
against a member, all related disciplinary proceedings 
against the member are stayed pending the disposition of 
the charge. 
 
On application of the council, a judge of the court may 
direct that a member who is charged with the criminal 
offence be suspended pending the disposition of the 
criminal charges. 

 
They had the reverse onus before; it was on the individual that 
had to apply to the court. Now it’s stayed, and only on the 
application of the council can you reverse the stay of 
proceedings. 
 
So I think that’s a meaningful addition there. We agree with that. 
 
Clause 27 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 28 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Mr. Chairman: — And now we will go back to clause 13. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Does this have to be seconded? Mr. Chairman, 
can you advise me whether a motion to amend has to be 
seconded? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No, it does not. We are now back with an 
amendment on clause 13(2)(f): 
 

To amend clause 13(2)(f) of the printed Bill by adding the 
word “written” before “consent” in the first line. 

 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One moment. I want to talk to the amendment. I 
don’t think it quite does what we’re proposing. Because what it 
does, it doesn’t make it mandatory to get written consent. It says, 
a member . . . “by adding the word ‘written’ before ‘consent’ in 
the first line.” 
 
So, “A member may require the written consent . . .” is what you 
have changed it to. 
 
It was before, “A member may require the consent of a client . . .” 
A member may require. I guess the member shall require the 
written consent. What we’re asking is that before the file is 
released for inspection, that there be the written consent of the 
client. 
 
I suppose what you have done here really hasn’t added much 
because it just puts it in the discretion again of the accountant. 
And what we were hoping for, and I think the member from 
Biggar was also, as we discussed it, is that a member shall require 
the written consent of a client for inspection of a file for that 
client. And for the purposes of this clause, the member shall 
request the client to give his written consent, I think would be the 
. . . 
 
So all I’m saying here, Mr. Minister, I don’t think it quite meets 
what we were asking, if you understand what I’ve said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I do, in fact. I think that the problem with 
. . . Going back to your committee, my understanding is that the 
question was that if consent wasn’t given, then the practitioner 
may be liable for breach of privacy; and in order to overcome 
that, that the practitioner should have the approval of the client 
to make that file available for audit. 
 
I suppose the problem with changing the “may” to “shall,” which 
I gather is really the thrust of your comment, is this. If a 
practitioner takes on a client and doesn’t get him to . . . Like if he 
just says, I don’t want you to sign the firm, then that file could 
never be audited. And conceivable a file . . . You know, a 
practitioner could do that with all of his files and skirt around the 
entire practice inspection issue then. 
 
So I suppose I see your point. I know that the institute are fairly 
strong on this, and I . . . Well I’ll close there, and I’ll let you 
comment on it. 
 
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1133 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well under the recommendations in the report, 
and that dealt with the prescribing the investigation and 
inspection methods of practice, the specific recommendations 
that we made was: 
 

Written consent of a client must be obtained not more than 
30 days before inspection of that client’s file. 

 
Now that was the recommendation. And, as I said, I think that’s 
right. I think that the confidentiality of the client should be 
respected, and it seems to me that by limiting . . . Well I just think 
that he should have the right to restrict, whether or not his file is 
going to be open. 
 
And what you’re saying is that the priorities of the profession is 
higher than the confidentiality of a particular client not wanting 
his file audited or inspected, in fact. And all we were doing, I 
guess, is looking at the individual client and saying his priority is 
greater than the priority of the inspection, be it all that certainly 
there will be . . . There should be no difficulty encountered by 
having, for instance, collusion. I don’t expect that there would be 
collusion between an accountant and all of his clients, getting all 
his clients to say, well, I don’t want my file open, I won’t give 
you consent; and, therefore, he’ll never be audited. I guess that’s 
the conclusion that you’re putting forward, that the chartered 
accountant or the institute is saying. But I just don’t think that 
would happen. 
 
My colleague from Biggar may want to say something on that, 
but I’m not going to debate it any further. Those are the rationale 
behind it. We spent a lot of time on it. I really think in most cases, 
certainly, written consent would be given for the basis of 
determining whether the work was being done properly, because 
that’s the purpose of the inspection. But I’ll leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Baker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this was 
probably one of my biggest concerns. I don’t believe that anyone 
should be able to come in and look at my tax forms and my file 
without my knowledge and my approval. 
 
Now I can see the dilemma that we’re into here, and a possible 
solution may be to have the inspecting committee have some 
powers to actually go and get that consent from some of those 
files, if necessary. I really believe that the public’s interest must 
be protected in this case, and that they just can’t go ahead and 
inspect files without permission from the client. I think that’s the 
whole . . . The committee hinged around this, and I believe it’s 
imperative that as legislators we do protect the interests of the 
public and give the accounting profession all due credit — and 
they’re professionals. 
 
But we still must protect the interests of the public. Number one 
and foremost, that must be our first concern as legislators. So I 
believe that we could solve this. There’s got to be a vehicle to 
solve it with, but I personally wouldn’t want somebody auditing 
my files — certain types of businesses, not because I might have 
one of them, but there could be information in there that could 
help other firms. It’s a very professional group, but there’s  

bad apples in every box. So I think we have to protect the public’s 
interest here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I think really what we’re doing is protecting 
the public interest. Every file wouldn’t necessarily be audited. 
The inspection committee would come in and would audit files 
at random, and what they would do would be to select a series of 
files and then ask the member — the individuals, chartered 
accountant, for example; you’re a chartered accountant — we 
would like to audit these files. 
 
Then the onus would be on that member, because there is 
certainly client confidentiality and a special relationship between 
a client and his chartered accountant. The onus would be on that 
individual chartered accountant to go back to you and receive 
approval for that file to be audited, and I wouldn’t expect that any 
professional chartered accountant would react in any other way. 
 
I would concur with you; I would certainly not want my chartered 
accountant to show my file to anyone else without my approval, 
and I think that the way we have it now would ensure that that 
would happen. I think to get the “shall,” I think, in fact, we’re in 
danger of doing the exact opposite. I could envision where 
chartered accountants would have a form, and upon engaging 
them you’d sign that form, and it would be one of the conditions 
of engaging the chartered accountant, and down the road then 
everybody is authorized to . . . have given authority to show their 
file. 
 
I think that really the chance for abuse if we put in “shall” is 
rather great in that if an unscrupulous chartered account — if 
there happened to be one — would be able to, say hand-pick his 
files for the inspection committee to audit. And I think that’s the 
very thing that we want to get away from. And certainly that has 
the major element of public protection in it, that where the 
institute wants to maintain the integrity and a high level of 
practice, quality of practice from their members. 
 
I hear both the member from Quill Lakes and the member from 
Biggar. I agree with you. I think, fundamentally, we’re coming 
at this thing from the same direction. I believe that the way it is 
here we can accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Baker: — Is there a vehicle there than an accountant that 
didn’t want to be inspected could divert all his clients and say, 
no, don’t; no, don’t? Because we also have to have . . . The 
auditing committee must go in and choose files that have not 
been specially prepared and they’re clean and everything else. 
They must have that room to work. So is there room in there to 
protect both sides as the way you see it at the moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you. I believe there is. I guess I’ll go 
over what I said before, only maybe I’ll try make it more clear. 
The procedure would be that a practice inspection committee 
would come in and select a number of files, and then the 
particular chartered accountant in charge of those files would go 
back to his client and receive approval for the inspection 
committee to review the file. 
 
I think to do otherwise, if the inspection committee came  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1134 
 

in, it would open the door for the chartered accountant to do 
exactly what you’re saying — to say, well, these people said you 
couldn’t look at it. And it may very well be that he had never 
asked them for approval. And so you can look at any of these 
particular group of files that you want to look at, and it may be, 
as you’ve described them, that those are the clean, neat, tidy ones 
and you’re only inspecting . . . You know, it takes away the 
randomness, I guess, and certainly I think that we wouldn’t want 
to do that. We want to have that so that any file theoretically 
could be selected, and then it would be up to the individual at that 
time to say, no, we won’t have the approval. 
 
Mr. Baker: — Is there room for the auditing committee . . . Say 
they run into this problem; is there room for the auditing 
committee to select another group of files where they may, in 
fact, ask the client for permission? Is it covered off in the Act? 
Because that would solve the problem if that’s the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Further down in that clause (f), the onus 
really falls onto the member being audited. And further in clause 
(f), it says . . . Well I’ll read the whole thing, as amended: 
 

(f) a member may require the written consent of a client for 
inspection of a file for that client and, for the purposes of 
this clause, the member shall request . . . 

 
So if the practice inspection committee come in and select your 
file as one they’d like to audit, your chartered accountant is 
obligated to ask you for permission. So I think that covers off 
your concern. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just don’t want to debate this any further other 
than to say that the argument that you put forward that what 
would become standard if you had “shall have written consent” 
is that as soon as you go in and engage the services of a chartered 
accountant, that he would automatically have the form giving the 
authorization. 
 
What we had done is to cover that off in our recommendation, 
saying that the consent had to be within 30 days of the review or 
the inspection of the file. And that was done intentionally so you 
wouldn’t get into that “automatic” when you engaged a chartered 
accountant. Because what would happen here is that they’d be 
notified that there’s going to be an inspection of his files, and the 
consent could only be within 30 days. So you get away from that 
automatic, as soon as you’ve hired an accountant firm, that you’d 
automatically would give consent to the inspection of the files for 
auditing purposes. But I just point that out that we had thought 
our way through to get around that very problem that you pointed 
out. 
 
(1530) 
 
I don’t want to say anything more on that. We’ll go along with 
the amendment; I will go along with that amendment. 
 
There’s one concern that has been raised, and that is, in the old 
Act it required the chartered accountants to file  

their membership lists as well as their by-laws, and the new Act 
does not include this provision for filing of membership lists. 
And what I’m asking is: is that an oversight or is it felt not 
necessary? 
 
I think within the report I can check it out. The understanding 
that I have, Mr. Minister, is that only two of the 39 professional 
associations in the province are not required to file an updated 
membership list, those being teachers and nurses. And the 
question, I guess, is: why have we departed from this when it’s a 
pretty established principle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are really 
two reasons. One, the Act requires under section 16(2) that: 
 

The register mentioned in subsection (1) (which is what the 
member is talking about) is to be kept open for inspection 
by all persons, without fee during normal office hours of the 
institute. 

 
The minute that we would file the list of members with the 
department, the next day it would be out of date; it would be 
obsolete. So this provides for a continuous updating of the list, 
and it’s available to anyone who wants it. And on page 25 of the 
committee report, the Report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations respecting the white paper on proposals for a new 
Chartered Accountants Act, the committee recommended as 
follows, under recommendations: 
 

The Committee is of the view that the proposal of the 
Institute is a practical and simple approach and 
recommends deletion of sections 40 and 41 on the condition 
that section 16, as drafted, is retained. 

 
So in fact what they’ve done is to accede to the recommendation 
of the committee. 
 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the Establishment and 
Operation of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre for the 

Provision of Rehabilitation and Extended Care Services in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Chairman: — The item of business before the House will 
be Bill No. 1. However, before we get into the Bill itself, I would 
request that the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a pleasure 
to introduce the associate deputy minister of Health, George 
Loewen, seated beside me; behind him, the solicitor of the 
Department of Health, Gerry Tegart; and directly behind me, an 
administrative assistant in the Department of Health, to the 
deputy minister, Michael Littlewood. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have many  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1135 
 

questions to the minister, and I won’t take very long here. But I 
would like to ask the minister: do you have a list of the board of 
directors that will be in place once this is operating? You had 
mentioned that you were in the process of selecting the board of 
directors. And I wonder if at this time you could just read those 
out to us; if you could give the name and little bit of background, 
if you have it there, for each of the people who will be on the 
board and running the ship once you get it up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I could do that for you. The chairman 
of the board is Mrs. Elva Kyle; she’s a business lady here in 
Regina. On the board is Dr. Morris Anderson, who is the 
principal of Luther College here in Regina. Murray Bedel from 
Lebret — and perhaps you’ll remember Murray as the farmer out 
at Lebret that had the unfortunate incident of losing his arms in 
the round baler and has won skiing championships and so on 
since that time. Jack Bridges is from Regina, and he’s a 
representative from the Legion; I think he’s a secretary of the 
provincial command, or something of that nature. Mac Davies is 
a retired physician from Indian Head. George Elliott is a 
physician representing the workmen’s compensation board here 
in Regina. Garnet Garven is also on the board. He’s with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. Phil Leduc is another member 
representing the Workers’ Compensation Board. Stan Malach is 
on the board; he’s my director of community health services. 
Greg Petroski from Regina, he’s also employed in government, I 
think in the Department of Social Services — oh, in Department 
of Health in psych services, excuse me. And he is the parent of a 
handicapped child and a member of one of the parents of groups 
for handicapped people. 
 
Brenda Righetti is from the Department of Finance and she is the 
analyst in the Department of Finance, assigned to the Department 
of Health. And Joyce Thompson — Joyce Thompson is a nurse 
from Abbey, Saskatchewan. Rick Triffo; Rick Triffo is in Regina 
here, and I think his background is he is a hairdresser, but he has 
a handicapped child and belongs to one of the parent 
organizations. 
 
Vera Wasiuta, who is also a nurse by training, and Vera has a 
consulting business dealing with the aged. Roger Welch; and 
Roger was with one of the government departments — I forget 
which one — but he’s moved to the private sector. He was with 
Finance; he’s moved to a private accounting firm. He represents 
the Kinsmen Foundation. And Pat Wellings; Pat Wellings is a 
mother of a boy with Down’s syndrome in Regina here, and a 
very instrumental person in a parent-helping, parent-type of 
group. Her husband is a contractor in Regina. 
 
So those are the members. I should point that Dr. Anderson is 
going on a sabbatical, and we will be replacing Dr. Morris 
Anderson. I haven’t selected anyone at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue of the board of directors. As I 
understand it they will be appointed for a three-year term. Is there 
a mechanism so that they won’t all change at the same time? 
 
As I understand it they’re on a three-year term; they can be  

appointed for two three-year terms. But what I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, is there a mechanism whereby, after the first term, is 
there any mechanism that all of them can’t be changed at one 
time, or is that possible under the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They were appointed under The Public 
Health Act, which was a different term than this Act will say. 
Under this Act they can be appointed for terms up to three years. 
So we will do it in a method that there will be continuity. And I 
look at the date of appointment and expiration of some of these 
people, and I see some of them were appointed in September ’84, 
another one is in January ’86, another one in March ’85, 
November ’85, another November ’85. So I think built into it 
now there will be a continuity. 
 
Certainly, as I say, the terms are up to three years. So we will 
make sure that continuity continues so that there isn’t a whole 
scale change in the board at any one time. As well as that, I 
believe there’s a couple of the members on there at pleasure. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister — and I don’t want 
you to read it all out now, or the detail — but could you give me 
the dates of expiry. The other thing that I wanted to know . . . As 
I understand it, the term is three years, and they can be appointed 
for two consecutive terms. Now is there provision, if they’re off 
one term, that you could reappoint at a later date, or is it two 
terms and then out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I’ll be pleased to send this over to you. 
And my indication is, you can be appointed for two terms but 
then you’d have to be off for a period of time and then you could 
be reappointed again. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If you could indicate to the members of the 
Assembly: what is the remuneration that people on the board will 
receive? They would get a certain amount a day plus expenses 
and maybe a per diem or a stipend annually. What is the 
mechanism to pay these individuals? And I know other people 
who do this kind of work receive pay, as well they should, and I 
wonder if you could just outline what that will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’d have to check to be exactly sure, but I 
believe it’s 110 for regular members and 140 or 150 for the 
chairman. And as I read out the list . . . And I think you realize a 
number of the names are government people; for example, Mr. 
Malach and Mr. Petroski, and so on. Of course government 
personnel receive no remuneration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And for expenses? For example, a person 
who lived outside of town — Joyce Thompson at Abbey, for 
example -0 would get expenses, automobile expenses to drive in, 
that sort of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In that case she would get the going 
government rates of automobile expense, meals, and lodging, 
while attending meetings. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The annual report . . . There will be, as I 
understand, an annual report from the hospital tabled in the 
Assembly each year. Can you tell me at this time  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1136 
 

what the year means in terms of the hospital? When will the first 
annual report be tabled in the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the hospital will be operating on a 
fiscal year. So the first report would come after March 31, ’87. 
It’ll be on the fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And in the area of funding, I know for the 
construction — I understand the funding and where that came 
from. But let’s use the example of an individual who needs some 
therapy or needs to use the hospital facilities. Can you break 
down how that will work? I believe there’s some level 4 beds and 
there are other people who may be even outpatients and get 
therapy, but can you run through the list of people who will be 
able to use it, the number of level 4 beds and the number of 
people who will be able to use the facility? 
 
And also for a level 4 individual in this centre, will they pay a 
going flat rate the same as other level 4 patients, or will it be 
based on the fact of being 65 or under 65? And maybe once you 
outline that, then I’ll have other questions that will come out of 
that, if you understand me, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the payment would be for the rehab 
beds. Let me explain it to you first. It’s funded through the 
Saskatchewan hospital services plan, the same as the Wascana 
Hospital is now, so there’d be no change there. 
 
For rehab beds, of course, there’d be no charge at all. For level 
4s it would be the same as in any other special care home. Then 
there’ll be some people that are responsibilities of DVA 
(department of veterans affairs), and we would charge them for 
the amount for their individuals. 
 
The number of beds would be 90 rehab beds, 160 level 4 beds, 
66 DVA beds, coming to 316; and then 70 hospice beds, or that 
would be workers’ compensation beds, for a total of 376. 
 
As well, there will be some outreach services, similar . . . I 
suppose the easiest way for me to describe those are similar to 
the outreach services from the children’s rehab centre, or 
formerly the Alvin Buckwold centre in Saskatoon, which will 
outreach to the southern part of the province here, where we 
haven’t had that capability as well as perhaps around Saskatoon. 
And those services, of course, are provided free also. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The outreach service, have you got any 
detail on how that will work? Will there be any offices, or not 
particularly the offices, but hospitals involved in the program as 
I would envisage? And I know what was discussed at one time is 
that the hospital here would act as the hub of a wheel, and then 
you would have other hospitals that would act as centres for 
rehab, and that we would put in training or facilities and people 
who would help them out with that kind of work. Can you give 
us a little explanation on how that outreach program will work? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we have funded a mobile pediatric 
unit which will be going around throughout the southern part of 
the province, and there’ll be a very close working relationship 
with hospitals, for example, where there are rural therapists, 
things of this nature, or early childhood intervention programs. 
But if your question was, have we designated beds per se in 
certain rural hospitals, no, we haven’t. But there will be a very 
close working relationship. As you understand, people may be in 
these hospitals that have to come in here for a while and then go 
back to those hospitals. Early intervention for children with 
disabilities will be in close consultation and co-operation with 
these chapters that are around the province. So I guess, in answer 
to your question, certainly there will be a very close liaison, but 
as far as designating certain beds — no, we haven’t done that at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the level 4 funding, I want to come 
back to that just for a moment on a point of clarification. As I 
understand it, a person over the age of 65 in a level 4 bed would 
pay 400-some-odd dollars, 470-some, if you would give me that 
number. But for somebody who’s under the age of 65, what 
would they pay for a level 4 bed at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figure’s 495, and it would the same 
irregardless of age. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have an amendment to the Bill that I’d 
like to put forward at this time, and it comes from the Provincial 
Auditor . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. I can read it off to 
you and then give you my copy if you want, so you can have time 
to look it over. And it says: 
 

Amend section 16 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out subsection (1) and substituting the 
following: 
 
(1) On or before June 30 immediately following each fiscal 
year of the board, the board shall cause to be prepared a 
statement of the revenue and expenditures of the board for 
that fiscal year, and a statement respecting the assets and 
liabilities of the board as of March 31st of that fiscal year; 
(b) by striking out “and the auditor’s report” in the second 
line of section 2; (c) by striking out “their” in the third line 
of section 2 and substituting “its’; and (d) by striking out 
“and report” in the third line of section 3. 

 
And basically, I think, what this meant was that we had in the 
Bill the need for the auditor’s report, and the auditor says that’s 
not necessary because he’ll do it routinely in any regard. But I 
would be pleased to give this to you and give you time to look it 
over. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I must interrupt proceedings to bring 
to the attention of the House that the Minister of Health is piloting 
a Bill through the House and has his  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1137 
 

officials present. I note that the Minister of Justice also has his 
officials present, and that is not in the tradition of the House. I 
would ask the Minister of Justice to remove his officials from the 
House until this Bill is completed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to ask the minister: I understand 
him to say that he’s contacted the auditor about this change and 
that he has agreed to it. And if he would just confirm that, then I 
think we can just move along with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll send you over the letter from the 
auditor. He contacted us about it, but certainly. 
 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 17 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The item of business before the House now 
is Bill No. 15. However, before I do that, I should just like to 
indicate to the Minister of Justice that I regret that I did not notice 
his officials in the House, and we could have avoided the 
interruption. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I would like to introduce the officials that 
have already been discussed in this Assembly. Lorelle 
Schoenfeld and Ron Hewitt are with me. They’re both Crown 
solicitors. They’ll be assisting me on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have some question, Mr. Chairman. I’ve got an 
important report here, a notice I had to . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, you have indicated in your brief comments in 
introduction of second reading of the Bill that this was necessary 
because of the new economic development projects going on. I 
sort of challenge the merits or the veracity of that statement 
because there hasn’t been very much economic activity going on 
under your regime. 
 
(1600) 
 
But I may say to you, Mr. Minister, that in view of the fact that 
we are heading for an election as soon as you have the nerve, or 
the Deputy Premier or the Premier has the nerve to call an 
election, I do think that we will be needing this Bill, because once 
again Saskatchewan will have economic growth and 
development. I want to also extend my sympathy to the members 
of your staff for your impropriety of inviting them to the House 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I don’t believe that it’s up to 
the member form Quill Lakes to comment on the presence or lack 
of presence of the officials of the Minister of Justice. I believe 
that that topic is closed, and let is remain that way. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to extend to the members of the staff our 
sympathies . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It isn’t necessary for the member from Quill 
Lakes to clarify anything to the minister’s staff. It has nothing to 
do with Bill 15, and I instruct him to remain exactly on Bill 15. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As I was saying, Mr. Minister . . . As I indicated, 
I have some sympathies for the staff, but I’ll get on to the main 
purpose of the Bill. 
 
You indicate, Mr. Minister, that Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada draft a uniform Bill to serve as a model Act, and what I 
want to ask you is: to your knowledge, is the Act which we have 
here presented to the Assembly similar to any and all details with 
other Acts that have, in fact, been passed in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. It’s primarily the same as what other 
provinces have either passed or are presently looking at, and the 
member should avail himself of the opportunity to read the Bill. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ll tell you, I have read the Bill, and I will 
make it perfectly clear that I think I have a better understanding 
than the minister, who doesn’t know whether he can have his 
staff in when the other minister’s in or not . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I have already indicated to the 
member from Quill Lakes that any references to the presence of 
the minister’s staff are not permitted in the discussion of this Bill, 
and I would like him to remain within the bounds of the debate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As I was saying, you indicate that several 
provinces already enacted the legislation. Could you indicate 
what provinces indeed have similar legislations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I’ll clarify my 
earlier comment about the necessity of the member looking at the 
Bill. He’ll see if he opens to page 2 that the clauses are actually 
taken from the convention, which has been acceded to. The other 
provinces are in the process of passing, or have already passed, 
the required legislation similar to what we have before us. 
 
British Columbia has passed theirs; Ontario is just in the process 
of passing theirs; Nova Scotia, I believe, has already passed their 
legislation. It’s very similar to ours. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is it necessary for all the provinces to have 
passed first, in respect, before Canada signs the accord? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The provinces themselves have to join 
and sign in order to make this type of legislation effective, 
because any particular arbitration award affects a particular 
provincial jurisdiction. So as a result, it will be necessary for the 
provinces to agree and pass the required legislation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Under the Act you have the definition of 
“contracting state.” Is each individual province detailed as a 
contracting state, or is it done on behalf of the individual 
provinces by the federal government? 
 
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1138 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — For the purposes of the effect of the Act, 
or enforcement proceedings, the contracting state would be the 
individual province — in this case, Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered 
Accountants Act and The Certified Public Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I move the Bill now be read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the Establishment and 
Operation of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre for the 

Provision of Rehabilitation and Extended Care Services in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I move this Bill now be read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
(1615) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism and Small Business 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, the last couple of sessions in your 
department we’ve been talking about the provincial climate, the 
business climate that’s out in the province. And you’ve been 
reluctant to admit your government’s failure. 
 
I think what we need to get from you . . . And you were talking 
about 3,000-and-some business starts and you gave me the stack 
of press clippings that you’ve kept since you formed the 
government back in ’82. And I looked at those press clippings, 
Mr. Minister. And there’s something that struck me quite unique, 
and that was that likely for every new business that opened, it 
really was a change of name, or at the expense of another one. 
 
And I suppose in some areas the down-town business people 
complain about a shopping mall, and the shopping mall, how it 
distracts — when you get to that size of business — how the 
shopping mall distracts from the main street. And consequently 
what a main street business will do is, he’ll close down and he’ll 
move out to a shopping mall type of an attitude. That’s one 
example of it. 
 
But have you any stats or numbers in the area over and above, 
the bankruptcies? You know, the bankruptcies, you felt, wasn’t a 
severe problem. You felt you could cope with it. You thought 
that the increase from an average of 80, doing our 11 years in 
office, to an average of 300 during your years in office wasn’t 
bad, that you could live with 300 because of the 3,000-and-some 
new ones. 
 
But can your staff pull out the stats and give me some numbers 
on how many have closed? How many businesses have decided 
to shut down, that were in operation, and now all of a sudden 
aren’t there? Have you numbers that would indicate those that 
didn’t necessarily wait till they were bankrupt but decided to just 
shut their doors and make a sale? 
 
I was driving down Albert Street today, and I saw a Cat with a 
bit ball knocking down a former business place that we used to 
enjoy eating at in. There’s a number of those happening across 
the province. 
 
And one of the reasons that’s happened . . . And I thought you’d 
be interested in sharing half of a napkin with me. And a 
proprietor from a restaurant sat down at our table and he told me 
why people are having trouble operating in businesses under your 
government, under the terms where you say that things are so 
great. And I’m going to have a little trouble deciphering this. I 
should have taken time to write this out on a foolscap and do a 
little better job. 
 
But right off the top, he pays $500 for his licence to sell liquor. I 
think that’s pretty standard; that hasn’t change. He has that one 
there. That’s about the same. The next one, though, is twice what 
it was just two years ago; $2,400 for his insurance — that’s 
double. 
 
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1139 
 

Forty-eight hundred dollars is another line. I’ll tell you, these are 
the taxes he pays. He pays a $4,600 property tax; and $2,400 
insurance on his business. And then the only one that stayed 
constant — the only one that stayed constant. His taxes on a small 
premise, with about a 100 and some seats — I didn’t count them. 
I should have looked at the licence when you come in the door, 
but I’ll look next time I go back there some time next week. 
 
But he paid $16,800 this year to the government to stay in 
business — $16,800. And he’s saying that just four years ago he 
got those same services in the same premise — in the same 
premise — for less than $8,000. How do you explain that you’re 
creating a climate for the small-business man? How do you create 
a climate for the small-business man when you’ve doubled the 
amount he’s paying to you in taxes and insurance? 
 
I think that tells you who those business failures are out there. 
And I just thought you’d be interested in this half of the napkin. 
It’s not in my own writing. I started writing them down. I wasn’t 
getting the numbers right, so he took it and wrote them on there 
for me. And he’s very concerned, and he said, can you turn this 
around? He says, can you make it possible for an average, small, 
ordinary entrepreneur to make a buck like we used to be able to? 
 
When I was in business I made a buck, was able to turn a profit. 
And I got into politics because a right-wing government like you 
guys made it impossible for me to survive between ’64 and ’71. 
It was impossible to make a buck. You had to be a friend of the 
government’s to survive. 
 
I know what making a buck’s all about. We only had about 40 
guys working for us; I had a payroll of about that. It wasn’t a big 
business. It was a small business. 
 
But I want to tell you that it’s tough to survive under this 
open-for-big-business government because the little guy feels 
you’re slamming the door in his face with these hefty tax 
increases, and it’s a tough time to operate. So I’d like you to do 
two things: tell me how you expect these guys to survive under 
this severe tax load, plus the fact that they are now bearing an 
additional debt of more than $9,000 each person in their 
household for this big deficit you’ve created in the province? 
They feel responsible; they’re going to have to pay that debt back 
besides. So there’s a real complicated problem there, and I’m 
trying to bring this thing to a head and bring it together so we can 
see your estimates wound up here so we can get on to some other 
areas. 
 
But how do you account for, number one, the amount of business 
failures over and above the bankruptcies? Those guys that said, 
like this: let’s get a cat in here with a ball and chain; let’s knock 
the thing down and do something else; it’s not paying; we can’t 
survive under your government — how many of those were there 
around that did it because they didn’t like this tax load? They 
said, I’m working for the government. I’m a slave to the 
government. 
 
And you have press releases that I shared with you the  

other day that put this red tape and this big tax right at the top of 
the list. But first of all, give us how many have decided to call it 
quits because they can’t afford to operate under your 
administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the member 
has attempted to make a number of points. I’ll try to respond to 
them, and I’ll try to respond to them briefly. First of all, I want 
to emphasize that that tremendous sheaf of clippings that I sent 
you is only a portion of the clippings that we have available to 
indicate material on the number of new businesses that have 
formed in the province. 
 
I emphasize again the doom and gloom rhetoric of the party 
opposite. Less than 1 per cent of the businesses in the province 
experience bankruptcy on an annual basis, less than 1 per cent; 
one of the best levels in Canada today. 
 
I cannot give the member opposite the number of people who 
have closed their businesses without declaring bankruptcy. The 
Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs may have that 
detailed information; I rather doubt it. I can tell him that there are 
today in excess of 4,000 more businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan than there was when we came to government in 
1982. I emphasize that again: there has been a net increase, net 
increase of 4,000 businesses in the last four years. 
 
So while I can’t provide him information on the reasons and the 
changes, as some businesses simply change names, there are 
numerous reasons why certain businesses exist in different 
locations or under different titles . . . But the meaningful fact is 
that there has been a net increase of 4,000 jobs. 
 
In terms of the taxation question, I’m rather amazed that he’d 
raise it. First of all I should point out — I don’t think the 
committee needs to have it indicated — but insurance can hardly 
be classed as a tax, and it’s certainly not something that’s paid to 
government. However, if the member chooses to indicate that, 
that’s certainly his right. 
 
Every tax that he mentioned was either in place or put in place 
by the NDP government. It’s only in the last four years that 
business people have seen any type of reduction or elimination 
of taxes, and I’ll mention some of those in a moment. 
 
The prime question, I think, in the minds of business men, falls 
within the business tax as a second level of property taxation and, 
of course, the members opposite again will know full well that it 
was their administration, the NDP administration, that changed 
the assessment formula in order to put the majority or a more 
significant level of taxation on the back of businesses. It was 
clearly the objective, and any man in business in this province 
now understands that. The method of phasing that in was a direct 
attempt to make sure that the heat built in different areas of the 
province at once. 
 
I’m sure that members know that in Moose Jaw there was 
considerable problems in early, because they were one of the 
first. We have, since being here, completed that assessment. We 
will look this term, I’m sure, at  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1140 
 

legislation, to put in place an independent assessment authority 
which my colleague, the Minister of Finance, talked about in his 
budget. That will give that assessment authority to the level of 
government where it, in fact, belongs — the local community 
government that is most closely aligned to the people. 
 
And so I think that, while we inherited a tremendous problem, 
the people of the province understand the rationale under which 
that assessment was introduced. They understand what has 
happened, and they understand the solution that we are starting 
to put in place. But for a member of the NDP to raise the issue of 
taxes, and particularly business tax assessment, takes some small 
degree of nerve. 
 
Just on the basis of taxes, there have been several steps taken to 
reduce the tax burden, or there have been targeted measures. I 
would indicate the initial venture capital program and recent 
expansions to that program which we have talked about; the 
elimination of small-business manufacturing processing 
deductions; the elimination of sales tax on research equipment; 
elimination of provincial income tax on new businesses; and the 
provincial sales tax changes. And I emphasize that word 
“elimination,” because in the lexicon of the NDP, when taxes 
were discussed, the word elimination I don’t think was ever heard 
in this province. 
 
That is totally a new concept in a . . . I’m sure that business 
people across the province understand that, and I think that the 
net increase of 4,000 businesses that we talked about is clear 
evidence that there is an air of optimism that is completely 
different than the gloom and doom mentality that is being 
forward. And I venture to say that the business community in this 
province will never forgive the NDP for the devious taxation 
practices and the assessment introduction that they saw fit to 
introduce into this province. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would like to tell you, that 
you show me one survey during ’71 to ’81 that had headlines like 
this, and this is a recent one; this is this year: 
 

Tax burdens worries small business most. The tax burden 
on small business is the primary concern of Saskatchewan 
business people for the second consecutive quarter, says 
respondents to a national survey. 

 
And Saskatchewan — that’s Saskatchewan — the number one 
problem by 58 per cent of the respondents was the tax burden. 
And the number two problem was the government regulation and 
red tape. 
 
(1630) 
 
You talk a fine line. You talk a beautiful story. If I could hear the 
same message in my riding as I do from you, everything would 
be rosy. But right across the piece business men are telling me, 
come on over and see me. And I’m going around from door to 
door. Car dealers in Assiniboia are calling me over and I come 
and visit them. And you know what they’re doing? They’re 
giving me a little donation for my election platform. And the 
number  

one question they’re asking is, when’s the election? We’ve got to 
get rid of these guys. We can’t afford them. The number one tax 
concern, the number one concern that worries the business men. 
 
If you’d be a business man and would listen to them and could 
link and communicate with the business men that are out there, 
you would hear that message loud and clear. Like the 
entrepreneur that runs his little restaurant told me on the side of 
his . . . and wrote down the side of my napkin when I was having 
dinner, those guys are coming around and saying, taxes are the 
issue. You’ve got them on the ropes on the estimates, let them 
know how bad our taxes are. Surely they can do something about 
it. That’s what the business men are telling me right across the 
piece, Mr. Minister, and that’s the number one concern of the 
business men. 
 
You have no interest of helping the average entrepreneur. What 
the heck! We’re going to give our money to Peter Pocklington. 
We’re going to give our money to Peter Pocklington. We’re 
going to give Weyerhaeuser a $234 million deal, but we don’t 
have a break for the small-business men; we don’t have break for 
the car dealer; we don’t have a break for the restaurant owner, we 
don’t have a break for the small contractor; but we’ve got lots of 
bucks. If you’re from Alberta or Ontario or United States or 
wherever, you come in and we’ll give you bucks for a 
megaproject. Don’t do anything that anybody else is doing. 
Come in and compete with the guys that are there. Take over the 
business that’s there. Create not one new job, not one new job in 
P.A. But you give them $235 million worth . . . Or you gave it to 
them for $235 million, when you know it’s worth a third more 
than that. Give them a discount on it — not a dollar down, not a 
dollar down — and yet you say that you’re helping them. You’re 
not helping the small entrepreneur, I want to tell you. They’re 
coming to us in droves; in droves. 
 
I want to say, it’s great. Keep up the good work, my friend, 
because we appreciate that kind of political support and that kind 
of political encouragement. 
 
I got a message to pop into a car dealer’s place and it sounded 
urgent. And I got over there and I got into the office and I 
thought, I’m going to get this big lecture on some deal. And he 
had a cheque. He says, here, we want you to know that we’re 
behind you this time; never voted NDP before . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The member is introducing 
topics that have nothing to do with the estimates of Small 
Business. The donations, political contributions you get from 
your constituents, has nothing to do with the estimates of 
Tourism and Small Business, and I would like you to refrain from 
introducing anything to do with elections. Carry on. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well my friend, Mr. Chairman, if that’s the way 
you want to run the rules and use your arrogant majority, I’ll stay 
away from it. But how can I show the minister that the business 
men are unhappy? How do they show that they’re unhappy? Tell 
me. There’s only one way to determine if a business man is happy 
with his programs, or isn’t happy. I’m going to get into the details 
of the budget. But I’m telling you this budget that is geared  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1141 
 

. . . And we talked about it in question period today — $2.25 
million last year on advertising. This year, this year that number 
is jumping away up, an increase to almost over 4 million bucks 
on communications in that one department alone. 
 
Business men don’t want to hear your garbage. They don’t want 
to hear your bragging about what you are saying. They want to 
see the facts. And the only way I can show the minister in real 
terms of how happy the business men are is their relationship to 
one party or the other. 
 
The people that you thought . . . I can see why you’re sensitive 
and don’t want me to bring up that other aspect of it. I can see 
why you’re sensitive. But I want to tell you that when you look 
at the communication budget for this year, instead of being 2.25 
million like we said, it’s up to 4.25 million — $4.25 million on 
communications. 
 
Tell them what a good job we’re doing. That’s what you want to 
do; talk about doing a good job in business. You don’t want to 
say the results of that talk. Well I’m going to tell you what the 
results are. I mentioned them before. That isn’t the only place 
that happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s not the only place 
that happened. 
 
And you look at page 97 in your book. Look at page 97, number 
8, under communications: what is it? What is the number? — 
$4.25 million for communication for one department. That’s half 
as much as we spent in the entire government on advertising prior 
to you taking office. That was enough to run 25 departments. 
You’re spending that on one. 
 
And you know, the sad part is, Dome Advertising is getting the 
bulk of that money. The advertising firm that’s doing the 
advertising for the Tory party is getting half of this money — half 
of it — the same firm that’s running your election. Now I know 
why you don’t want me to talk about politics. Now I know why 
you don’t want me to talk about politics when there’s $4.25 
million in communication, and Dome Advertising is getting it. 
 
And who did the ad for the former minister? Who did the little 
pamphlet? I wish I had brought it with me. I don’t know if some 
of my colleagues have the former minister of Tourism’s little 
pamphlet that was done by Dome and we got it. And it was done 
by Dome Advertising, the same people that got $1.5 million last 
year for communications. 
 
In there any conflict of interest? Is there anything there that 
smells like Sinc Stevens in Ottawa? Is there any conflict at all? 
Does Dome Advertising have a blind trust when they do the 
political advertising for yours? 
 
I would like the little minister to go and get that little paper and 
show me where Dome did it. It’s a slick little piece of advertising. 
But they’re the same ones — they’re the same ones that are 
getting half of this money. 
 
No wonder you don’t want to talk about politics. No wonder you 
don’t want me to say what the small-business men are doing and 
how they’re going to vote. I know why you’re getting noisy over 
on the other side. And I know why you don’t care about how 
much noise you’re making  

over there. You never seem to worry about that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Can’t hear you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I guess you can’t hear me. You don’t want to hear. 
The member from Saskatoon — where’s Glauser running out 
there? — the member for Mayfair isn’t running again. He’s got 
your guys’ number. He knows where you’re coming from and he 
knows what’s going to happen. 
 
And you know, you can tell me all you want that this isn’t the 
platform to talk about politics. You can stand up in your chair 
and say, don’t talk about politics in here. Well I’ll tell you, we 
talk about it when we get out of here. We’ll talk about it when 
we get out of here. 
 
And the business men are happy, the business men are happy that 
there’s going to be an election in June. They’re excited about it 
and this here shows why they should be. This shows why they 
should be. In the year we talked about, the communications 
budget was estimated at 3 million. By ’84-85, $3 million; ’85-86, 
3.3; and ’86-87, 4.25 — $4.25 million for communication. 
 
And the minister wants to stand in his seat and say that this isn’t 
blatantly political — blatantly political to hire Dome Advertising 
to do, when it was 3 million, $1.5 million to half of that at 4.25. 
You’re going to get quite a few pamphlets printed for that, my 
dear friend. I don’t like that. I don’t like that inference at all. I 
think when a department that spends that kind of money on 
communication hires the firm Dome Advertising to do their 
communication and their advertising for them and placing their 
ads, when that same firm is doing their political advertising, that 
is blatantly wrong. That is blatantly wrong because there’s a 
conflict of interest there. 
 
There’s a conflict of interest there and I think that the minister 
has some responsibility — has some responsibility — and that’s 
why the care dealers and the restaurant owners are writing out 
their little pieces of paper. That’s why they’re coming to us and 
telling us, we can’t afford to operate under these guys. They’re 
raising the price of our operations. Insurance from Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance has doubled. Their municipal taxes have 
doubled; their property taxes have doubled; their business taxes 
have more than doubled. And to expect a small restaurant owner 
to pay $16,800 off the top to the government . . . And he doesn’t 
like that being called government; it’s all government agencies, 
every one of them, every one of them. That red tape is what’s 
frustrating business men across Saskatchewan. That’s where 
you’re not providing a climate. 
 
I worked in a number of towns across Saskatchewan in my day, 
and that has to do with, there was opportunity for business men 
around. There was opportunity in those days. And all of a sudden 
we got a right-wing government elected and those opportunities 
are gone — they were gone. There were no more jobs around. 
Contractors went out of business. They didn’t show up on a 
bankruptcy list. They didn’t show up on the bankruptcy numbers. 
And the minister doesn’t even keep track of how many 
businesses  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1142 
 

closed their doors in his term of office — doesn’t even keep track 
of that number to decide why would these guys close. 
 
Surveys are done and published in the papers. National surveys 
are done that indicate that tax burden’s the number one problem. 
And he doesn’t even understand that that’s a problem — doesn’t 
understand that that’s a problem, doesn’t understand that that’s a 
barrier to your operation. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, that is in answer to your question on how 
many businesses have started since you’re around. Well I 
suppose when you call business starts the little operation where 
now we’re teaching young people about business practices, and 
they get in and they call it a business when they’re shovelling 
snow off somebody’s driveway or mowing somebody’s lawn — 
that’s another new business that’s open. It’s great; the young 
people learn some business tricks. 
 
But the area I wanted to talk about, and the numbers I wanted you 
to compare, Mr. Minister, are as they relate to the budget — and 
if I’ll lay my fingers on that paper — as they relate to the budget 
and the sheets that came from public accounts. And I had some 
numbers. I wanted you to explain to me why the discrepancy in 
those two numbers. 
 
I don’t know. My friend, Mr. Glauser, I’m not . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member knows that he is not to 
use the name of members in the House. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Did I use a name? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Yes, you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, maybe while the 
member is looking for whatever piece of paper there is, I will try 
to respond to some of what we just heard. I’m sure there are a 
large number of business men in Saskatchewan who are very 
interested in the comments of the member opposite, and I hope 
there’s still some paint left on the wall after that session. 
 
First of all, if I remember the order in which the supposed points 
were made, the first was a question of . . . wanted to be shown 
some survey results from their period in government. I would 
point out, of course, that during their period in government the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business didn’t operate in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When we came to government we were of the assumption that 
they had shredded all the information they had on business. Since 
then I have had the opportunity to travel around the province and 
talk to rather large turn-outs of business people in 30 different 
areas, and they told me that it wasn’t that they shredded the 
information; they never had any. 
 
The NDP was not prone to discuss matters with business people. 
We have been told that we have spent more time in the short four 
or five months that I’ve been the minister of this portfolio talking 
to business than they did in the 11 years. And that’s not to say 
anything about the time my  

colleague, the member from Regina North, spent discussing 
many issues with business men when he was here. 
 
So I think the reason there are no survey results from your period 
in office is that nobody in government ever spoke to business in 
those days. 
 
(1645) 
 
Business men told us in those meetings that it was something . . . 
quite a change in the last four years to have members of 
government, members of cabinet, come and speak to them in 
their own communities, to solicit their input, to ask for advice, to 
ask . . . share their problems with them, and to work collectively 
together to see if there were some solutions. And I think that’s 
significantly different than what we heard from the member 
opposite. 
 
When his colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, stands up and 
suggests that the women in business conference is in fact a waste 
of money, I think that that would indicate the level of 
sophistication and understand that that party has as far as 
business is concerned. 
 
And once again, once again in that extended comment that we 
heard from the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, he very 
clearly — very clearly — stated that his party was against the 
project that will lead to significant jobs and opportunities in 
Prince Albert, and of course I refer to the paper-mill that is being 
built up there and is part of the sale of the present facility to 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
It seems to me that there’s a responsibility on the part of the party 
opposite to get their story together. The leader of the party goes 
to Prince Albert and indicates — and I could fish out the press 
release; I won’t bother — that in fact it is an excellent project and 
his party is totally behind it. 
 
The very day that he’s making that statement, the member from 
Quill Lakes is standing in his place and suggesting that their party 
is against every major project that’s going on. 
 
And then today, in fact two days later — two days later — the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg just now got up and 
suggested that he was against that project, that it was somehow 
bad. It was bad for the people of the province; bad for Prince 
Albert; bad for the trees. I mean, sooner or later that party has to 
get together and make a clear statement. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The minister is attempting to 
make a statement but from all the yelling from opposition 
benches to my left, I have difficulty hearing what he’s saying. 
Order, order, order! Are you challenging the ruling of the 
Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as I was saying — and 
I’ll leave the issue — but I really think it is time that the 
statements that are made in this House begin to bear some 
resemblance to the statements that are made outside this House. 
I think that it’s time that the statements  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1143 
 

that are made in North Battleford were the same as the statements 
that are made in Estevan when they discuss the various projects. 
And I will leave that issue for the time being. 
 
The question was asked why in fact we spend money on 
advertising. I’d like the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to 
listen to this. We advertise tourism advertising to protect the 
investment in 2,000 small businesses in this province — 2,000 
small businesses who directly depend on those tourism dollars 
that flow into the province as a result of advertising. 
 
Just for the record — and I think it’s important to clarify this — 
the member has tossed out the number $4.2 million. I would 
indicate again that that is the entire communications budget. I 
wish it were, Mr. Chairman; I wish we had that kind of money to 
spend. The advertising budget is in fact $2.3 million. It is the 
third lowest of any province in Canada in terms of tourism 
advertising, but it is a vast change since what happened when the 
previous administration was there. 
 
The department of tourism was tucked away in the Department 
of Parks. Tourism . . . Their biggest job was to make sure that the 
family members of the member from Quill Lakes got a job on the 
park gates in the summer-time. But there was no understanding 
of the commercial impact of tourism on the economy of the 
province. And I think that the simple fact that tourism is now part 
of the Department of Small Business indicates the emphasis that 
we place on that aspect. 
 
And we’ve talked about advertising. I will give you one very 
simple number. Maybe it can bring some meaning to the thing, if 
the members opposite would try to control themselves so we 
could carry on here. For every dollar, Mr. Chairman, for every 
dollar that is spent on tourism advertising, the province gets 
$12.40 in direct expenditures by tourists coming to the province. 
 
I’ll repeat that number once more for the member for Assiniboia. 
For every dollars of advertising that the province spends, we 
realize $12.40 in direct expenditures by tourists coming to the 
province. 
 
And I want to make one more point about advertising the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Again the political grandstanding 
with the comments about Dome Advertising. 
 
Just to clarify for the member of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Dome 
Advertising is the agent of record. We pay Dome; Dome then 
places all the ads. And the money goes to Reader’s Digest and I 
indicate the full-page ad in Reader’s Digest that was paid by 
Dome; Saturday Night, again a very attractive and very popular 
ad on Saskatchewan in Saturday Night paid out of that money; 
Skyword, The Fisherman . . . I could go through the large list of 
publications. 
 
And that does not involve the electronic media advertising which 
is proving very popular. And as I indicated in question period, 
that electronic advertising will be put on display here in the 
province tomorrow in  

both Saskatoon and Regina, so the people of the province will 
see and understand exactly what is happening in that area. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s very clear that we have come a 
significant distance in terms of the emphasis we’re placing on 
tourism and the results that we are getting from tourism. We have 
a long way to go; we are still the third lowest province in terms 
of advertising. We hope over time to continue to improve that 
because, as I indicated again in question period, the potential for 
returns to the economy from tourism are probably as great as in 
any industry we have. By the year 2000, tourism will be the 
single largest industry in the world. It will be the single largest 
employer in North America. 
 
We have seen a constant increase in tourism jobs — between 2 
and 3,000 every year of the last four — and we expect that trend 
to continue through good and bad times. So I would suggest that 
the money that is spent on advertising of tourism is some of the 
best spent dollars that are spent by this government or any other. 
And once again that simple fact: for every dollar that is spent on 
advertising, $12.40 is spent in this province by the tourists that 
come here. And I think that number, as much as anything, 
explains the rationale behind it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One short explanation: how did you arrive at that 
number, that $1 reaps you 12.40? What did you use for a basis of 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, every year we 
do studies. If the member will check — well we can get into that 
later — the number of studies that I presented him we have done; 
we do studies every year tracking the results of what we have 
done. It’s a simple process. Anyone can do it. 
 
We could talk about results from the tourism industry. U.S. 
automobile entries into Saskatchewan for one or more nights — 
and a significant factor — increased by 4 per cent over 1984; a 
continued increase. 
 
Visitations to national and provincial historic sites increased by 
21.3 per cent — one-fifth increase in visitations. 
 
Convention activity in Saskatchewan increased significantly 
over 1984. This is important. Regina hosted 47,047 convention 
delegates in 1985 — a 22 per cent increase over the previous 
year. And convention expenditures in Regina during 1985 — 
convention expenditures alone — totalled $18.6 million, an 
increase of a whopping 34 per cent. Convention activity in 
Saskatoon was up 14 per cent as well. 
 
Most hotel-motel operators reported increased occupancy rates 
in their establishments during the summer season by at least a 
minimum of 5 per cent. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan drive-in and fly-in outfitter camps 
experienced, on average, an increased demand of 15 per cent. 
 
Departmental advertising had a major impact in 1985. The 
programs generated a response of 16,125 business  
  



 
May 7, 1986 

 

1144 
 

replies, an increase of 213 per cent, an increase of 213 per cent 
in inquiries to the department about tourism opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Telephone inquiries from Canadian provinces were up 133 per 
cent — I’m sure the members will be interested in this — 133 per 
cent; while telephone inquiries from the U.S. were up by 145 per 
cent. All those numbers, direct increases of the advertising 
programs that the members opposite seem to be so very much 
against. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, I think that when the member asks where we 
get these numbers, these standard collection procedures that 
we’ve been going through since this tourism section was rolled 
in with small business, now I can understand why the member 
has some difficulty understanding it. Because when tourism was 
closeted in the Department of Parks, worrying about manning a 
park gate, not advertising this province, not encouraging people 
to come to this province, doing nothing on the economic side of 
tourism, that type of information gathering would not have taken 
place. And I think it’s important that the committee understand 
that these results demonstrate very clearly that the numbers in the 
blue book are very much justified. 
 
As I indicated a couple of times today, I wish that there were 
money to make that budget larger. Hopefully over time there will 
be, but we are definitely moving in the right direction, and 
tourism opportunities in this province are increasing by a very, 
very significant number. 
 
Mr. Engel: — It’s really interesting that, ask you a question — 
where do you get $1 equals $12.40? — and you get this big tirade 
of all these other numbers. Did you pull that one out of your hat, 
or what? 
 
But just in closing, I’d like to go through the former blue book. 
In communications, you estimated you’re going to spend 3.092 
million. You spent 3.229 million — an increase. But all the 
others: in subvote 9 you estimated you’d spent 326,000; you 
spent 264,000. In employment and development you estimated 
you spent 1.4 million. Guess what? Fifty-six thousand dollars 
was spent instead of 1.4 million on employment and 
development. 
 
I’m supposed to trust this blue book. I’m supposed to trust this 
blue book when last year you estimated employment and 
development . . . How many thousand are there on welfare that 
could be working? Sixty-five thousand people looking for work, 
Mr. Chairman. And in employment and development they had a 
budget in there of 1.4 million last year. We said, great; spend the 
1.4 million; let’s find some jobs. How much did they spend? 
Fifty-six thousand dollars out of 1.4 million. You can’t even 
think of a fraction because it’s so little — $56,000 of 1.4 million. 
 
Saskatchewan small industry development. Let’s get some 
business going. Let’s develop industry and keep business alive. 
That was the area that I was really concerned with. On an $81,000 
estimate, what did you spend, Mr. Minister? Eight thousand 
dollars — 10 per cent of what he estimated, Mr. Chairman. I 
think if I go through this . . . Industrial technical assistance, 
$175,000 budget in last year’s blue book — spent 70,000, less 
than a third. 
 
I think we have information here, Mr. Chairman. I want to talk 
about Dun’s bulletin, the bulletin about Dun and Bradstreet, and 

what it really said about Saskatchewan’s small business. I’ve got 
some issues here I’ve got to talk about tomorrow. I think, Mr. 
Chairman, that being it’s this close to 5 o’clock, I move we rise 
and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


