


















































June 25, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 25, 1986 
 
 

2301 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s my privilege this afternoon to introduce 
to this Assembly a group of Girl Guides from the Dinsmore 
district. There are five guides accompanied by their instructors, 
Linda Lloyd and Cathy Newby. They’re seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery, and I’d like the members to join me in welcoming them to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce through you 
to the Assembly today a group of students from St. Mary’s 
Elementary School in north-west Regina. They’re accompanied by 
Leslie Grant and Lillian Schroeder. They’ll be here for question 
period. Also I would like to welcome the parents that are with the 
group, and I’ll meet with you after question period in the 
members’ coffee room in the basement. We’ll see you then. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, and to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to introduce to you 
in the Speaker’s gallery Mr. Fred Androsoff, the reeve of the R.M. 
of Blaine Lake; Mr. Mike Dutchak, the mayor of Blaine Lake; Mr. 
Donald Hubbard, a councillor in the town of Blaine Lake, and 
Mrs. Eleanora Boyko, the administrator. 
 
These people are part of the pilot group for a senior citizens’ level 
3 and 4 nursing home, and they’re here to meet with the Minister 
of Health this afternoon. I hope that their stay here this afternoon 
during question period is entertaining and educational, and I will 
be meeting with them at 2:30 with the Minister of Health. I ask the 
members to please make them welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
minister responsible for the Devine government’s negotiations 
with the Weyerhaeuser corporation. Mr. Minister, on March 25, 
three months ago, your government announced a deal with the 
U.S. company, Weyerhaeuser. Your pre-election announcement 
— for clearly an election was imminent — was interesting, but we 
know that the election didn’t happen. Your March 25th statement 
said that the assets of PAPCO would be transferred to 
Weyerhaeuser who would pay over a 20-year period; now you say 
it’s 30 years. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this: on what basis did you make that 
announcement? Was it on the basis of a handshake with 
Weyerhaeuser, or was there a written  

agreement or statement of principles; was there something 
committed to writing before you made that announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there was . . . some basic 
principles have been agreed to, and those basic principles . . . the 
government and the company, Weyerhaeuser Canada, are still in 
agreement on those principles. Mr. Speaker, what we have here in 
this debate as it relates to the Weyerhaeuser deal is a classic case 
of the New Democratic Party being against the selling of any 
assets which they gathered unto themselves in government, 
gathered unto themselves while in government. And it’s a classic 
philosophical battle between them, who believe that everybody in 
the forest industry from the truck driver to the skidder operator to 
the trim-saw operator should be a government employee, and our 
position which says the government’s role is to be involved in 
forest management, and we will not give up on the forest 
management side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you tell us there was a signed agreement. You have 
provided us with schedule B, which is initialled, I presume on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and Weyerhaeuser. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you make available to the House the 
rest of that agreement — schedule A, schedule C, and the rest of 
the agreement? Or will you persist in giving speeches and denying 
the people of Saskatchewan the facts upon which you are 
disposing of $250 million worth of assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said in the House on 
several occasions, and I as well have said here today, that there 
was an agreement of basic principles upon which an agreement for 
the disposal of the assets of PAPCO and the assets, some of the 
assets, of Sask Forest Products, and for the construction of a 
brand-new paper-mill in Prince Alberta. 
 
There were some basic principles upon which an agreement would 
be structured. I have said that before; I say it once again here 
today. There was a memorandum of understanding between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the company — a standard 
business practice, I might add, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say once more, these people will not let this go. They do not 
want to let any aspect of their little empire go. But I will tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that must happen. It must happen for the basis of that 
industry and for that industry in the part of Saskatchewan that I 
represent. But it must happen for all of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it will happen, as it must. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you have admitted that there is an understanding. You 
have admitted that it’s in writing. You admitted that it was signed 
or initialled on behalf of the  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2302 
 
 

parties. You’ve given us part of it — schedule B. Why can’t you 
give us schedule A, schedule C, and the base agreement? 
 
What is so special about schedule B that the public can know 
about it? And what is so special about schedule A and schedule C 
that the public can’t know about it? Is it true, Mr. Minister, that the 
reason why you’re not giving us that is that the deal is even worse 
— even worse — than the one revealed by schedule B? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I reiterated in the House 
in committee, schedule B was given to you in a forthright way, 
and it’s exactly . . . and it’s the right. And schedule B is that 
portion of that basic agreement of principles which deals with an 
area which has been largely agreed to. There are many aspects of 
the negotiations which have not been agreed to in total, and in fact 
which have not come to a final agreement. The final agreement, as 
I have said, will be very large in nature, and there will be many, 
many, many pages — thousands of pages of that, and you know 
that — for a deal of half a billion dollars. 
 
I have given to the members what can be given, as I said I would. 
Mr. Speaker, I have given to the members more, far more, in a far 
more forthright way than . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. The 
members are continually hollering and yelling the last few days in 
this legislature until it’s impossible for the legislation to carry on 
its work. 
 
I might also advise the Assembly that today and yesterday my 
phone was ringing, from people who watch on television what’s 
happening here, and they are very disappointed with the operation 
of this Assembly. And I’m going to ask you to come to order so 
that this Assembly can do its work. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member says, why will 
you not release documents? I say, and I stand here and in front of 
the people of Saskatchewan and say we have provided more than 
they would ever have provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote, and I will quote from page 454 of 
Hansard on March 2, 1981: 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this, what I’m about to quote 
from, a former minister in the former NDP government, one Mr. 
Cowley, and it’s very relevant to this question as it relates to the 
negotiations. A question came on March 2, 1981, Mr. Speaker, 
from my colleague at that time, Mr. Rousseau . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I have cautioned the members 
several times now, and this is the last time. 
 
Order, the minister has not completed his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
ask questions, and I’m just trying to provide them an answer, and I 
will continue to do that. 
 

My colleague at that time, Mr. Rousseau, asked the following 
question on March 2, 1981: 
 

Would you mind advising the Assembly, Mr. Minister, what 
you paid for the Prince Albert pulp mill? Secondly, I 
understand the pulp mill is for sale. How much are you 
trying to sell it for? Two . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m going to 
caution the member for Regina North West and the member for 
Shaunavon that we just cannot allow this to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Two questions. Here is the answer, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Hon. Mr. Cowley at that time: 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member obviously doesn’t really 
want us to do very well because he wants us to negotiate in 
public. I’m not going to comment on the price that we’re 
asking for it . . . With respect to what we paid for it, we 
exercised our right of refusal. We paid, in effect, the price 
that the people who were going to acquire the P.A. pulp mill 
had offered . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Order, please. The member is too lengthy in his 
answer. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister after that lengthy, irrelevant answer. I have a question that 
deals with a sweetheart deal, and the Speaker has referred to phone 
calls, and I want to say that we have been getting literally 
hundreds of phone calls from angry constituents who are upset 
with this sweetheart deal. And they tell us to keep going at the 
government because they say that the information that you have 
given us, and by way of back . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say that the government 
members can yell all they want. I’m going to ask my question, and 
by way of background I want to say that the only facts the public 
have had released to them include that Weyerhaeuser will get the 
assets of PAPCO, including 7 million acres of prime commercial 
land, forest land — one-fifth of all the forest in Saskatchewan. 
Weyerhaeuser will pay nothing down, no cash up front for the 
assets. Weyerhaeuser can deduct from the principal it owes to the 
people of Saskatchewan any losses it incurs in the first three years. 
That’s an incredible provision by anyone’s estimation, and even 
after the end of the 30-year period Weyerhaeuser will not have to 
pay back the outstanding principal and interest in cash, but issue 
worthless paper. 
 
Now my question to the minister is: why, after you released this 
information, won’t you release the documents and signed 
agreements on which you based this sweetheart deal that you have 
outlined in schedule B? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 
and the rest of his colleagues would ask us to release information. 
What I have said, and what I will  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2303 
 
 

stand by now and tomorrow and the next day and whenever they 
want to talk about it, is that we have introduced more information 
than they ever did. 
 
That group bought this mill, Mr. Speaker. That group bought this 
mill and brought it into the public domain — they brought it into 
the public domain. Did they tell the public anything about the 
price they paid? Did they tell the public? did they table in this 
House the price? Even after the deal was closed, Mr. Speaker, 
even after the deal was closed, no, they did not. They did not. And 
their minister at the time, Mr. Cowley, said they would not 
negotiate in public, this is not a negotiating forum, and he also said 
this: 
 

What I want to say is that when the negotiations are 
complete, then we take a look, along with our partners, at 
what financial data we will make public. 

 
That’s a quote from the member, the former minister, Mr. Cowley, 
in their government. 
 
Now that Leader of the Opposition, those members, who were his 
colleagues sitting right here at that time, will sit here . . . and at 
that time they thought that was the right way to go. But now, 
sitting in opposition, everything is changed, and they say, we 
should negotiate in public, we should conduct business deals in 
public. Well I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have been . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the minister. I appreciate, 
Mr. Speaker, sitting him down twice in a row on irrelevant 
answers. 
 
A new question to the minister, and it deals with the notorious sort 
of people that you’re open-for-business philosophy is bringing to 
the province. And I refer to the Peter Pocklington sweetheart deal 
and the many people who have called us on that issue, including 
the editorial in the Prairie Messenger which outlines the problems 
they foresee with bring someone of the Peter Pocklington nature 
into the province. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, about the sweetheart deal 
you’ve arranged with Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, this good 
corporate citizen as you’ve referred to. Are you aware that 
Weyerhaeuser is currently involved in a violent strike at its 
American plants where more than 7,500 workers have gone off the 
job because the corporation is demanding roll-backs of $6 
Canadian per hour from their employees? Are you aware of that, 
and do you still continue to say that the sweetheart deal you’ve set 
up is in order to bring a good corporate citizen, who will, and we 
believe probably take away income from workers in northern 
Saskatchewan and out of the pockets of the business men in P.A. 
and surrounding area. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, the member will talk about labour 
relations that are happening elsewhere. I mean it’s a ridiculous 
analogy the member makes. He can say, the doctors are on strike, 
Mr. Speaker, in the province of Ontario. But we won’t be 
outlawing health care; that will not happen. And it’s the kind of 
analogy that member  

makes. 
 
What I say to the member is that Weyerhaeuser Canada 
corporation has a good record, and you can go, as many people 
from the city of Prince Albert did in recent weeks. People — 
representatives of the city of Prince Albert, the business 
community, and the elected representatives — were in Kamloops 
and met with many citizens of Kamloops who were unrelated 
totally to the Weyerhaeuser corporation and what they operate. 
And the reports that they got in every case were related to the kind 
of corporate citizen Weyerhaeuser is in that city where they have a 
major installation. And the people in Prince Albert who know this 
industry, who know and understand the benefits of this industry to 
their community and to the forested region know, they know and 
they’re very confident that Weyerhaeuser will be an excellent 
corporate citizen. 
 
One more point, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the question that the 
member asks, and that point is the following: he says that we will 
not release documents. Mr. Speaker, I say to you and to members 
of the House and to members of the public of Saskatchewan: we 
have been more forthright in providing information. The mere fact 
that that Bill is before the House attests to the fact that we are 
more forthright than they ever were. And what they say in 
opposition, once again, is so, so very different, in such contrast to 
what they did when they were in government; it’s obvious to 
everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — On behalf of the poor, humble Saskatchewan 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, who, in fact, before one piece of paper will 
come out of the paper-mill in Prince Albert, will in fact have 
approximately three-quarters of a billion dollars on the table, I ask 
the member from Meadow Lake if in that agreement there is any 
commitment from Weyerhaeuser to continue operating the 
paper-mill in spite of future losses. There’s no guarantee that 
paper-mill will make money either. And in fact if they do lose 
money, are they committed to continue with the operation, or is 
another socialist government in this province going to purchase 
that paper-mill, and the rest of this whole scenario back on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan and cost them another half a billion 
dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the short answer. You 
have seen the position of the socialists in this House and in this 
province. You’ve seen that. And because of that, there will be no 
opportunity for another socialist government to do anything for 
one good long time because they will not be in the government 
side. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is there anything 
in the agreement to commit Weyerhaeuser to a long term 
operation of their paper-mill and other acquisitions in this deal, in 
spite of the fact that they will, in fact, or they may, in fact, lose 
money on behalf of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
North West now advocates the status quo and the status quo being: 
is there any guarantee that the stand alone pulp-mill will not lose 
money. There certainly is not, Mr. Speaker, and the track record 
which I tabled in  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2304 
 
 

this House yesterday will show that that’s the case, that it will lose 
money. There’s no viability, Mr. Speaker, in this industry in 
Saskatchewan; there’s no viability without the addition of a 
paper-mill to that pulp-mill to integrate the facility. 
 
And the viability and the long-term of that industry is what must 
be and should be foremost on the minds of everybody who’s a 
responsible legislator in Saskatchewan. That should be the first 
thing because the viability industry means viability for the families 
who depend for their bread and butter upon that industry, and there 
are thousands of those people across the forested region of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They are on our minds, and that’s why this 
deal must go ahead. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In spite of the 
integrated operation, as the member from Meadow Lake indicates, 
if Weyerhaeuser continues to lose money — and presently in their 
Oregon operations they are closing plants because they’re losing 
money — do you have a long-term agreement that they will 
continue to employ those people and keep those plants open 
because of the sweetheart deal you’ve given them with respect to 
the other assets they’ve acquired. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser Canada 
corporation or Weyerhaeuser corporation, the parent company, has 
not been in the practice of losing money, and any record that you 
want to look at will show — any record that that member wants to 
look at will show — they have not been in the practice of losing 
money. Contrary, Mr. Speaker, to the practices of the former 
Government of Saskatchewan who was in the practice of losing 
money in this industry and in others. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources. Mr. Minister, you stated on Monday, and I 
quote: “We are very satisfied with the terms of the new forest 
management licensing agreement” with Weyerhaeuser. You stated 
you were very satisfied with the agreement which will give 7 
million acres of Saskatchewan’s commercial forest to this big 
American company. 
 
Can the minister confirm that this forest licence management 
agreement sets out all the terms and conditions under which 
Weyerhaeuser corporation will receive exclusive rights to one in 
every five acres of Saskatchewan’s commercial forest? And since 
you confirmed yesterday that the agreement had been completed, 
will you table all the documents relating to Weyerhaeuser’s forest 
management agreement later today in this Assembly? Will you do 
that later today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the opportunity to enter this debate. As the minister in charge of 
forestry, I have been closely involved with the negotiations on an 
FMLA (forestry management licensing agreement). And as I said 
before, Mr. Speaker, we’re satisfied that the terms and the 
conditions that are being proposed for the FMLA are not only 
consistent with good forest management practice but will be to the 
benefit, not only of the Weyerhaeuser Company, but all of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Is there an agreement? — yes 
or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, to refresh the memories of 
the members of the opposition — some of whom have been 
around for a considerable number of years, some of whom have 
been around at a time when other FMLAs were signed — they 
would know that an FMLA would have to have approval of 
cabinet, which would be in the form of an order in council. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have stated there’s an 
agreement; you’ve stated you’re satisfied with it. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister — and I remind you, Mr. Minister, that we are talking 
about a quarter of a billion dollars in public assets. If you had 
received cash rather than giving it away, it would reduce by 
one-eighth this province’s total debt. It is an enormous sum of 
money. They’re worth $1,000 for every family of four in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you not, Mr. Minister, see the need to answer some of these 
questions by Saskatchewan taxpayers about the terms and 
conditions of their assets — not after closing, when the deal’s 
final, but now. 
 
If you’re happy with the terms and conditions, why not defend 
them? Why conceal them? If it’s a good deal, Mr. Minister, why 
won’t you defend it? Why do you not answer these questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, concurrent with negotiations 
that have gone on with Weyerhaeuser, we are also negotiating new 
FMLAs with MacMillan Bloedel, L & M Wood Products, 
Simpson Timber, and we don’t negotiate those in public or discuss 
them on the floor of the legislature. And the terms and the 
conditions of the FMLA which is being negotiated with 
Weyerhaeuser is in no way substantially different from the types 
of conditions that are being built into those other FMLAs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, by way of information, and by way of passing 
something on to the members of the opposition, there’s something 
that has to be made clear. We are not giving one acres of forestry 
to anybody in Saskatchewan, be it Weyerhaeuser, L & M, 
MacMillan Bloedel, or Simpson. What we are doing is giving 
companies the privilege of harvesting forested acres in 
Saskatchewan. And in return, in return for that privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, they are paying us an 85 per cent increase in royalties 
over what PAPCO was previously paying. Plus, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to point out that for that privilege of harvesting in 
Saskatchewan they will also be giving us 126 per cent increase in 
the amount of reforestation that is going to be done in the future in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: —Than you very much, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister for Parks and Renewable Resources. Mr. 
Minister, we’re talking about a deal that will change the face of 
northern Saskatchewan for the next 30 years, or perhaps for ever. 
We have questions in the North pertaining to the major 
environmental impact of the North, the traditional way of life of 
the people in the North. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: do you not think that the people of 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2305 
 
 

the North have a right to know exactly what it is that you propose? 
This is the future of the people in the North, Mr. Minister, that 
you’re dealing with. And you won’t even bother to answer the 
questions about the impact on their lives. I ask you, Mr. Minister: 
if you are pleased, as you claim, with this new forest management 
licensing agreement with Weyerhaeuser, why are you afraid to 
show it to the people of this province, especially to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, in negotiating any forest 
management license agreement, all of the interests of all of the 
residents of Saskatchewan, be they north or south, have been taken 
into consideration. I appreciate the hon. member’s concerns, being 
a native Northerner himself, and I want to give him every 
assurance that as minister, not only in charge of forestry, but 
wildlife, fisheries, parks, and renewable resources, and 
campgrounds, the consideration has been given to the interest of 
all users and all traditional usages in northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Proposed Tariffs on Potash Exports to U.S. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the minister in charge of the potash corporation. Mr. 
Minister, your free trade policies of your government have 
repeatedly endorsed the free trade position of the Mulroney 
government and the Reagan administration in the U.S. 
 
Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that the Reagan administration — 
not Congress, but the Reagan administration — is aggressively 
intervening against Saskatchewan potash exports to the U.S. by 
direct orders from the U.S. secretary of commerce to help the New 
Mexico potash industry prepare a case against the Saskatchewan 
producers, provide extra commerce department staff in this case, 
and to expedite the process. 
 
This is the actions that are being taken. Mr. Minister, you’ll be 
aware of the major headlines indicating that U.S. are putting in 
tariffs. “U.S. looking at tariffs to stem the potash flow.” 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in view of those facts, in view of the 
aggressive intervention by the Reagan government against 
Saskatchewan potash producers and Saskatchewan jobs, what 
action has your government taken to resist this unacceptable action 
on behalf of the Reagan administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I believe if the member 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I believe if the member checks 
carefully, he’ll find that the action was initiated by Mr. Domenici, 
the senator from New Mexico. He’s a Democrat, I believe. 
 
The point, Mr. Speaker, is that the system that is in place  

operates this way. I think what is attempting to be negotiated is 
some changes to that system so that in fact the jobs in 
Saskatchewan will in fact be a lot safer. 
 
In this specific instance, I think there are three points. At the 
present time there is a preparation of a petition to investigate 
dumping allegations under way. If in fact that petition is accepted 
and the investigations follow — they’re obviously extremely 
technical and complex — and PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) will prepare its case, as will the other 
Saskatchewan producers, to prove that any allegations that the 
participation in the U.S. market has been detrimental to American 
industry are, in fact, not correct. 
 
That is the position we are taking, and we will be working toward 
that end. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to lay on 
the Table the report of the Chief Electoral Officer under section 
222(1), the report of the returns of election expenses incurred by 
candidates in the constituency of Regina North East. 
 
And as well, I lay on the Table the report of the Chief Electoral 
Officer dealing with the annual fiscal returns of registered political 
parties for the fiscal year 1985. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the Premier like to introduce his 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will introduce three 
members of my staff: Norman Riddell, sitting beside me, is the 
deputy minister and cabinet secretary; Mr. Brian Leibel is director 
of administration; and Lynn Schellenberg is administrative officer 
for Executive Council. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Chairman, I’ve just a couple of 
things that I would like to provide to the legislature in terms of a 
few comments as we kick off my estimates. 
 
As you know, Mr. Chairman, the Department of Executive 
Council provides decision-making support to the Premier and to 
members of the cabinet. In fulfilling this responsibility, the 
department plays a critical role in policy formation and in 
co-ordination. In this regard, the various branches of Executive 
Council — intergovernmental affairs, the policy secretariat, public 
affairs, and the cabinet secretariat — have contributed 
significantly to a number of government initiatives over  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2306 
 
 

the past year. I just want to touch on a few of these. 
 
First is the annual conference of the first ministers and the national 
agricultural strategy. The establishment of the annual conference 
of first ministers provides opportunities for the premiers and the 
Prime Minister to discuss important issues. Certainly our 
Executive Council and the province of Saskatchewan has been 
intimately involved in these discussions, going back to February 
of 1985 when the first ministers’ conference was here in Regina. 
 
At the Halifax conference we were able to get agriculture on the 
agenda to making it one of the more important things that were 
discussed. I would like to point out to the members present that it 
was only possible for me to make this important initiative through 
the co-ordination of activities we have in Executive Council. 
Through discussions with farm groups, individual producers, 
academics and leaders in Canada and abroad, papers were put 
together and co-ordinated by Executive Council, forwarded to the 
other premiers, and forwarded to the Prime Minister, and as a 
result we were able to get our ideas and our concepts at the 
national level and now at the international level. 
 
I also made a trip to Washington last fall to impress upon senior 
congressmen and cabinet ministers in Washington that 
Saskatchewan had substantial interest in the potential changes in 
trade and agriculture, and that was obviously raised today in 
question period. I took the opportunity to explain Saskatchewan’s 
eagerness to reduce protectionism in the United States, and as well 
said that we understand the feelings that they had with respect to 
protectionism and the policies and the implications that had 
politically in their districts. 
 
I was invited to Nebraska to outline similar ideas that we had here 
in agriculture, by Governor Kerrey. As a result of that, I had a 
second invitation, and I just returned, as the chairman knows, from 
the mid-West governors conference in Columbus, Ohio, where I 
reviewed the kinds of things we do in Canada and suggested to 
those Americans and said, if you look at our way as opposed to 
their way, it would save them in the neighbourhood of $30 billion 
in their current farm Bill, and it wouldn’t wreck the prices. 
 
Those ideas and much of the alternative policies were put together 
by Executive Council, and we will continue to make sure that we 
do. Similarly, with respect to negotiations on Rafferty and 
Alameda dams, the Executive Council, the water corporation, and 
Intergovernmental Affairs has been responsible for putting 
together a project that people have been talking about for literally 
decades. People like the former premier, Tommy Douglas; the 
former prime minister, John Diefenbaker; the former cabinet 
minister, Jimmy Gardiner, federally, for the Liberal Party — all 
are on record saying it was a thing to do. Its time had come, and 
they’d been saying this for years. And we’re finally through some 
good negotiations to be able to put it together. 
 
With respect to international work, Saskatchewan’s interest in 
China has been obviously something that we 

have been pursuing. China is the province’s fourth largest export 
market, and the Executive Council and Intergovernmental Affairs 
has worked hard to put together a twinning relationship, has 
twinned, so that we’re looking at possibilities with the Jilin 
province and other provinces in China with respect to trade, 
economic development, culture, and so forth. 
 
With respect to multilateral trade negotiations, my visits with 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) in Geneva and 
the discussions we’ve had internationally and nationally obviously 
has taken the Saskatchewan position that trade is extremely 
important to us. We want access to as many markets as possible, 
and as free as possible, so that we can export the goods and 
services that we have in this province. 
 
I’d like to say that we have also been somewhat busy from time to 
time in hosting international guests. In this regard the highlight of 
the year was undoubtedly the visit by Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, when Her Majesty came to 
Saskatchewan for the first time since 1939, and we were delighted 
to have her here. 
 
We’ve also been involved with other dignitaries inviting them in, 
hosting dinners to make sure that Saskatchewan’s reputation has 
been something that we’re very proud of. We put together a coat 
of arms, a design submitted by the College of Arms in London for 
the royal warrant. Its use will be restricted to the Lieutenant 
Governor, the Speaker, the courts of justice, the Premier, and 
government for certain formal purposes. 
 
I also want to mention that we have made some instrumental 
changes with respect to policy. I won’t go through them all but, 
obviously, legislation like pensions, welfare reform, budget 
reforms and so forth are on the leading edge of things that are 
going on, not only in the province but, indeed, in North America. 
 
So I would just say that the cabinet and Executive Council have 
been extremely busy locally, nationally, and internationally, 
putting together a list of projects and strategies to represent the 
province of Saskatchewan, not only at the local level but, indeed, 
at the national and international level. 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, there are 
a number of items I want to raise with you. And I first want to 
raise an item which I think is of a great deal of importance to a 
good number of people in Saskatchewan and in respect of which I 
think there is no great clarity as to just what the policy of the 
government is. And I am talking about the policy of free trade, 
your policy of supporting free trade. 
 
And I want to be as careful and precise as I can, because these 
discussions tend to become jelly rather than any exchange of ideas 
that can be understood. And I’m not talking about protectionism 
versus free trade, if by protectionism we mean the use or abuse of 
non-tariff barriers. 
 
Everybody agrees that we as a country, and our trading  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2307 
 
 

partners as countries, should refrain from abusing anti-dumping or 
countervailing or fact-finding or direct quotas or health regulations 
or any number of other non-tariff barriers which are used. And we 
all agree on that. So no one, I think, is . . . There is simply no 
division on that issue. 
 
The division comes with your advocacy of free trade. I want to say 
that there is a major philosophic difference between you and me. 
You advocate free trade; I do not advocate free trade. I believe that 
Canada must have selective tariffs. I believe that all goods should 
not cross the border between Canada and the United States 
without tariffs. I don’t believe that. 
 
The government obviously does and the Premier obviously does. 
He has said over and over again that he believes in free trade — 
over and over again. And we all know what free trade means. Or 
at least the Premier does. The Premier holds a doctorate degree in 
economics and knows what the term free trade means. He knows 
what it means in economic terms, and he knows what it means in 
political terms, because he’s a practising politician. 
 
And the United States has a free trade agreement — has one with 
the State of Israel. So we know what a free trade agreement with a 
partner, trading partner, of the United States means, because there 
is one. And there are free trade agreements in Europe, or have 
been. The European free trade agreement operated for some time, 
and we know what that term means. And so I think we all know 
what we’re talking about. 
 
The Premier is saying that he believes in free trade, and I am 
saying that I and our party does not believe in free trade. We 
believe that there should be selective tariffs. And if members 
opposite believe that only the trade union movement holds that 
view, then they are, I believe, sorely mistaken. I’m going to come 
to this in a moment. 
 
But I want to underline that no one, again, is talking about whether 
or not we should try to get rid of non-tariff barriers. The great bulk 
of the non-tariff barriers have arisen with respect to products on 
which there is no tariff. We have free trade in potash. We have 
free trade in potash. We have got a free trade agreement in potash. 
 
(1445) 
 
And it’s non-tariff barriers of anti-dumping or countervail which 
are likely to arise. And that will happen with respect to any free 
trade agreement unless — unless — you have something like the 
auto pact where some of those opportunities to restrict the 
movement of trade are eliminated by way of the specific 
agreement. 
 
But right now we’re talking about free trade. The Premier has 
been abundantly clear that he believes in free trade and has said it 
over and over again. And I want to say over and over again that I 
do not believe in free trade, that I believe we must have some 
selective tariffs. And I want to raise with the Premier some of 
these particular concerns with respect to free trade. 
 
Mr. Premier, I am referring to a magazine called Food, which is 
the journal of the food and beverage processing  

industries. I could refer to dozens, but this has many of the . . . 
This is the voice of the manufacturers, not the voice of the 
producers. And I want to point out what the Premier’s advocacy of 
free trade means. 
 
During the course of the federal government’s initiation and 
formulation of its policy on free trade, it called for briefs from 
many people and many organizations, including the provinces — 
and some provinces have put in their briefs, and we’ll come to that 
— and including major industrial sectors. And here is what some 
of the people in the food processing industry said. 
 
The majority of the industry briefs zero in on quota- and 
price-setting boards. It is stressed that if they remain in place, they 
will effectively deny the North American market to those 
companies dependent on such boards for their raw agricultural 
supplies. The criticism was directed, not only at the boards 
controlling Canada’s egg, poultry, turkey, and milk supply, but 
also the Canadian Wheat Board, which sets the domestic price for 
a number of grains. 
 
We’ll start, Mr. Premier, with this simple question. Do you agree 
in free trade with respect to eggs and poultry? We’ll start with that, 
because I get the distinct impression . . . And I know it because 
I’ve heard it — you say over and over again that you believe in 
free trade. And free trade has one very, very simple meaning: no 
tariffs — no tariffs. I say to you that you therefore are saying that 
you believe in free trade in eggs and poultry; I do not agree with 
free trade in eggs and poultry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I obviously agree with free trade in 
many areas, such as potash and many others, and a simple look at 
the record during the period of the 1970s indicates that more and 
more goods from Saskatchewan were entering the markets of the 
world and the U.S. market free of tariffs because of the GATT 
(General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade) negotiations in which 
our government was peripherally involved and which we fully 
supported. 
 
We want to see freer trade. We don’t want to see needless tariffs. 
We don’t agree that that means that there should not be tariffs, and 
I say . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Make up my mind. I am 
making up my mind and I am saying that I believe in free trade in 
potash and not free trade in eggs. And members over there believe 
that if you have free trade in potash you have to have it in eggs and 
they are therefore condemning — condemning, I say — our 
poultry industry and our egg producers to being run out of 
business by American producers. That’s what the Premier says he 
stands for. 
 
The Premier has said it over and over again, and I want him to say 
how he can be for free trade, which he has said over and over 
again, and still protect the egg industry and the poultry industry. 
May I have your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would take a position 
very similar to the hon. member. The hon. member has said that 
he agrees in freer trade. He agrees that free trade in many areas is 
good. He agrees with GATT which was set up after the depression 
to make sure that we could undo all the protectionism that we got 
into 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2308 
 
 

- particularly started from the United States — where countries 
like Canada would work together to reduce the tariff and non-tariff 
barriers around the world. And he agrees with that, and I do too. 
 
He agrees that nobody likes to see tariff and non-tariff barriers, 
countervail, illegal kinds of things that you can dream up in the 
drug markets and whatever, to keep pork out of the United States, 
or commodities out of here. I agree 100 per cent with him. What 
we want to do, and as I’m sure the hon. member wants to do, is to 
reduce those trade tariffs and reduce the protectionism around the 
world, and particularly between the U.S. and Canada, because we 
trade a great deal with each other. 
 
I believe we should have freer trade and as free as possible in areas 
like potash, areas like oil, areas like timber, pork and bacon, the 
kinds of things that we produce, manufacture, and export. I believe 
that. Now as we get there it’ll take some time . . . And he says, 
well, are we going to have free trade in eggs? Well I don’t expect 
we’re going to have free trade in eggs or free trade in milk. I 
mean, the United States has no more interest in negotiating a free 
trade milk arrangement than I do in eggs. We’re so far from those 
negotiations . . . Put it this way. You know, sir, that if we had trade 
negotiations going on . . . and I understand the politics of the word 
“free” versus more liberalized trade, or liberalized trade 
agreement. I understand that. So we can get into that. 
 
But put it this way. If you were at the negotiating table for Canada 
— and if you were in a negotiating position for Canada, I would 
have confidence that you would say, look, here are the 
commodities right now that we could start with. Let’s look at 
potash; let’s look at uranium; let’s look at timber; let’s look at 
softwood lumber; let’s look at all these things that we’re already 
very close to a free trade arrangement; let’s make sure those stay 
free. And let’s reduce the tariff and non-tariff barriers on pork, on 
shakes and shingles, and let’s start with those irritants. And that’s 
where you start in negotiations. You know absolutely that you 
don’t walk in and say the whole world is free because you just sit 
down and decided to talk about it. 
 
Well the only thing that I would caution my hon. colleague about 
is if you want to — and I don’t think you do — but if you want to 
take the classic Ontario position, the classic Ontario position that 
says, we have manufacturers in this country that have been 
protected and we don’t want free trade, or freer trade, for that 
matter, because we have been protected. Ontario ha said that, and 
you know that. And I’m sure when you were the premier you 
would argue against it. 
 
Now if you’re . . . I don’t think you are, but if you want to take 
that Ontario position, you’re going to box yourself in, as we’ve 
had Saskatchewan boxed in. We gain the most from more 
liberalized trade with United States, much more than Ontario. 
They’ve essentially got a freer trade arrangement in their big 
industry which is automobile manufacturing, and it’s done them 
quite well. I’d like to see as much confidence here in uranium and 
potash and timber and other things. 
 
So on the whole question of the word “free,” if we want to debate 
that, I would like to see it move towards as free as  

possible, with as many tariff and non-tariff barriers removed as 
possible. And you will start with the kinds of items that you 
suggested and I suggested. In fact, if we got in a room and said, 
what areas, what commodities would you start at the negotiating 
table, I doubt whether you would start with chicken, and I doubt 
whether you would start with eggs or the dairy business. It may be 
100 years before they would even talk about trading milk between 
Canada and the United States, looking at the problems they’ve had 
in Europe, New Zealand, Australia, and others. 
 
So when we look at more liberalized trade, I guess I would say, 
without pushing it too much, if you want more liberalized trade, 
you want to reduce tariff and non-tariff barriers, we’ve got to 
begin some place. We have to start. We’re into negotiations now 
with the United States to reduce the barriers. That’s what it’s all 
about. 
 
Now at home here we can talk about free trade and freer trade and 
liberalized trade. I don’t think it’s fair ball to frighten people when 
right now folks in the potash business, as of yesterday, and folks in 
the uranium business, the pulp and paper business, 
Intercontinental Packers, are all having their jobs threatened. And 
some Canadians are saying, I’m not so sure we should negotiate 
with the United States. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously, if you want better arrangements 
with the United States, we should be at the table with them. If you 
want to have lower tariff and non-tariff barriers, we should be at 
the table reducing them. If you’re not at the table, then I guess you 
can talk all you like about freer trade and less tariffs, but I would 
say, look, I agree with you. I want reduced tariffs; reduce 
non-tariff barriers. I want to be in negotiations with the United 
States so that they don’t get carried away with protectionism. I 
want to slow them up as much as possible. And that’s precisely 
what the negotiations are about. I would rather be talking with 
them at the table than saying, no talks, no discussions; just let 
them carry on and block out our potash, block out our pulp and 
paper, block out these other things. 
 
I mean, if you want to take the Ontario position, that’s fair enough. 
But I don’t think that you do. I support free trade. And many 
commodities, if we could do it now . . . I’m just like you; I would 
support free trade and I would like to see free trade in more and 
more commodities as they’re negotiated between two parties that 
mutually agree it’s in their best interest. And if you both agree it’s 
in your best interest and you sign it, because of potash or cars or 
pulp and paper, I agree with that. As a negotiator yourself, I 
believe you would. 
 
So we want to see more trade, more liberalized trade, freer trade, 
and wherever we can pick them off industry by industry, sector by 
sector, free trade arrangements that are mutually beneficial to both 
sides. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, why 
then has the Mulroney government, with your full support, 
consistently refused even to consider the sector-by-sector 
approach to liberalizing of trade which worked so well in the auto 
pact, as you say, and which I suggest could work in other sectors, 
without at the same  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2309 
 
 

time threatening many of the jobs and many of the economic 
structures of western Canada. 
 
Let me underline again, let me underline again where I am with 
respect to wheat. I believe there has to be a tariff on U.S. wheat 
coming into Canada. This has not been a popular point of view 
always, but I believe that to be necessary if we’re going to have a 
domestic price for wheat of $9 or $10 Canadian. 
 
How is it possible, Mr. Premier, to have a $10 or a $9 or $8 
domestic price for wheat, which the wheat board gets when it sells 
to Canadian millers, if those same Canadian millers can bring in 
U.S. wheat at $5 a bushel. We all know that that can’t be done. 
And it’s time that people recognize that this sort of free trade talk 
is simple nonsense; this sort of free trade talk which says of course 
we’re big producers of wheat, therefore there should be free trade 
in wheat. We are certainly big producers of wheat, but we’re not 
agreeing that there should be free trade in wheat; we’re not 
agreeing to that. 
 
We believe that there has to be a tariff on wheat if we are going to 
run a higher domestic price. And as I say, I hear some people say, 
well the things which we produce, the potash and the oil and the 
wheat, well they don’t all fall in the same category. And this is 
why I’m saying that we need selective tariffs. And in this case we 
need a tariff on U.S. wheat, and may well be in certain 
circumstances on U.S. feed grains. And there have been that in the 
past, but I’m not now dwelling on feed grains, I’m talking about 
bread wheats, be they hard or soft. And I’m saying that we have to 
make that fact clear. 
 
We’re not talking about some wide-sweeping, free trade 
agreement. And this is where I think the Mulroney government is 
off on the wrong foot, because there are going to be endless 
exceptions, and we ourselves are listing them now. And we would 
be far better off to take the sectorial approach, pick an area where 
we think we might make some progress. I know the arguments 
against that, but the arguments for it seem to me compelling. 
 
(1500) 
 
The only real success story we have had in bilateral negotiations 
has been the auto pact. We’ve had some success stories in 
multilateral bargaining with the GATT agreement which lowered 
tariffs all around, I think, to the betterment of most, if not all, 
traders in the world. We got some benefit out of it. I favour going 
the multinational route. I favour going with sectorial arrangements 
with the U.S. 
 
Where I think we’re off base is talking about some sort of 
overarching, all-encompassing free trade agreement with the 
United States. It’s not going to happen. Everybody is now staking 
out the ground saying: yes, everything’s on the table but . . . 
everything’s on the table but . . . And we’ve got a whole string of 
buts now. 
 
Why don’t we face the fact that we will get farther in Canada by 
going the GATT route for general lowering of tariffs and going the 
sectorial route with negotiating with the United States? And then 
we wouldn’t have this tremendous splutter of barriers being 
erected by the  

United States in anticipation of negotiations which we see coming 
here now. 
 
I can’t help but believe that because these negotiations have been 
launched, the United States has been buttressing its position — 
and there’s no doubt about that. The press makes it very clear that, 
in order to get the consent of the U.S. Senate for the fast-track 
negotiations, Reagan has obviously had to give in on shakes and 
shingles, I suspect on potash — I don’t know whether the senator 
from New Mexico extracted that price, but it’s all running through 
Packman’s office, and he seems to me to be managing it. 
 
And we have seen barrier after barrier after barrier put up in order 
that they can be removed as negotiating chips, and we’re farther 
behind after three months of rough discussions and two weeks of 
negotiation than we’ve ever been before. And that is because of 
the approach taken by the federal government with the full support 
of the government opposite. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, are you now conceding that the free 
trade in bread grains is out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, when we are in discussions 
with another country or multilaterally with respect to trade 
negotiations reducing tariffs, you go to the table and you discuss 
with them what areas you can mutually agree to begin to reduce 
tariffs. 
 
And in the discussions when we go down with the United States or 
with other countries, we are prepared to discuss all kinds of things 
— prepared to discuss potash and timber and cars and fish and so 
forth. If we ruled them out before we got there, I mean, you would 
have nothing to discuss. So we’re into negotiations saying, we’re 
prepared to look at pork and we’re prepared to look at all kinds of 
things. That’s just normal; that’s a natural thing to do. 
 
Now with respect to the U.S. Activities to date, the hon. member 
knows it’s got nothing to do with the free trade negotiations that 
are going on today. It has nothing to do with them at all. 
 
If we were not into negotiations at all with the United States, they 
would be doing these things left, right, and centre because as he 
knows, my colleague, Howard Pawley, me, Peter Lougheed, and 
Bill Bennett have been forecasting the trade restrictions coming up 
in the United States, and he’s aware of them. 
 
They have been destined to get into protectionism because 
politically it’s popular, primarily among the Democrats in the U.S. 
because they’re saying, we are getting beat because of the 
difference in exchange in our currencies, and they have the bit in 
their teeth and they’re going to district after district after district 
saying we should not trade with Canadians or trade with anybody 
else. And that’s going on regardless. At least now we have a 
forum to talk to them, other than me or anybody else just going 
down to a conference from time to time to speak to them. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, while we are facing severe and  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2310 
 
 

significant protectionism in the United States that’s going to take 
jobs away from us in potash, in uranium, in oil and gas, in 
Intercon, in steel, in Ipsco — all those things that the Americans 
are doing and have been doing for some time — it seems to me 
that the people would like to think that we can negotiate a better 
deal with Americans rather than just let them do it. And if we’re 
not talking to them, I guess we just back away and we say, go 
ahead, cut us off, as you have just said in this legislature. 
 
I believe that it’s a . . . I’ll take you at your word. You want to see 
freer trade in potash, and free trade in potash — free trade in 
potash. And if the United States puts restrictions on it, you don’t 
like that and I don’t. Now somebody better be down there fighting 
for us. You don’t want to be into the negotiations. You said, well, 
we can’t be discussing it because you’ve used the word “free.” 
Well how about if we use the word “freer” or “more liberalized” 
trade? Would that be fine? 
 
And we said we want to start with potash, and we want to start 
with this and this and this when we’re at the table, but I’m not 
going to go at the table and say that I’ve refused to discuss potash 
because the Americans have refused. Maybe they say they don’t 
want to discuss it. I want to talk about potash when I’m down 
there, and steel, and hogs, and bacon, and obviously anybody from 
Saskatchewan who wouldn’t be interested in talking about those 
commodities is there. 
 
And with respect to grain, if we’re both major exporters of grain 
and we’re marketing all throughout the world, we can agree that 
we won’t export into each other’s countries except for tariffs. And 
if that’s the agreement, then that’s what you have. An if you want 
freer trade and both countries agree that it’s in your best interests, 
then both countries can do that. But if you’re not at the table, then 
they can just keep slapping tariffs on bacon, and hogs, and potash, 
and shakes and shingles, and softwood lumber, and uranium, and 
coal, and we’d just sit here. 
 
Well we can’t just sit here. We have to be as tough as they are. We 
have to be able to do the kinds of things that they do, and we have 
to be at the table saying: this is the kinds of things that we have to 
do. 
 
Now if you don’t want to be in discussions and you say, well we 
want a sectorial approach, well you can’t discuss them all at the 
same time. What we’ve said is that we will want to be able to 
discuss an awful lot of things that are irritants with us with respect 
to United States. We want them on the table, and we want to be 
able to discuss uranium, and potash, and hogs, and steel, and pulp 
and paper, and the forestry products, and we want to make sure 
they’re on the table. 
 
Now if we pick them off one at a time and say, well, we won’t talk 
to you until we can get down to bottle caps — we’ll start with 
bottle caps — well, we’d never get anywhere. We’ve got to start 
together and go through the process and agree that we can talk 
about these things in that process, and as you said, let’s get free 
trade in potash; let’s get free trade in timber; let’s get free trade in 
a large number of other areas; and where we can’t let’s at least 
reduce the tariffs and, secondly, and I’m sure you’re aware of this, 
design a mechanism that will allow us to  

reduce the irritants between the two countries as quickly, as fairly 
as possible. 
 
So again I go back and say, we’re not that far apart. You don’t like 
the word “free”; all right, use the word “liberalized” trade — freer 
trade. We want to both move in the same direction; that’s what the 
negotiations are about, and I believe it’s a good idea that we’re 
into them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Mr. Chairman, with leave, I would like to 
introduce a group. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, and 
members of the legislature, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you 10 students, grade 8 students from the Englefeld 
Elementary School. They are accompanied by their teacher, Peter 
Penrose, and a parent, Gabe Lefebvre. I want to take this 
opportunity to welcome the students here. 
 
At the present time, if I might indicate what we’re doing, is 
dealing with the Premier’s estimates, the Executive Council. The 
Premier answers questions that are directed to him through the 
Chairman of the committee in respect to the expenditures of the 
Executive Council. 
 
So I welcome you here. I hope that you have a very enjoyable stay 
and a safe trip back home. I’ll be meeting with you shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, clearly everybody would 
wish that these non-tariff barriers, these anti-dumping and 
countervailing, and all the rest, health regulations and direct quotas 
and that sort of thing, would go away. Does anybody know any 
occasion in which the United States has ever entered into any 
agreement with anybody, other than the GATT arrangements 
which are limited, we know, and they apply to everybody, and the 
auto pact, in which they have ever negotiated away any of their 
rights to do any of their things? And does the Premier not accept 
the statement of Ambassador Niles when he says that the 
constitution of the United States is not on the table? Is there any 
reason to believe for one minute that we will get a mechanism for 
resolving disputes which will seriously limit the right of the U.S. 
Congress and the U.S. administration to activate those non-tariff 
barriers? 
 
This is the absolute key to the discussion, and I am very interested 
to know what the Premier says about just what indications there 
are that there will be any movement in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the question raised  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2311 
 
 

by the hon. member reminds me of some people who would say 
that we have designed a mechanism and it can never be any better. 
There is no future arrangement that could improve on the 
relationships between us and a neighbour. I can think of, for 
example, before we signed the auto pact, the U.S. had never done 
it before. Well under your argument we’d never do it, because it 
had never been done before. 
 
Before we got into GATT, it had never been done before on that 
massive a scale between many countries, but under your 
argument, we’d never done it. Why would any country reduce its 
autonomy to get into multinational trade negotiations. Who would 
ever do it? Did it change the U.S. Congress or the Senate? No. 
They agreed in principle, between friends, to do better. 
 
New Zealand and Australia are on their second term of a bilateral 
trade arrangement. Did they ever do it before? No, but they tried, 
and they’re both happy with it because they have less tariff and 
non-tariff barriers, and they’re working at them. They put 
everything on the table, and they’re picking them off one at a time, 
and it’s working. 
 
The Europeans — and this is probably the one that flies in the face 
of, I believe, your argument — the Europeans were at war with 
each other. The government of this country was at war with the 
government of that country. And under your argument they would 
never get into a common market because they’d never done it 
before, and what’s more, they were at each others’ throat. What 
did they do? After the war, enemies who had sent their children 
and their mothers, and their fathers to the front and wiped each 
other out, signed a trade agreement between the countries. And 
Great Britain is still Great Britain, and France is France, and West 
Germany is Germany, Italy is Italy, and their parliaments and their 
House of Commons are just as important and just as powerful as 
they ever were. 
 
What we’re looking at is a mechanism where Canadians for the 
first time in history could have access to 100 million people or 
more as a major market, and we’re the only country in the free 
world that doesn’t have that. Other countries either do, or have a 
big enough domestic market to make that happen. 
 
So I am not intimidated because it’s never been done before. I 
mean, before you got in the legislature, you never were there 
before. Before I was here, I was never here before. But I, you, and 
others go to school for the first time, and strike deals for the first 
time, and get married and raise children, and get into business and 
take risks. 
 
The alternative, the status quo, is the dangerous part of what we’re 
into now. The status quo believing . . . And as the wheat pool 
study says — and I’m sure you’ve read it — there is no status quo 
when it comes to dealing with the United States right now. No 
status quo. So if we’re even going to stay where we are with 
respect to the United States, it seems to me we have to look at all 
the alternatives. New arrangements, bargaining, one on one, three 
on one, country to country. At least we have a mechanism. 
 
I can only say that the United States — right? — never did  

sign an auto pact; it finally did. And it’s been good for Canada, 
and it’s mutually agreeable. The United States was into GATT; so 
were we. Never done it before, but it was good for all of us. I hope 
we can strike a bilateral trade arrangement with Japan and reduce 
tariff on non-tariff barriers. We’ve never done it before, but I’d 
certainly be there to try. 
 
The failure is not trying. And the other failure, I’ll say to the hon. 
member, is to cool up unfounded fears that it is not right to try. 
That’s the problem. When you get half of this country, or half of 
the politicians in this country, run around crying wolf, that we 
shouldn’t be negotiating, the Americans just laugh. They just grin 
and they pick us off one at a time, an industry at a time. That’s the 
problem. 
 
And I think that we should be standing shoulder to shoulder and 
negotiating from a position of strength and saying, we will defend 
our jobs, and we will try for new arrangements. And as you say, 
and I agree, reduce those non-tariff barriers, design any kind of 
mechanisms that we can be better in terms of relationships with 
our neighbour where we can mutually agree it’s in our best 
interests for both of us. 
 
(1515) 
 
That’s the kind of attitude that built the country. That’s the kind of 
attitude that will sustain the country. That’s the kind of attitude 
we’ve seen throughout the world in GATT. It’s the kind of attitude 
that put together the auto pact, the New Zealand-Australian 
agreement, indeed the Common Market. 
 
And I think bilateral arrangements, as you know, in GATT, are 
consistent with the rules of GATT. If two countries reduce their 
tariff and non-tariff barriers, that’s consistent with everybody 
having the common denominator, with less tariff and less tariff 
barriers . . . non-tariff barriers. That’s a good thing to do. It’s 
positive. I can only say that I’m not afraid to try. And I don’t 
believe that we should leave it and just say, well we can let it go, 
and because it’s never been done before, that we shouldn’t try. 
 
I think the United States will be same in terms of how it runs its 
country. And we will be. But if you strike an agreement between 
friends and honourable people and you put a package together, 
then it can be binding. The auto pact didn’t change the U.S. 
government, but they live up to it. And that’s the significance of it, 
and I believe the significance of a relationship that we could have 
between the most importing, trading countries in the entire world 
— the U.S. and Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, 
everybody agree with much of the sentiment that’s there. What 
we’re talking about really is priorities. You can’t do everything all 
at once. And Canada has to make up its mind whether it’s putting 
most of its effort into getting some sort of a bilateral agreement 
with the United States which is overarching and covering 
everything, and then trying to sort out all the things that it won’t 
cover, or we have to decide whether we’re going to stick with the 
system which has worked so well for us over the last 20 years — 
the GATT negotiations. And stick with what has 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2312 
 
 

 worked so well for us with respect to the United States — the 
sectoral arrangements. 
 
And that has worked well. And we have expanded trade 
substantially, not only in autos but, under GATT, in all manner of 
things. And its worked very well. And while no one objects, I 
suppose, to someone trying something else, it ought not to be first 
priority when it’s obviously got so many difficulties, as is being 
demonstrated every day, and where it has such a small pay-off 
compared with a GATT arrangement which would offer even 
larger markets. 
 
A few home truths must be understood here. And I wonder if the 
Premier would agree that supply management arrangements such 
as we have in much of Canadian agriculture and free trade are 
simply incompatible. And I’ll ask that question again. Will you 
agree that the supply management arrangements which we have in 
much of Canadian agriculture and free trade are simply 
incompatible? And will you agree that the operations of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, in so far as they relate to the domestic 
market, are incompatible with free trade? 
 
I will just quote the views of this magazine of the Canadian food 
and beverage industries which says that free trade and Canadian 
supply management are incompatible. I would have thought that 
was almost a motherhood statement. And I want to hear anyone 
explain how free trade is compatible with supply management 
arrangements in Canada and open market arrangements in the 
United States. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well this is going to be an interesting 
discussion, I can see that. First of all, the negotiations that we have 
between a country like the United States or Japan do not rule out 
the multilateral negotiations of GATT. In fact, the team that 
Canada has involved with the bilateral negotiations — Mr. 
Reisman — are the same team that are going to be involved in 
multilateral. So we haven’t ruled out any of the old mechanisms. 
The old mechanisms are there and we’re into them. 
 
The second thing that I want to point out, and I’m sure the hon. 
member will understand: when I have discussed with Europeans 
about them reducing their tariffs and their subsidies, say in 
agriculture, I mean, they change the subject. They are not 
interested in talking with Canadians about reducing the tariffs. We 
used to export wheat to Europe, and now France is a major 
exporter, and their subsidies are about twice the price. 
 
The only time that I ever got their attention — when we started to 
talk about a common market or a freer trade arrangement between 
North American countries. And they said, are you really going to 
do that? I mean, I got their attention. They’ve been doing that 
themselves and sticking it to Canadians and sticking it to 
Americans. And you know yourself that the European Economic 
Community is the biggest sinner when it comes to subsidization 
and tariff and non-tariff barriers. 
 
We finally got their attention. And when we get into the GATT 
negotiations, we have a lever and say, you want to see the two 
largest trading partners freely trade with each  

other? How will that sit with you when they know they want to 
export into this North American market? That’s the second 
observation. 
 
The third is that we are into these negotiations as provinces like 
we never have been before. The world has changed; it’s tougher. 
The United States is into a new mood of protectionism, and we 
may have to have all the new mechanisms we can come up with to 
slow them up. 
 
But the provinces for the first time . . . And as you know, the 
provinces were not involved in GATT; the provinces had precious 
little to do with it. And I can recall statements — I don’t know if it 
was the time when you would go to first ministers’ conferences or 
at least premiers’ conferences — but I can certainly recall at the 
time Peter Lougheed saying the provinces should be involved, 
because we’re been traded away, and agriculture’s been traded 
under the table, didn’t even make it. 
 
Well we are now much more involved, and I’m sure you would 
agree with that. We meet every three months with the Prime 
Minister and at various ministerial levels right intimately involved 
in trade negotiations, and I don’t think we’ll ever back away from 
that. I think we’re into that now so that we can have premiers and 
trade ministers from all political persuasions and from all regions 
and all provinces right there involved in multilateral and bilateral 
negotiations. 
 
Now with respect to supply management and trade, the hon. 
member probably knows — maybe he’s forgotten but I’ll remind 
him — that you can have supply management features under 
GATT. If both countries practise supply management, it’s fair 
ball, and you agree not to antagonize each other and raise it. If you 
have milk marketing orders in the United States and milk 
marketing quotas in Canada and you decide that you both are 
constraining supply and into supply management, that’s perfectly 
fine with respect to GATT because you’re both trying and doing 
the same thing. 
 
Where you run into the problems, obviously, is where you . . . one, 
it is on an export basis, and another one is just strictly on an import 
basis. But if you can’t mutually agree, then you’re going to leave it 
that way until you can find a mechanism that would allow you to 
do the both. So I can see no . . . as you said, if you want to go back 
to the old ways, under GATT you can have supply management, 
and we can just leave it at that. 
 
When we’re into bilateral arrangements . . . New Zealand and 
Australia — a perfect example — I believe they’re both labour 
governments; I believe they’re both socialist governments that 
have got into freer trade arrangements. They have supply 
management on all kinds of things and they have agreed to trade 
more and more and more, and they will tell you. I’ve talked to 
both from New Zealand, I’ve talked to cabinet ministers from 
Australia; and they said it’s one of the best things they’d ever done 
with a big partner. 
 
So if we’re into a situation where you say you can’t do it . . . Don’t 
you think there’s supply management in the Common Market? I 
mean, my gosh, they’ve got supply  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2313 
 
 

management, they’ve got subsidies, they’ve got all kinds of 
mechanisms. It depends on what you agree to. 
 
If we’re moving to freer trade and greater trade and more 
liberalized trade . . . and some commodities will be under supply 
management in the United States and some here, some there; then 
you say, all right, you want to do this, I want to do it; that’s 
precisely what you do. 
 
So, I mean, again it’s a little bit — and I’m not sure that you want 
to do this — but I don’t think it’s fair to make people unduly 
afraid in Canada about talking with freer trade, bilateral trade 
agreements, by saying, well your industry is done because free 
trade obviously means you can’t have any supply management in 
milk. 
 
How would we ever get into the GATT negotiations and 
multilateral trade if somebody was running around Canada at that 
time saying, oh, we’d better not do that because your industry is 
gone and yours is gone. You and I both know the best thing that 
ever happened to the world in terms of economic activity was the 
GATT, to reduce all those mistakes we made prior to the 
Depression where we all stopped trading with each other. That’s 
why we went into it, and we should be proud of it. 
 
Anything that we can do to build on those negotiations, bilaterally 
or multilaterally — not frighten people but move ahead — and if 
we have to design new mechanisms, by all means that’s what 
Canadians should do and any normal, free-thinking person who 
would like to trade with his neighbour. 
 
Finally, just let me say this: when you’re talking about Canada and 
the Canadian way of life, it seems to me, and the hon. member 
knows, that we have a unique way of life. We have earned it. We 
have worked hard. We’ve established good reputations around the 
world. We have exported all over the world. We have earned 
prosperity and earned wealth, and we have earned a unique 
Canadian way of life. 
 
I will say to the hon. member: while we have earned it and we 
have it today, it is not free. Just because we can stand here and call 
ourselves Canadian and say we have this mechanism and that 
educational system and this health care system, it is not free, and it 
will not last unprotected. 
 
The best thing that we can do is maintain our standard of living, 
create the wealth, create the markets, create the jobs around the 
world, so that this country can continue to earn that kind of living 
and that kind of reputation and that unique identity. The quickest 
way not to have the identity is not to have the wealth to support it. 
You can have all the culture you like but if you’re flat broke 
because you don’t trade with anybody and you have no markets 
and you have people out of work, you can be buried proud in 
culture, but you will not survive. 
 
I go back. We are not an old country, but we have built an 
excellent reputation as traders, honourable people, and quality, and 
our word is good. We have earned it. But it is not free, and we 
have to fight for it, and we have to defend it, and we have to 
negotiate daily with Americans, with French, with Germans, with 
Japanese. And we should not  

be putting our head in the sand and saying, oh, I don’t know if we 
should talk about this because, by gosh, this industry might not be 
able to survive. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, there’s a lot of very, very good industries that 
are at stake right now, and they are competitive. The only thing 
that can beat them is the treasury of the United States or another 
country. That’s potash, agriculture, pulp and paper, and timber, 
and steel, and all those things we do so well. 
 
so again I would go back and say, we’ve earned it. Supply 
management mechanisms work in GATT; they’re certainly 
consistent, but economic growth and value of this country has 
been dependent upon trade. We started with fur trade; we get into 
agriculture trade; the whole history of the country is trade. 
 
Our reputation, with all we can produce and all we’ve been 
blessed with and our unique standard of living, is based on us 
creating wealth and doing it well. It’s no time to back up; it’s time 
to go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, 
everyone likes to hear a rousing speech on the challenge of the 
future, but we have to face a few realities. 
 
I just want to read a portion of a special report here in the 
magazine that I referred to, and again, this is not put out by 
agricultural producers by the processing industries. And it’s not 
put out by the trade unions, or it’s not put out by any other body 
which is particularly protectionist. And they start out by saying: 
 
“There are no preconditions. The administration is going to 
negotiate on everything. There is not a fish that swims, a crop 
grown, or a widget that is made that is not going to be subject to 
the negotiations.” 
 
That statement was attributed to Senator Robert Packwood, the 
Republican chairman of the U.S. finance committee on the day the 
committee gave the green light permitting the administration to 
enter into free trade negotiations with Canada. 
 
The same sentiment was stated in a letter from President Ronald 
Reagan to Senator Packwood a few days after the historic finance 
committee vote. Quote: 
 
“We believe it is in the best interests of all of us to have everything 
on the table when the negotiations begin and to start without 
preconditions on either side” (the President said). 
 
This is a far cry from some of the conflicting statements about 
what will and what will not be on the table that have been coming 
out of Ottawa on the subject of Canada-U.S. trade negotiations 
over the past few months. 
 
However, taking President Reagan’s and Senator Packwood’s 
statements at its face value, it means that Canadian agribusiness 
and fishery systems could be in for a thorough shake-out before 
Canadian-U.S. trade talks are concluded, successfully or 
otherwise. 
 
Now that is the background in which we’re moving. And I  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2314 
 
 

want to say again that I do not accept the arguments for free trade. 
I thoroughly accept the arguments for freer trade. And so long as 
people are saying, all we’re doing is negotiating, and of course 
agriculture really won’t be affected, we’re just negotiating on it; 
and fisheries won’t be affected, we’re just negotiating on it, we 
can say those things. But I think we should be realistic and 
forthright with our citizens and know what the implications are. 
 
(1530) 
 
For the baking industry, it will face high material costs because of 
the domestic price of grain from the Canadian Wheat Board, and if 
the industry is to be competitive on the U.S. market it is obvious 
that this policy will have to change. That is the policy of having a 
higher domestic price than an international price for grain. 
 
For the brewing industry: 
 
“The removal of import protection would probably hurt Canada’s 
wine industry.” 
 
I’ll leave that out. We’ll take brewing: 
 
“The access of U.S. brewers into Canada under current 
circumstances would cause the industry extreme concern, and it 
would lead to substantial job dislocation, investment loss, and 
numerous plant closures.” 
 
And I’m sure every brewery in Saskatchewan would be at risk. I 
don’t think anyone doubts that. I hope not, because I think it is 
unquestionably the case. And I could give industry after industry. 
 
I want then to say a little bit about the general conclusions of what 
the author of this article says “will be the result of any substantial 
free trade agreement.” And he’s talking again about the food and 
beverage industry. And it says: 
 
“If this industry is going to function profitably and progressively 
under any free trade agreement, a fairly extreme restructuring will 
be necessary.” 
 
And they all go on to say this restructuring should be done in part 
before the agreement is concluded. But we’ll leave that aside. 
 
“The authority of supply management marketing boards must be 
modified. In a great many food processing sectors, wages are 
higher than those paid in similar U.S. industries, and 
Canadian-U.S. wage structures must be brought into better 
balance.” 
 
That’s a nice phrase for saying lowering their wages. 
 
“The Canadian work-force tends to have better benefit packages 
than the U.S. Again these cost factors will have to reflect U.S. 
reality.” 
 
No suggestion that the U.S. factors are going to reflect Canadian 
reality, and I understand that true. Because clearly, to the extent 
that we enter into a free trade arrangement with the United States, 
our circumstances of operation will have to mirror those of the 
United States and not vice versa. If they don’t have supply  

management, we won’t. If they have it, as you say, if we both have 
it, that can be worked out. But if they don’t have it, we won’t. And 
they don’t have it, not in the way we have it. 
 
With respect to wage rates — our rates will have to progressively 
move towards their wage rates. With respect to costs of 
production, ours, let’s say in poultry, will have to equate with 
those of Georgia or Tennessee, or we will have to have no free 
trade in poultry. With respect to benefit packages, pensions and 
the like, again Canadian measures will have to, in the delicate 
words here, “reflect the U.S. reality.” 
 
And all of these are what we’re in fact talking about. And they do 
in areas like, as I say, the auto industry, because it’s done 
sectorially. And we’re not now talking then about great batches of 
people, hundreds of thousands of people, being displaced. We’re 
doing it as we did in auto — in a rational way. 
 
The Canadian dollar will have to, they say, have to be pegged. 
That’s meaning have to stay down in order to give us some 
competitive advantage. And obviously the United States won’t 
stand for a pegging, and we will have to keep our dollar down in 
some manner. 
 
I like this one: 
 
“The Canadian government will have to improve its corporate tax 
structure and to deliver a tax burden more equal to that of the 
United States.” 
 
Being translated means lower corporate taxes. 
 
“Various Canada-U.S. regulations on packaging and product will 
have to be uniform; transportation costs will have to be reduced; a 
serious effort to eliminate all interprovincial trade barriers . . .” 
 
And on and on. Now this is a massive restructuring of the 
Canadian economy, and not only the Canadian economy — we’re 
talking about a reconstruction of Canadian society. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that while we obviously must 
pursue free trade, or freer trade, and while we must seek the 
sectors where we can match — and note, auto was a different 
sector because a very great deal of the auto industry was located in 
the northern United States where wages and benefit packages are 
similar to those in Canada. 
 
But increasingly we are being invited to compete with industries 
in the southern United States where wage rates are very much 
lower and where benefit packages are lower and where the whole 
social structure is very, very different. And everywhere it is said: 
Canada will have to conform to U.S. standards; Saskatchewan will 
have to look more like Mississippi in its wage structures and in its 
benefit packages. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that the pursuit of that objective is 
the pursuit of an objective which is designed to bring about a total 
restructuring of not only the economic but the social basis of 
Canada. And I do not  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2315 
 
 

believe that it is welcomed by the majority of Canadians. I believe 
they want to see freer trade. I believe they want to see some 
dispute-resolution mechanism dealing with non-tariff barriers — 
and everybody agrees with that — but I don’t believe they want to 
see the two economies operating as one. 
 
I don’t believe they want to see the Canadian government give up 
its right to impose selective tariffs — I’m not now talking about 
anti-dumping and countervailing, but I mean permanent tariffs — 
because those measures by the Canadian government will, I 
suggest to you, be necessary if we are going to maintain some of 
the things which are very nearly fundamental to our social system. 
And I would say the Canadian Wheat Board is one, and I could 
give you other examples. 
 
And I would very much prefer it if the Canadian government 
attempted to — while it may start out with this proposal of having 
everything on the table — get down to realities and pick out the 
sectors where progress can effectively be made without 
endangering the social system in Canada. And I see no evidence of 
that. I see still the rhetoric of free trade. I see still the proposal that 
everything is on the table. And I say to you that I don’t believe 
that’s the way that either Saskatchewan people or Canadian people 
want to go. 
 
I want to ask a question. I wonder if the Premier can tell us, what 
studies has the province done or commissioned regarding the 
impact of free trade on Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the 
hon. member has slipped back into the classic Ontario arguments. 
I mean, he reads it from food processors and food manufacturers 
and all those people who say they may have to have some 
adjustment. Well that’s what Ontario has been saying to 
Saskatchewan for generations. And we’ve had infant industry in 
Ontario and Quebec protected for 100 years, and they’re saying, as 
they sit there shivering, we may have to have some adjustment. 
Well the hon. member says that everybody is for freer trade, or at 
least he is, but he will not admit that somebody in Ontario or in 
Quebec may have to adjust a little to freer trade. They may have to 
have a little bit of adjustment. That’s the first question. 
 
The second one is: what about the consumers of Canada and the 
consumers in Saskatchewan? I often hear the members opposite 
say: if we could only have gasoline prices as cheap as they are in 
the United States; if we could only get refrigerators as cheap or a 
stove or building supplies; or if we could have our clothing like 
they have it in the United States. The consumers in Canada, and 
there are literally millions and millions, would like to see some 
sort of benefit coming to Canada because of all the possibilities 
with respect to trade. 
 
I’ve never heard the Leader of the Opposition mention consumers 
once, or us getting a better deal in terms of freight rates. He read 
from manufacturers that say, gee, we might have to adjust our 
freight structure. Well goodness knows, Saskatchewan has paid 
the freight both ways for Ontario. I mean, you could have given 
that speech in the Ontario legislature, and everybody would have 
clapped, but they didn’t clap here. That’s the very  

reason you get into the negotiations, because it is our turn to make 
sure that we are there and see some adjustment in central Canada. 
And as he knows, most of the benefit of trade comes to us. 
 
Let’s look at another argument — I don’t think he’s on good 
grounds on that argument. But his argument with respect to 
agriculture, saying, if we get into agriculture discussions, there 
will be changes. I’d like to ask, and I know he doesn’t have to 
respond, but I would suspect the hon. member would like to see 
agriculture on the table at GATT, at the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade. I can’t find anybody, at least in the country or a 
good part of the country and in North America, that wouldn’t like 
to see Agriculture on the table at the GATT negotiations, which he 
thinks, I believe, is a reasonable forum. 
 
Well all those questions that he asked with respect to what might 
happen would happen at GATT. We’d be into the negotiations: 
could we reduce the tariff on this; could we have non-tariff 
barriers; could we have rules to the game; what impact would it 
have on the Canadian Wheat Board; what might it do to chickens; 
what might it do to feed grains — all those would be discussed at 
GATT, and they should be. 
 
So again, I don’t believe that it’s fair to raise a red herring and say, 
well my gosh, the wheat board’s gone, or oh, for heaven’s sake, 
we’ve been at GATT for years and it hasn’t done a thing to our 
health care system. We’ve continued to support it. Our education 
system . . . And that’s the forum we negotiate. Take the same rules 
and apply it to the negotiations in the United States. We’ll say, as 
he knows, if it isn’t a good deal, we won’t sign it. Why would you 
want to sign it if isn’t good for the country? The provinces all have 
to be there, and they will be. 
 
So I mean, we can talk about the politics of it . . . You frighten 
some so you can get your constituents to think that oh, my gosh, 
everything is at stake. Well it’s at stake all right; whether you 
should be at the negotiations or whether you shouldn’t. I mean, if 
we look at all the things that he mentioned, the baking industry 
and the brewing industry and the auto pact, and all the changes in 
the wages that may have to take place, 
 
I think it’s fair to point out in Canadian dollars we have about 165 
billion in two-way trade between the United States and Canada. 
And now 80-some per cent of all that trade is without tariff. And 
it’s increasing. I mean, it’s been growing and growing. Nobody 
forced us into it. And we’re competing with Mississippi, and we 
compete with California, and we compete with the rest of them. 
And it’s been growing. And all of a sudden we want to talk about 
even reducing tariffs more. Its’ so frightening that my gosh, 
Ontario will lose an industry; or the wheat board’s gone. And you 
know that’s nonsense. 
 
It only makes common sense to try to reduce the protectionism 
that’s going on there. And if we’ve got 85 per cent of it without 
tariff or non-tariff now, let’s either lock that in or expand it. I 
mean, that’s what we’re about. You don’t have to raise 
Mississippi; you don’t have to raise health care. I mean, you can if 
you like. But I’m not going to be signing anything, or would you, 
or agree to it, that says our health care system or educational 
system is  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2316 
 
 

in jeopardy. 
 
Europeans didn’t do that; New Zealand didn’t; Australia didn’t. In 
multilateral trade negotiations, you can’t find where it does 
happen. You’re building a bit of a smoke-screen here saying all 
this is at stake. Well it’s all at stake if we lose money. We can’t 
afford it. 
 
So again I go back. Freer trade means there’s adjustment. You 
know that, and you’re not against that. Freer trade means the 
consumers are going to benefit in a lot of commodities. So are 
exporters. We also have to import. That’s just fair. We’ve had 
agriculture discussed or we’re going to put it on the table. It should 
be at the table at GATT. And all your questions I’m sure would 
come up at GATT. And yet you’re in favour of that. So you can’t 
really have it both ways. 
 
If you think trade and agriculture should be together and 
discussed, I say fair enough; that’s precisely what we’re doing. 
Now we throw them all on the table so the U.S. can’t back out of 
some, I think that’s fair ball, because we want to talk about what 
we want to talk about. And we’ll sit there and say, all right, today 
we’re on this issue; tomorrow we’re on another one. Where we 
can cut a deal, we’ll cut it; where we’re not, where we can’t, we 
won’t. 
 
And so be it. That’s what you do in GATT; that’s what you do in 
Europe; that’s what you do in New Zealand. And I think that’s 
what we should be doing with United States so that we don’t lose 
— and I’ll go back to it . . . The status quo is not there. And I 
haven’t seen a study that says the status quo is there. We are 
destined to lose unless we fight for it and design either new 
mechanisms, improve the old ones, to make sure that we can 
continue to create wealth in this country trading with others. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, can you 
tell me what studies the province has done or commissioned 
regarding he impact of free trade on Saskatchewan? You will be 
aware that other provinces have done studies. The federal 
government has done some. Some of these have been published. 
Would you indicate what has been done with respect to the impact 
on Saskatchewan. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have been doing ongoing research 
internally. If the hon. member wants to know if we have 
contracted with outside firms to do research, we haven’t. We’ve 
done it in our trade secretariat; we’ve done it in intergovernmental 
affairs. We’ve co-operated with the federal government in 
examining its in-house studies that are now public across Canada. 
We’re continuing to do our own research with respect to 
multipliers, impacts of trade, and so forth. I have not published 
anything with respect to the impacts of trade, but we’ve certainly 
done an awful lot of analysis and continue to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, you’ve obviously done 
some work and based your decisions upon it. You are now asking 
the public to give some views to a commission you have 
appointed. Will you make  

available to the public, in the manner that the federal government 
did and the Ontario government did, some of your studies, so that 
they might examine them and give their views on these studies 
and the direction in which they are going to the commission which 
you have appointed, which I’ll call the Wakabayashi commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I don’t have anything that’s 
publishable at this point in time. Maybe we will have by August 
when they’re in their little tours around the province. So if at that 
time we’ve got some information . . . 
 
I think it’s fair to point out that you don’t have to do any research 
— none — to know that restrictions on most everything that we 
export into the United States hurts us. Potash restrictions or 
uranium restrictions or pork or pulp or paper or oil or gas — I 
mean, the more access we get to the U.S. market, the better it is; 
the less access, the more we hurt. Most of the things that we’re 
into are exported either to the United States or to other countries. 
 
In terms of my strategy, and I’m sure your strategy, you don’t 
have to have an awful lot of numbers. If you’ve grown up in the 
province, or at least you’ve worked in this province on anything to 
do with business or the government, you know the implications of 
trade with other countries. 
 
Now I’m sure we can work through some multipliers that we 
have, or through input-output analysis that can show the detriment 
or the net gain of either less trade or more trade in potash, or in 
pork, or in paper, or whatever else that the industry might be, to 
know the impact. 
 
We have certainly reviewed some of those research, say, that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool did. They took commodity by 
commodity. Where they’ve said there’s a net positive gain to the 
livestock industry n beef and pork, it would be a negative impact 
on the poultry industry. Where general overall positive impact, 
there’s no status quo. And we put together the federal studies, 
other studies, and some of our own in-house analyses. If I’ve got 
something that’s publishable, I’d be prepared to entertain the 
possibility of putting it out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, 
you really shut out the people of Saskatchewan in this type of an 
operation. There are not many people in Saskatchewan who have 
the capacity to do the analysis on the likely effects of lowering or 
raising tariffs or the removal of non-tariff barriers. 
 
And as I say, the Government of Canada published some of its 
studies; the Government of Ontario published some of its studies. 
You now have a commission, the Wakabayashi commission, 
going about attempting to get views. I cannot see why the views 
would not be better formulated and more cogent if you had 
published or would publish studies so that people could give you a 
better informed reaction to the proposals. 
 
I say, Mr. Premier, that the public of Saskatchewan are virtually 
shut out of these discussions and you are certainly going to get 
people who express their concerns. And maybe they don’t have 
sound grounds to express their concerns, but without the data 
which might reassure  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2317 
 
 

them, they will certainly express their concerns about any changes 
which are likely to affect their ability to stay in business or their 
ability to keep their jobs. 
 
Certainly we’ve had what I think are a great number of, shall we 
say, surprising proposals mentioned by the government from time 
to time, and it’s not therefore surprising that people are not clear 
what your position is and therefore not clear what they have to 
respond to. Do you have anything, or do you expect to have 
anything in the near future, which would be publishable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can certainly think of a publication, or the 
information that I have in my office that I could put together as a 
publication, that says: here’s what we do in terms of trade; here’s 
some impact analysis that’s available. I mean, I’ll give that very 
serious consideration in terms of having it out to the public for the 
hearings. 
 
The second thing I might want to point out, this is not a one-way 
operation. Each industry, each sector, can provide us with the 
intimate detail about what kind of impact trade will have on their 
livelihood. Potash — and the potash industry will say, here’s what 
it means to us; here’s what a cut would mean to us; here’s what 
growth would mean to us. 
 
And the same would apply to hogs and packing industries and 
pulp and paper and oil and gas and steel — all those. And that’s 
why we’ve asked for their intimate economic analysis of what 
trade they do; and how harmful protectionism is; what impact the 
growing markets would be; so that no only that I can understand 
but, as you point out, that the public can understand. 
 
What are the implications to all those people who live and work in 
the potash industry to the United States putting on a non-tariff or 
tariff barrier on potash? Now they’re pretty substantial. And when 
the potash industry — whether it’s management, labour, a 
combination — put that together, the public is going to say, now I 
understand what it means to potash. I can say it or you can say it, 
but when the industry comes forward in our hearings and says this 
is what it means to me, I believe that analysis plus our own 
research is going to give us a very clear picture of the kinds of 
things that you’re going to see at stake in the negotiations. 
 
So I’ll give very serious consideration to putting together a 
publication on all the things we trade and not trade, but it’s a 
two-way street. We can provide that to the public, but the public is 
providing it to us as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, you are 
quoted as saying that you were in favour of a common currency 
with the United States. I found that statement absolutely 
fascinating and would like your comment on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m afraid I don’t recall saying that. If you 
could give me . . . If somebody said that I said it, I would even 
doubt that I’d back that up. A common . . . I mean, we have a 
Canadian dollar and they have a U.S. dollar and I believe in 
floating exchanges and based on productivity. I do not ever recall 
saying that. If I did, 

 maybe I was reported wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I’ll leave that. It struck me as an 
idea bizarre even for the Premier, if I may put it that way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pretty witty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Pretty witty, yes. I thought so too. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want now to deal with a narrower point, and that is 
the question of what sort of reports you expect from Reisman, and 
who will be involved in assessing those reports. I will tell you, I 
was disappointed — if I understand the situation — I was 
disappointed that the federal government was unwilling to have a 
team of people including, for example, on our behalf, Mr. 
Wakabayashi, who would be, if not at the table, at least in virtual 
daily consultation with Reisman and his team of negotiators. 
 
I just believe that, if negotiations get beyond the realm of 
generalities and we get down to negotiating deals, then it will be 
absolutely imperative that the person who’s negotiating on behalf 
of Canada have a pipeline to the provinces. And I don’t mean once 
every three months. Anyone who’s done any negotiations knows 
that that absolutely can’t work. That’s like negotiating a union 
contract and getting the principals together once every three 
months. That’s simply not how deals are cut. 
 
Reisman needs a group of officials with whom he can be in virtual 
daily contact — not every day, all day — but when the deal starts 
being cut, if any deal is going to be cut, and it’s not going to be 
good enough that the first ministers get together every three 
months, or indeed every one month. What will be needed is a 
pipeline, and I’m disappointed that Wakabayashi is going to spend 
his time being around Saskatchewan in the summer and not at 
Reisman’s elbow — not he alone, but a group of provincial 
representatives at Reisman’s elbow. And I don’t know why that 
isn’t the case. 
 
And I ask you whether or not we can’t make arrangements 
whereby there would be a provincial committee of officials who 
would be sitting in on the negotiations — not necessarily every 
hour of negotiations, because I imagine there’s fair amount of 
pleasantries at this stage of the game. But when they move beyond 
the stage of pleasantries, is there any assurance that we will have 
our person there ready to convey the views of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and ready to consult with you or your appropriate 
minister on very short notice so that those views would be 
conveyed in a timely and effective way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have a very 
comprehensive pipeline to the negotiations. Our officials, 
including the Premier’s office, was briefed before Reisman went 
down to begin his negotiations. We were briefed on all the studies 
that the federal government has done, shared with us. We were 
briefed during the negotiations, and on a daily basis Art 
Wakabayashi, or the trade minister, or me, for that matter, can be 
in discussion with the individuals that are on the national team, 
and we’re briefed afterwards. 
 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2318 
 
 

We have three different mechanisms for a pipeline, and the Prime 
Minister said, if that isn’t enough, we’ll look at even another one. 
But we’ve got Art Wakabayashi, who is the formal trade 
representative; we’ve got the trade ministers from all across the 
provinces and their groups, which can be piped right in, if you 
will; and you’ve got the first ministers that meet every three 
months and who do not want any surprises. And they’ve said that 
to the Prime Minister: we want to be fully informed; we want our 
men and women informed; we want the people informed; we want 
the strategy; I want to hear what you’re talking about and want to 
go there in full understanding because . . . well as the new premier 
from P.E.I. said: look, if it isn’t going to be acceptable to P.E.I. 
obviously I’m going to raise all kinds of problem. So a consensus 
is automatic here. We have a consensus, or else everybody’s going 
to have to bear the consequences; and in this process in our 
democracy, you bear the political consequences. 
 
So we have a mechanism; we’re in on it. I think, if I’m right, I saw 
the Leader of the Opposition in Canada, the Rt. Hon. John Turner, 
was on Question Period this weekend. He says he has full 
confidence in Simon Reisman as a tough, aware, experienced 
negotiator for Canadians; he has no problem with him whatsoever. 
The guy’s been involved in trade, in GATT, in departments, in 
governments. And if we’ve got access to him and his information, 
and at the Premier’s level, at the minister’s level, and at the 
working committee’s level, well . . . 
 
I suppose you could say, well I think that Art Wakabayashi should 
be in Washington sitting beside Simon, and the Prime Minister 
hasn’t ruled that out — or somebody there. But I mean, if there 
isn’t confidence in the Canadian negotiators, it’s not going to work 
anyway. I mean, who is to prevent somebody from making a 
phone call to somebody in the middle of the night and say, well, 
we’ll cut a deal and then we won’t let the provinces know? I 
mean, you know, it’s impossible. 
 
And these are public negotiations, at least in terms of the results 
and the strategy. We’ll put things on the table, and we’ll bring it 
back to the provinces, and we’ll send it back in there, and it will 
ultimately be public because you’re going to have to sign it. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I am not worried that nobody will know what’s going on. I 
mean, you couldn’t have enough watchmen in the night to keep 
everybody fully informed all the time and saying that somebody 
couldn’t call somebody. What would happen if Simon Reisman 
called — is it Murphy? — Mr. Murphy, you know, 3 o’clock in 
the morning and say, here it is? 
 
Well I have confidence we’re going to get access to information. I 
certainly know the Prime Minister says that we will meet every 
three months and we can discuss anything you want to. So I 
believe it’s important that Art Wakabayashi and his committee 
hear the views of Saskatchewan people, industry by industry, 
sector by sector. No other province is doing it. I hear premiers 
across the country say, hey, that’s not a bad idea; maybe  

we should be doing that. 
 
So in the negotiations, you’re right, it’s preliminary right now, Mr. 
Reisman can be there laying out the groundwork. We get daily 
reports. Art Wakabayashi can fully understand all the details of 
Saskatchewan industry and talk to Saskatchewan people, as he 
listens to and is fully informed what’s going on in Washington and 
in Ottawa. The two processes, I believe, go hand in hand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I have every 
confidence in Simon Reisman’s ability, and I’m not surprised that 
Mr. John Turner has, since Simon Reisman was John Turner’s 
deputy, as I recall, when we were dealing with them, and they 
undoubtedly were an able pair. They equally, undoubtedly, did not 
have the interests of Saskatchewan at heart. I instance the 1974 
budget which made royalty payments non-deductible. I won’t go 
into that battle that Premier Lougheed and I had with those 
particular people, but if you feel that they have the interests of 
western Canada at heart, that wasn’t my overwhelming impression 
at that time, I’ll tell you that. 
 
I want now to turn, just for a moment, I just want to end my 
comments on free trade with where I started, that whether or not 
you are now changing the language in which you’re formulating 
your comments, you were, short months ago, talking about free 
trade and about comprehensive free trade. And I have no 
hesitation whatever in saying that that would not work to the best 
interests of Canada. If now we’re talking about enhanced trade, or 
Progressive Conservative liberalization, or whatever phrases are 
about which have no definable content and therefore can mean 
anything, fair enough. But I don’t think there’s any doubt in the 
public mind that at least it started out in the minds of the Prime 
Minister and yourself as an exercise in free trade. If that has been 
changed, then we at least are making some progress and are 
getting negotiations onto some basis of reality. 
 
But I think many will be still fearful that what is being proposed is 
a free trade deal with the United States; that is, the absence of 
tariffs. And that, I think, would be not in the best interests of 
Canada. I can’t imagine anyone who would say it would be. 
 
I want to say once again, we’re not now talking about non-tariff 
barriers and the rest, which everybody agrees that we would like to 
see both Canada and the United States lessen the use of those 
against the products of the other. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I wanted to raise another issue, and that, Mr. 
Premier, is the arrangements between your government and Peter 
Pocklington, by which I will include Gainers and any other 
companies which Peter Pocklington may own. I do not know his 
corporate structure, and I’m forgiven for that because I can name 
you at least 10 companies that he has been associated with from 
time to time, and I have no idea under what corporate name he’s 
now operating. 
 
But I want to ask you whether or not an agreement has been 
signed between your government and Peter Pocklington with 
respect to any one or all of: a bacon processing plant, a hog 
slaughtering plant, or a pork  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2319 
 
 

processing plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Without going to the deputy of the 
Economic Development and Trade, or Sedco, or whatever, I 
believe that we have signed a package on the bacon plant. I 
believe the building is up and will be in operation, certainly by this 
fall. And what it is, is an industrial package of $7,500 a job that we 
have for anybody that’s creating a new job for a year; and a Sedco 
package for operating that we provided, and Sedco will provide, 
for people who want to build new facilities. And I believe the 
interest rate is current rates, if I recall. I think I had that 
information for question period. 
 
On a new packing plant, I believe that we have agreed in principle 
that we would provide the same sort of package, that is $7,500 a 
job in a Sedco operation, but I don’t think it’s at the stage that the 
bacon plant is, where the bacon plant’s being built. And obviously 
the packing plant is something that’s still being contemplated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, our 
difficulty to some extent is not knowing for certain what agency of 
government may be dealing with this, whether it be Economic 
Development or Sedco or Agriculture. And I address therefore 
some of these questions to the Premier. And I’m not expecting 
precise details because he obviously doesn’t have his officials here 
for precise details. 
 
But the press release of six months ago or more said that there 
would be a bacon plant with a capacity of 50 million pounds of 
bacon per year. Now, Mr. Premier, that’s a lot of bacon. And 
while you will know this, and I won’t, I’d be very surprised if 
more than 20 to 25 pounds of bacon comes from a hog carcass. 
And as I say, so we’re talking about a couple of million hogs in 
order to provide the carcasses for 50 million pounds of bacon. Can 
you give me any idea of the source of the hogs for the bacon 
plant? Can you give me any idea what is thought of as the source 
for those hogs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I would have to confirm the capacity 
of the plant. But if it is accurate — and just for the moment we’ll 
assume that it is — it’s my understanding that the hogs will come 
from various places in Canada. We expect and hope to see, and 
certainly we’ve provided incentives to have hog numbers up in 
Saskatchewan. We expect hogs from Alberta to come in here, 
hogs from Manitoba, and indeed hogs from Ontario, so that we 
can take the carcasses and make the bacon and export it into the 
United States, because there’s a growing market for bacon into the 
United States. 
 
Rather than processing them in, say, Alberta or processing them in 
Manitoba or Ontario, we want to process them here. We will 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . I can see that the member from 
Shaunavon is laughing again at more trade with the United States. 
He doesn’t seem to be interested in the kinds of response that 
would be provided. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, when somebody creates a new packing plant 
or a new operation here, obviously the members opposite can’t 
hardly stand it, and they have to chirp from their seats. If they’re 
interested in a bacon  

processing plant, as the Leader of the Opposition is, I suspect, the 
hogs are coming from Saskatchewan and the prairie provinces and 
indeed Ontario, and we will be packing these, making bacon, 
exporting it into the United States as, quite frankly, we’ve been 
doing for years, only the other way. 
 
We export things, raw commodities, into Ontario and Quebec; 
they process it, ship it back here, and ship it out. We’re trying to 
do the opposite, which I’m sure he would agree in theory — at 
least in principle — is a good idea for us to be adding value here to 
the things that we do, even taking others’ raw products or 
unprocessed products and process them here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, can you 
tell me whether there is any arrangement with Peter Pocklington 
— using that term as I previously defined it — whereby any 
subsidy . . . Is there any deal or understanding or arrangement or 
commitment whereby any subsidy or payment will be made to 
Pocklington on the basis of the importation into this province of 
hogs or sides or pork bellies produced in other provinces? 
 
I’ve heard persistent reports indicating that your government is 
offering a subsidy to Pocklington to bring hogs, or some portion of 
the carcass thereof, into this province. And I would be interested in 
your comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I take notice of that, Mr. Chairman. I 
don’t have those details here. And from my recollection, I don’t 
recall it. But if there is, I would certainly be prepared to get the 
information. But I don’t have it here, and I can’t recall it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Premier, I have been surprised 
by many, many of the statements of this Pocklington deal for some 
time. We have . . . The statement says that we’re going to have a 
$3 million bacon processing plant, curing and packaging plant, in 
Saskatchewan. And plans also call for a $20 million hog 
slaughtering plant and a $3 million pork processing plant, both to 
be built later, as supplies warrant. 
 
I had a lot of trouble with that. I didn’t know what supplies there 
would be for a hog slaughtering plant that wouldn’t also be 
supplies for a bacon plant. Obviously you can get portions of a 
carcass from outside the province. I’m aware of that. 
 
But it seemed to me that the bacon plant, which will be one of the 
largest and most modern in Canada, will employ 100 persons and 
have a capacity of 50 million pounds of bacon a year, which my 
very inexpert information would indicate at least 2 million hogs, 
or the bacon portion of 2 million hogs, which is a very large 
number of hogs, considering the fact that this province produces 
about three-quarters of a million. And obviously no plant is going 
to get them all. I just am baffled by where anybody is going to get 
enough hogs for 50 million pounds. 
 
But I want now to concentrate on what sort of a financial deal 
Pocklington gets. And I’d be interested in knowing whether you 
can tell me whether there is discussions of spending about 6 to $7 
million on the plant of which he  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2320 
 
 

will get more than 5 million in a Sedco loan and more than 
three-quarters of a million in a grant, leaving Pocklington with 
next to nothing to put up. I very much fear, since Pocklington has 
built his empire basically on other people’s money, that this is the 
facts. 
 
I would like you to outline in general terms what the deal is with 
Pocklington in terms of how much it’s thought he will put up and 
how much the Government of Saskatchewan will put up, either by 
way of loan from Sedco or any other agency, or by way of grant in 
the terms of industrial incentive loans or any other grants, because 
my information is, for what it’s worth, that Pocklington is putting 
up very little, and what we have is yet another sweetheart deal, and 
a sweetheart deal with a fellow who I wouldn’t regard as a 
sweetheart. Now I wonder if you can give me the financial 
structure of the Pocklington deal. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I don’t have all the numbers with me but I 
believe that some of the hon. members had the chance at the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade to ask him all these 
details.  
 
The one that we can deal with specifically, but I don’t have all the 
numbers, is the $3 million bacon plant that’s in North Battleford. 
And as I understand it, it is no more complicated than I described 
it earlier. You get $7,500 — a gift — for new jobs created. So if 
that’s the case, it’s an industrial incentive program which is 
available to anybody who creates it. 
 
Then you will get either the first or a second mortgage or some 
combination of a mortgage from Sedco that can provide, say, a 
20-year repayment on some sort of current government borrowing 
rates, the rate of the day, which is available to people who come in 
and want to establish a brand-new facility. 
 
Now if it’s 100 new jobs and we’ve got $7,500 a job, I mean, 
you’re looking at $1 million I guess, or $750,000. And then you’re 
looking at the benefits of a Sedco package that you’d put together 
on a 20-year program at some sort of government rate of 
borrowing over the commercial rate. And then he goes ahead and 
he builds the project and he has to . . . you know, obviously 
committed to pay that back, and so forth. 
 
So it’s a little bit unfair. If you want to get into the sweethearts and 
deals, we would encourage the Japanese to come in and do that, or 
people from Ontario to come in and do it. You may not like Peter 
Pocklington because of his reputation, either politically or 
otherwise; that’s fair ball. But certainly Gainers has processed a lot 
of bacon and a lot of meat and been in operation for a long time in 
Canada, and it certainly has the expertise. If they can take 
advantage of existing government programs in Saskatchewan, 
build a new bacon plan, employ 100 people, from all indications I 
get out of North Battleford, it’s a very positive thing. 
 
I think and believe that you’re in favour of it. If that’s the case, fair 
enough; if you’re not, I would certainly like to know. But it’s the 
normal Sedco and industrial incentive  

package that, on the $3 million . . . given the information that I 
have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Premier, I fear you’re right. I 
fear that he is going to get $750,000 in a grant and probably get a 
$2 million Sedco loan, where if it’s a $3 million plant . . . And 
then I suspect he selected his own contractor and may well make a 
little money on the construction contract. And I suspect therefore 
there won’t be very much Pocklington money going into that. 
That’s all too likely with the numbers which you have suggested. 
 
What I want to say, Mr. Premier, is that it is surely curious that 
you would offer large incentives to Peter Pocklington to build a 
pork processing plant, when in 1985 . . . when in 1983 there was a 
pork processing plant here owned by Intercon which simply was 
closed, and which, so far as I am aware, the Government of 
Saskatchewan did not offer any incentives to Intercon to keep 
open. I’ve no brief for Intercon, except that they are good 
corporate citizens, but I’ve no brief for them. 
 
But I would say the same of anybody, that if we already have a 
plant here, and if it’s about to be dismantled, is there any reason 
why you would take no steps to intervene with respect to the 
dismantling of this plant and then offer Peter Pocklington a grant 
of $750,000 and a significant loan in order to put up a bacon 
plant? 
 
I know they’re not exactly the same plant. I acknowledge that out 
of hand — one is a pork processing, and one is bacon. But Peter 
Pocklington is talking about a pork processing as well. And I 
inquire as to why the government has acted in this way, offering, 
so far as I can see, nothing to Intercon to keep their pork 
processing plant, and offering substantial incentives to Peter 
Pocklington, not only with respect to a bacon plant, but also with 
respect to a pork processing plant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’m sure we can agree that Intercon 
and Gainers knows more about processing and bacon than either 
one of us. Now in Intercon’s case, here in Regina they were telling 
us that they were losing money day after day after day, and there 
was just not the market for that kind of technology, for that kind of 
processing plant for them to keep the doors open. They were 
subsidizing it out of the Intercon plant in Saskatoon, and they said 
it’s just not going to make it. It’s the technology. It’s what they did 
and the product they sold, and so forth. 
 
Now at the same time, if they had come to me and said, gee, 
we’ve got a new idea on a bacon plant, a new project, whatever — 
I mean, I’d look at it. I mean, why wouldn’t I? I mean, I’m 
interested in agriculture. I’m interested in export and trade, and I 
don’t need to pursue that. 
 
When a new company comes along and said we are specializing 
and we can build a brand-new bacon plant and take bellies, if you 
will, from across Canada and process it into fine Canadian bacon 
and export it and create new jobs, I don’t care whether it’s 
Intercon or Fletchers or Gainers or whoever it is. They approached 
us and said, would you like us to do it. And I said, we have a 
standard industrial incentive package; you got it. 
 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2321 
 
 

Now if could add, Intercon has now got a little bit interested, and 
they’ve expanded some themselves and they’re expanding into 
California. They have a $23.9 million modernization and 
expansion process. They will get $7,500 for every new job they 
created, and they’re looking at new technology and new 
techniques. 
 
And as the hon. member knows, a little competition, a little 
technology, and little new ideas aren’t all that bad when it comes 
to the business world. It keeps them awake in the morning and it 
keeps them awake at night, and they think about how they can 
improve. 
 
So we’ve got new technology in bacon; we’ve got new technology 
at Intercon. we’ve got a $23 million expansion in Saskatoon, $3 
million expansion in North Battleford, and the possibility, yes, for 
a $36 million brand-new packing plant if it all comes to pass. 
 
Now you were right. You have to have hog numbers up; you have 
to have trade with the U.S. If those things don’t come to pass — I 
expect it will — there will be a new pork processing plant in a 
large scale, say with 1,000 people. But if they do develop and the 
markets are there and the hog numbers are up, as we hope, then 
certainly we can compete with Quebec into providing those 
markets into the United States. 
 
So I certainly never ever ruled out exciting new ideas or new 
technology or a game plan by Intercon. They came to me and 
frankly said, it won’t work in Regina; it just wasn’t there. They 
couldn’t see how to make it profitable; and they know more about 
that than I did. You’ve been involved in your administration, I’ve 
been in some in this administration, in Intercon. I feel better about 
the new technology — and they’re happy with it, the bacon 
technology which seems to be able to use other provinces’ pork 
bellies — then I would just pumping money in to an operation that 
was in Regina that, from everything that I could see, would just 
lose, lose, lose. 
 
So we’ve got new ideas, new technology, a little competition, and 
they’re both getting $7,500 for new jobs created, which is there for 
everybody. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, do you 
have any objection to make available to the committee the written 
arrangements with Peter Pocklington that your government has 
concluded with him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I provided the general 
outline of it. I believe the minister was asked if he would give the 
details of the contract. I don’t believe that he did. I mean, we’ve 
provided certainly the package in general. Many of these are 
confidential because we put them together, as you know from time 
to time with various other companies. We don’t want all that 
information out to the private sector when you’re asking them to 
compete and so forth. It’s generally as I described, and we’ll leave 
it at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I somehow felt 
that we weren’t going to get the details on Pocklington, and I think 
I could talk here a long time and  

still not get them. So I don’t intend to talk that long. 
 
I’d just indicated that once again, from the information that we 
have, it looks like a great deal for somebody, and I think his name 
is Peter Pocklington. As I say, he’s got a history of being able to 
do great things with other people’s money, and I suppose that’s 
how the game works. 
 
I’m not encouraged by his dealings with the pork producers 
marketing board in Alberta. And I’m frankly surprised that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would welcome without apparent, 
any question, a pork producer who has I think without any 
question at all attempted to undermine and defeat the orderly 
marketing of pork products in the neighbouring province of 
Alberta. And I think that for our government to welcome with 
open arms a pork producer with the record that he has in dealing, 
yes, with his employees, but also with the organized producers of 
pork in Alberta, that does not bode well, I think, for smooth 
relations between that company and our pork producers or the 
people who work in that plant. I don’t know whether you want to 
make any comment, but I’m going to go to another item if you 
don’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said at the outset, the 
labour legislation that we have in Saskatchewan, largely designed 
by the members opposite and the hon. member when he was 
premier, is here. Everybody that comes into this province operates 
under those laws and the legislation that it was designed. As he 
knows, it’s sometimes difficult in negotiations. He’s been in 
negotiations with the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union) himself from time to time, when it just wasn’t 
the sweetest thing that he ever did that morning. We’ve been in 
negotiations with doctors — he has — and nurses, teachers, 
various other people, and from time to time, it isn’t easy. You 
hope that you always settle in a fair arrangement. 
 
I note that Fletchers settled in Alberta. I hope that the Gainers 
arrangement settles. If they come in here, they’ve got to operate 
like everybody else does. I will enforce the laws to make sure that 
they’re fair. So I’d leave it at that, and the hon. member can go on 
to the next topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Enforcement of laws is a good deal easier 
with people who want to adhere to them, but we’ll leave that. I 
can’t add anything about Peter Pocklington’s record which hasn’t 
already been paraded through the news media over the last three to 
six months. So he is well-known and I don’t need to guild that lily. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about some economic indicators. And I 
want to raise with the Premier my argument that 1985 has been a 
very, very bad year for Saskatchewan, and not only because of 
droughts, but because of a good number of other weaknesses in 
our economy. And there are many, many indicators, but I’ll pick a 
couple. 
 
Retail trade. Retail trade in this province in 1985 increased by an 
amount which was the second lowest in Canada — by a 
percentage figure which was the second lowest in Canada. Retail 
trade in Prince Edward Island went up about 6 per cent; in 
Saskatchewan it went up something over 7 per cent; and every 
other province did better on retail trade. Every other province did 
better.  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2322 
 
 

I’ll take employment, and here I want to talk . . . I think it will be 
easier to . . . if in some sequence if I go to public and private 
investment. I could also do that on an interprovincial basis, but I 
want to do it on a comparative basis with respect to previous years 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
I’m talking about now percentage changes in public and private 
investment. In 1978 over ’77, 7.9 per cent; in ’79, 27 per cent; in 
1980, 10 per cent; 1981, 19 per cent; 1982, minus 9 per cent — 
those are the years of the big freeze; in 1983, in spite of the fact 
that 1982 had been a disastrous year and one would anticipate a 
sharp increase in the percentage, that was not the case, 6.5 per 
cent; 1984, 0.3 per cent; 1985, 5.2 per cent. 
 
Those are very, very low figures for public and private investment, 
and every single year since 1982 has been lower than any of ’78, 
’79, ’80, or ’81. And I wonder if the Premier can indicate why the 
economic policies, of which he was so proud when he came to 
office in 1982, have produced such a dismal record in public and 
private investment, such a dismal record on this occasion and 
virtually every year in retail trade increases, and other dismal 
records which I will deal with in a minute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only make the 
point that the hon. member knows that we have encouraged 
investment in Saskatchewan. We have spent money publicly. I 
mean, he’s often criticized because we’ve spent too much. He 
says, you have a deficit; you’re spending it; you’re investing it; 
you’ve got rural gas and individual line service, and you’re 
building this, and hospitals and projects, and it’s public money. 
And geez, it’s too much; you’ve got a deficit. 
 
On the other hand, we’ve got private investment coming in. As he 
knows, we’ve had an awful lot of investment in the energy 
business, and we’ve got investments in the industrial sector, in 
tourism, and so forth. 
 
So, he says, well the policies that we initiated in Saskatchewan 
caused all these problems. Well the same problems — and the 
government didn’t change at all, and he knows that — occurred in 
Alberta. He knows that. I mean, if he wants to take comparative 
figures, Alberta was in a boom and it was going gangbusters in 
1979-80-81. And the government didn’t change. And if he wants 
to look at the same numbers, they took a dive because . . . 
 
Why? Well obviously wheat prices went down; potash prices went 
down; oil prices went down; interest rates rose to 22 per cent. I 
mean, that’s my government’s policy, obviously. I mean, he . . . 
Not too many people with much over a grade 6 education would 
believe that the government policy caused international interest 
rates to go up or commodities to go down. And the same 
government was in Alberta now runs a huge deficit, I mean, on a 
current account, because of the same conditions, same philosophy 
— building and growing, building a heritage fund. 
 
Now I won’t get into it in any great detail. We’ve had  

consistently among the lowest employment in Canada. We have 
been building, we have been creating, and we’ve had 
diversification. And I can go through forecasts. I mean, our 
unemployment rates have consistently been the lowest in the 
nation. We lead western Canada in lowest unemployment, despite 
drought that they never had in Manitoba and other places. Our 
population is up 4 per cent. We’re well over a million people. 
Employment is up 6 per cent; incomes are up 16 per cent; 
investments up 14 per cent; new businesses are up 14 per cent and, 
as he knows, billions of dollars worth of projects. 
 
And I can take as many forecasters and analytic groups that talk 
about the strategies in Saskatchewan during these time as he can 
find that might say that they aren’t any good — I can find them to 
say that they are. 
 
But obviously people across the U.S., whether they’re in Nebraska 
and are Democrats, or whether they’re in Alberta and they’re 
Conservative, or whether they’re in North Dakota and Republican, 
or in Manitoba and they’re New Democrats, face the same 
economic circumstances except for one thing. No province in 
Canada faced tougher, more difficult times with respect to 
weather, grasshoppers, drought, on a magnitude that we haven’t 
seen for years, then we did. And we had to cope with it, and I’m 
sure you know that that’s difficult. 
 
So in terms of policies, we still have a large public sector, we still 
build things in the public sector. We’ve certainly put money into 
health care; we’ve certainly put it in education. The public sector’s 
rural gas, the public sector’s individual line service, the public 
sector’s into burying lines — we’ve built one power project, 
starting another one and encouraging the private sector to come in 
because we like the partnership between the private and the public. 
All that. 
 
I don’t think you’d philosophically agree with much of it. I don’t 
think you’d disagree with interest rate protection. I mean, you 
voted for it in here. You didn’t disagree with us targeting tax 
incentives for farmers, cutting the tax on gas. You haven’t 
disagreed with the pension program, except you don’t want your 
wife to have it. Fair enough. 
 
We’re looking at the kinds of things that generally ordinary people 
in Saskatchewan recommend that we do under some pretty 
difficult times, to build that infrastructure. So compared to jobs; 
compared to interest rates; compared to gasoline prices; compared 
to economic growth; we’re either doing relatively well or close to 
the top on the things that matter. Job creation — it’s been difficult; 
I’ll grant you it’s been tough, particularly in agriculture. But we 
certainly rank, and with respect jobs, both for young people, 
women employed in the work-force, I’ll stack up the record with 
anybody in Canada, given the circumstances. 
 
And you can dwell on it if you like, but I don’t think many people 
are going to buy your argument that we brought in policies that 
would wreck the economy. We may be criticized because we 
would spend money during some difficult times, but most of those 
measures you voted for yourself in here — particularly interest 
rate protection. I’d do it again, and I will continue to do it. In fact, 
we’ve provided. 
 
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2323 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I 
am not being critical of you for not spending enough public 
money. You’ve found a great number of ways of spending public 
money and running up a debt, the like of which this province 
hasn’t seen. 
 
The problem is that private people haven’t been investing. The 
problem is that just in sheer dollars, private investment has done 
down. That’s our problem. You can look at the numbers and the 
budget documents. You can look at them yourself, and you will 
see that the public and private investment combined has been 
lower in every single year of ’82, ’83, ’84 and ’85 than it was in 
any year of ’81, ’80, ’79 and ’78. And you say that in the 
significant things, things are going well. Well I’ll pick up a few of 
these so-called significant things then. 
 
People who are on welfare who could be employed, the so-called 
unemployed employables — 1981 there were 2,600; 1984 there 
were 11,900. And ’85 we don’t have the exact figure; it looks like 
about 11,000. I must say I’m not impressed with that sort of 
figure. And these are people who used to be unemployed but are 
now on the Saskatchewan assistance plan. 
 
You talked about jobs for young people. Let me tell you how 
many jobs there are for young people in this province. People 
between the ages of 15 and 24, and that’s how Statistics Canada 
put out their figures, and I’ll tell you how many jobs there are. 
 
In 1977 there were 105,000 in the province; ’78, 108; ’79, 113; 
’80, 113; ’81, 110. Now listen to these — ’82, 107; ’83, 103; ’84, 
101. Looks like ’85 we’re back to 103. Every single year since 
1982 the number of people between the ages of 15 and 24 who 
were working is lower than any single year from ’77, ’78, ’79, ’80, 
and ’81. So there just aren’t these jobs for young people you talk 
about. And job creation for young people, both with respect to 
full-time jobs and part-time jobs, was less than the period from ’77 
to ’81, and very substantially less. 
 
Let’s take housing starts. It’s another indicator which I don’t have 
here the years comparisons, but if I used them they would be 
equally effective. I am using here interprovincial comparison for 
1984-1985. And in this, our housing starts increased by 2.5 per 
cent, certainly by far the lowest in Canada — by far the lowest in 
Canada. Contrast that with even Alberta at 14 per cent, and they 
were supposed to have a great excess of housing. Manitoba had 23 
per cent; Ontario at 34 per cent; and we at 2.5 per cent — those are 
housing starts. 
 
When it comes to debt, and you spoke of borrowing money and 
spending lots of it . . . and that indeed is true. With respect to total 
debt, the total debt from 80-81 was 2.5 million, and ’87, in the 
Estimates, it’s estimated at 8.7 million — and I’m not at all sure 
that it’s all included there — some indication that I can’t find in 
this debt figure, some of the recent loans. But we’ll leave that 
aside. From 2.5 million in 1981 to 8.7 million in 1987, the year 
ended March 31, 1987, which we’re now in, and that is a pretty 
impressive increase in debt, more than a tripling in that short 
period of time. 
 

And what is even more unfortunate, we know that there’s been 
heavy borrowing for power and for telephones, and I don’t 
particularly quarrel with that. But the borrowing for which we will 
not get anybody else to pay but the taxpayers, the so-called, 
non-reimbursable debt, that in 1981 that was $53 million and now 
it’s $1.814 billion — more than 35 times as much between 1981 
and the year we’re now in of ’87, ’86-87. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I could go on — the gross domestic product 
per capita, and on and on. But all of these indicators show that 
these have been about the toughest four years that Saskatchewan 
has seen for a long, long time, judged by non-reimbursable debt 
— or total debt, or housing starts, or employment for young 
people, or unemployed employables, employable people on 
welfare, or public and private investment, or retail trade — do the 
same with respect to in-migration and out-migration. You’ve 
heard those figures before, but in the year 1985, the 12 months for 
1985, more out-migration per capita in this province than any 
other province in Canada. Just nosed out Newfoundland for that 
distinction. Just nosed out Newfoundland, where other provinces 
— Alberta certainly had some, but we were way up there. Taking 
away Newfoundland, we were a country mile ahead of most 
provinces — or behind, depending upon your point of view. 
 
But this province, the population went up by a very modest 
amount — not nearly as much as the natural increase, not nearly as 
much as the figure by which births exceeded deaths — and the 
out-migration was very substantial; and every indication of the 
first months of this 1986 year, the out-migration is even greater. 
 
So these, Mr. Premier, are the economic figures which indicate 
just how well the economy has fared under your leadership and 
guidance. And you say that there have been tough times, and of 
course there were tough times, but interest rates declined 
substantially, not by any action of your government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We won the election on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And that reduced interest rates in Canada 
— sure, sure, sure, sure. Interest rates or, let us say, the Bank of 
Canada rate — even the government opposite, I don’t think claims 
credit for the Bank of Canada rate — interest rates substantially 
declined. Oil prices, from the day you came to office, kept going 
up and up and up and up, from about $20 a barrel to in the 
$30-a-barrel range and more, and only in the last few months have 
they dropped. 
 
So oil prices were increasing sharply; interest rates were going 
down. There ought to have been a great opportunity. The crops in 
1982 and 1982 were very nearly record crops. The last two have 
not been so good, but ’82 and ’83 were very nearly record crops. 
There were many, many pluses. 
 
(1645) 
 
In any given four-year period there are downs and ups, but having 
regard to the fact that you had good agricultural production in first 
two years, the four-year  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2324 
 
 

average, I would bet, would be well up there with most four-year 
stretches. WE had high oil prices, low interest rates, all the 
ingredients for economic development, and it didn’t take place. 
Lower interest rates from 1982 on. They started to go down and 
they’re a good deal lower now than they were when your 
government took office. That was supposed to be a great 
stimulant, and with all those stimulants what has happened? Retail 
trade is down, public and private investment is down, more 
able-bodied people on welfare than every before, jobs for young 
people down significantly, housing starts down, total debt up, 
non-reimbursable debt up. And that’s what’s happening, and that’s 
what’s happening. 
 
That’s an indictment of the open for business policy which you 
launched in the fall of 1982 — open for business and nobody 
came. You had a party and nobody came. They came to the party 
but they didn’t stay. And economic investment by the private 
sector is far lower in these four years than it was in the previous 
four years. And that’s a pretty significant figure. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, that . . . I would invite you to indicate, 
to tell us which of these economic indicators you think I’ve 
misstated, which of these economic indicators you think I’ve 
misstated, which ones you think are not being stated accurately. 
 
And I’ll go over them again: out-migration in the last 18 months; 
reimbursable debt in the last 18 months or four years, as you wish; 
total debts in the last 18 months or four years, as you wish; 
housing starts, again in the last 18 months or four years, as you 
wish; employment among young people — any one of your years 
is poorer than any one of the four preceding years — number of 
able-bodied people on welfare, last 18 months or four years. 
 
And as I say, any one of your years is worse that any one of the 
four previous years. Public and private investment, any one of 
your years is worse than any one of the previous four years. Which 
of those do you say isn’t true? Which of those do you say isn’t 
true, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman. I don’t believe that the 
Leader of the Opposition believes a word that he just said. I mean, 
I don’t believe that he thinks that the province of Saskatchewan, 
under whatever administration, is going to change world events. 
Now he may try to lead the public on . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
His friend from the Quill Lakes is back in, Mr. Chairman; he’s 
chirping from his seat. If the Leader of the Opposition would just 
move over and control his members, I would be glad to respond. 
 
As soon as I hit something that means something relevant, the 
member from the Quills, he hollers from his seat because he 
doesn’t like to hear it. I want the gallery to know and the public to 
know that the member from Quills can’t stand to listen to some 
intelligent arguments. He won’t listen to any reasonable debate. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition — if he could kind of get hold of his 
troops over there, if you’d kind of get them to calm down. If the 
Leader of the Opposition would even mention to the chairman that 
he could have a little bit of respect in the legislature so the member 
from Quills could  

at least quit chirping from his seat, Mr. Chairman, it would be an 
awful lot easier in here if you would quieten down the member 
from Quill Lakes. I’m sure his constituents like to know that he 
doesn’t even know the rules, or if he does, he doesn’t respect them 
and the leader has no control over him. 
 
So I’m quite prepared to stand here and talk about the member 
from Quill who sits there with his mouth open day after day from 
his seat, doesn’t know the rules, and just talks and talks. His leader 
is embarrassed. I mean, right now you can see he’s embarrassed 
by the member from Quills. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well if encourages him to speak from his 
seat, well then no wonder he’s got problems with respect to his 
leadership. Mr. Chairman, I believe that I have the floor and while 
I have the floor it seems to me that the hon. members could at least 
have the courtesy . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Listen to them 
holler. Why don’t you just have the respect for this Assembly, 
have respect for your leader, at least have respect for your own 
leader and show them that you know something about decorum, 
some decorum? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, listen to them. Fair enough. They can chirp 
away there and they can look ridiculous. Everybody in the gallery 
and the province knows the NDP have made absolute monkeys of 
themselves this session doing just that. And there will be one. 
Listen to them chirp. All right, you want to get into it. Obviously, 
I’ve been winning in here or they wouldn’t act so foolish. They 
want to divert the attention from the answers. So I will continue. 
 
First of all, I don’t believe the Leader of the Opposition believes a 
word that he said with respect to what causes prices to go up or 
down, or the economy to go up and down internationally. I mean 
he says, this four years versus the last four years. Well I can pick 
four years for the Leader of the Opposition where he lost 17,000 
people a year — 17,000 a year. I can pick where he lost in a month 
333 people. 
 
He doesn’t go back to 1973 or 1972 and the StatsCanada 
immigration, migration statistics, and said the province of 
Saskatchewan lost 17,296 under his second or third year in 
government. He doesn’t throw that year out. What was that — 
time times? Or was that your policy? Was that your policy to have 
17,000 people leave here? You don’t believe that any more than I 
do. Nobody in this province believes this rhetoric. 
 
I can go into Manitoba. For Heaven’s sake, their unemployment 
and the number of welfare during the same times and the same 
population, is much higher than that. Are you going to blame that 
on the administration or the times? I don’t believe you believe a 
word of it. You might think that some folks out there in the world 
will believe it. But you don’t; I don’t. And any intelligent 
individuals if they want to go back and compare your record in 
agriculture, your record in population, your record on whatever 
you want to look at, I mean, I’ll do it. And I’ll compare it either 
yours and mine at that time, or  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2325 
 
 

yours and mine in comparable times. I mean I can pick years as 
well as you can. 
 
I’ll just say that if you did so well in those last four years, why did 
the public throw you out on every single seat but eight? Why? If 
you had all that action and all that experience, and you were in 
power for 11 years, and you had all those good times, what was 
wrong with Saskatchewan people? Why did they throw you all 
out? They don’t believe that garbage then; they don’t believe it 
now. You can’t fool the people of saying that oh my gosh, there’s 
some people leaving this month and it never happened under your 
administration. They know that. You’ve tried to do that all your 
political life and they don’t believe you any more. They didn’t 
believe you in ’82 and they don’t believe you now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll take that chance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I guess you will; we’ll all take that 
chance. But I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan right now are 
going to say, well, I remember when interest rates were 22 per 
cent and what did the members do? Nothing. We lost up to 17,000 
people per year that set a record in the province. The country was 
doubling its population, and under the NDP in Saskatchewan, it 
lost people. 
 
Well look, Mr. Chairman, I won’t get into it. I know that our 
employment record matches others. I know that our economic 
activity matches others at any comparable times. I can compare it 
with Manitoba; I can compare it with Alberta. I’ll go back and 
pick years where they were absolutely dismal in their record. They 
don’t want to recall that, but I’ll just put it this way. You’re not 
fooling me and you’re not fooling yourself. You’re not even 
fooling your colleagues saying that, oh, the Saskatchewan 
government has this big impact on international interest rates and 
potash prices and oil prices. I don’t believe it; you don’t believe it; 
nobody in Manitoba believes it. 
 
All I’ll say to this. During good times and bad times the test of a 
government is if it goes to the wall for the people and protects 
them and works for them and fights for them. You had some good 
times and you lost it. They threw you out on your ear — every seat 
but eight. And you bragged about how good it was but people 
didn’t believe you. We’ve had some difficult times and we’ve 
defended people against high interest rates, against taxes, against 
drought, from falling prices. And they will judge us on whether we 
tried to help them or not and not on somebody talking on any of 
these things that say, oh, the province of Saskatchewan, there’s a 
big change . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
The member from Quills can’t stand to hear the truth, Mr. 
Chairman. The Leader of the Opposition just is embarrassed 
sitting there looking at his colleague holler from his seat. He 
knows that he doesn’t like to hear people calling from their seat 
and he gets a little bit upset. I call him . . . Mr. Chairman, I can 
control my members; they’re as quiet as church mice. Look at how 
polite they are. They’re quiet in here. They know the rules; they 
play by the rules. The member opposite has these . . . 
 

Well, I’ll just put it this way. I know, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t believe what he just said. He 
knows it isn’t true. He knows he tried it in ’82 and lost the farm. I 
know right now that we have attempted to protect people against 
high interest rates, protect them against drought, protect them 
against all kinds of international economic consequences and we 
will continue to do that. 
 
We will continue to provide financial security and pensions and 
targeted tax incentives and as the newspapers say today, Mr. 
Chairman, obviously we’re going in the right direction because 
optimism is up in the province of Saskatchewan and they’re 
feeling better and better every day. AS a result of legislation we’re 
bringing in, interest rates are down and protected gasoline prices 
are lower. We have obviously some better weather conditions and 
I’ll take the good times with the bad. The question is, during the 
difficult times, will you go to the wall for the people. And we’ve 
shown that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, the public are going to judge 
you not by what you say but by what you do. I think everyone 
gives you credit for being a BSer par excellence. I think we all 
acknowledge, Mr. Premier, your finely honed skills in that regard. 
The public, however, will judge you by what you do and not by 
what you say. You may pretend to have great confidence but I 
suspect the public will judge you by your hesitancy in calling an 
election. 
 
Mr. Premier, you may claim great success in industrial 
development in the creation of jobs. I suspect the public will judge 
you, not by what you say, but by what they feel and see on the 
streets and in the country of this province. And it’s dismal, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you may talk about open government, but I suspect 
they will judge you, if nothing else, by the fact that you have tried 
to run out the clock and failed, but left us with only three minutes 
left. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is true that you have fallen on hard times. There’s 
an old saying in Saskatchewan, “Tory times are hard times.” That 
has little to do with the luck of Conservative administrations and a 
great deal to do with what they do when they’re beset by 
problems. 
 
It is true, Mr. Premier, that the international interest rates is not 
something of your making and it is true that the price for oil is set 
elsewhere. It is also true that the public expect you, when faced 
with those problems, to take some concrete action and not stand, 
wringing your hands, saying: isn’t it terrible; there’s nothing we 
can do; my goodness, times are hard; oh my goodness, I wished 
we had been in office at an earlier and more prosperous period. 
 
The public, Mr. Premier, do not accept such weak excuses. The 
public expect action to be taken, and you have not done it. You 
have not taken action with respect to any of the serious problems 
which face the public. The number of unemployed is at record 
levels, as is the percentage. The number of  
  



 
June 25, 1986 

 

2326 
 
 

unemployed, the number of people on welfare, is at record levels, 
Mr. Premier. And the hardship being caused by the lack of jobs in 
this province is at a level which we have never felt before. 
 
This is what you’re going to be judged by, Mr. Premier. You’re 
going to be judged, not by what you say, but by what you do. You 
may have had great success in convincing the public in 1982 that 
you could create a miracle. I think you’re going to have to take 
responsibility, whenever you call the election, for the fact that 
what you created was not a miracle but a mess. 
 
We have a mess in this province, Mr. Minister. And if it is not bad 
enough that you have created the mess, you are trying to paper 
over the mess with some unconscionable business deals. I mention 
Weyerhaeuser. And I wish you would give us the details with 
respect to Gainers. I suspect that, if you could defend them . . . if 
you thought you could defend them, you would. You know full 
well you can’t defend those deals, and so you’re not giving us the 
detail of it. 
 
So I say, Mr. Premier, if you’re as confident on your seat . . . If 
you’re as confident on your feet as you are in your seat, then give 
us those details. Let us have them, and we will have a debate on 
the subject. I suspect, however, this is going to be pretty much a 
case of a dog chasing his tail, because I suspect you’re not going 
to give us those details. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move this committee of finance rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 


