


















































June 26, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 26, 1986 
 
 

2327 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I address my question to 
the minister in charge of Forest Products, the minister in charge of 
the Weyerhaeuser give-away deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday for the first time in three months you 
finally admitted that you do in fact have an agreement, a general, 
signed agreement with Weyerhaeuser. And that was the first day 
that you admitted that. And you have released a small portion of 
the terms of the agreement, the part of the sweetheart deal which 
we have been raising with you in the House — the aspects of the 
deal where you say no cash down payment from Weyerhaeuser; 
operating losses to be deducted from the principal of the debt; 
payment to the province only in the years where the company 
makes a substantial profit; and no penalty whatsoever if the 
company never pays a penny for this quarter of a billion dollar 
asset. 
 
And so our question to you, Mr. Minister is: will you in fact table 
the signed principles of the agreement today so that we can get on 
doing an examination for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the question was asked 
yesterday. I gave the answer yesterday that, as Mr. Cowley and his 
former government said, this is not a negotiating forum. What I 
have done, which that former government did not do, is that I have 
undertaken to provide the agreement to provide all of the 
agreements upon closing of the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everybody knows that the deal has not been closed. I 
have admitted, as the member says . . . I have said to the member 
. . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  He makes a point to say that we 
have finally admitted after a number of days . . . At no time have I 
changed the position in that sense, Mr. Speaker. I have always said 
the documents that can be provided prior to the closing of the deal 
will be provided. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have made that point clear in past days, and I 
make that point once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, same minister, probably the same 
type of answer — no answer — but I ask you, Mr. Minister, on the 
basis of what you have made public this is clearly a sweetheart 
deal, a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s not just the 
opposition that’s saying it, Mr. Minister. 
 
For a basis of support to the position that we’re taking, I quote 
from the Star-Phoenix editorial, and it says: 
 

On the basis of what has been made public so far about the 
specifics of the agreement, one could conclude the public is 
being exposed to most or all of the risk in this arrangement, 
while most possible  

potential benefits are ill-defined. 
 
That’s the Star-Phoenix editorial. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, to you is: when will you stop 
stonewalling? What in fact are you covering up? Why will you not 
in fact table today the signed agreement, the principles under 
which this transaction is proceeding? Will you indeed give the 
public the information which they have a right to examine before 
proceeding to give you the right to risk $83 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member quotes from the 
Star-Phoenix. I will, in reply to that, quote from the Prince Albert 
Herald of yesterday. We’ll get into the game of quoting from the 
paper. The last paragraph of an editorial in the Prince Albert 
Herald yesterday reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

In Regina the politicians can argue all they want about 
whether the Weyerhaeuser purchase of PAPCO and the 
subsequent paper-mill project is a good deal. In Prince 
Albert, we know it is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what they say in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here, we have 
the members opposite, the members of the New Democratic Party, 
running directly into the brick wall that is their philosophy. 
Common sense — they will not acknowledge common sense. 
They will not acknowledge what they know, I believe, in their 
hearts and their heads is a good deal, but what they will do is run 
headlong into the brick wall. That is their philosophy, and they 
cannot escape that philosophy which says — and here, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to the Weyerhaeuser deal — here is how that 
philosophy is impeding their thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this pulp-mill, which now exists, lost over a period 
of five years $91,000 a day, Mr. Speaker — $91,000 a day — the 
average loss. That, Mr. Speaker, is nothing short of hemorrhaging 
money. Mr. Speaker, what Weyerhaeuser corporation is bringing 
to this province with the $250 million is a transfusion of new 
money — new money into that industry, for the life of that 
industry. And what this deal will do is put a tourniquet on that 
hemorrhaging — to use that analogy in the further sense — so that 
the industry can live, Mr. Speaker, and the industry can live on 
into the future. That’s what we stand for; that’s what the deal 
stands for, and we will stand by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you are no longer 
believed. This government is no longer believed. The people of 
Saskatchewan have demanded that the facts be laid on the table 
here to be examined. I ask you: have you in fact concluded the 
agreement, because unless the agreement is concluded and the 
facts are known, it’s impossible to comment on the ultimate 
benefits of the agreement. And what the Star-Phoenix has 
indicated, Mr. Minister, is based on the facts. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2328 
 
 

Will you in fact . . . Do you have any more facts to support the 
benefits of this deal to the people of Saskatchewan? Have you any 
further agreements in respect to the multinational corporation in 
which you’re turning over these assets for virtually no return to the 
taxpayers? Do you have any further agreements? Will you table 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said before, when 
final agreements are signed, this government will table the total 
agreement. We will table every shred of the agreement and all of 
the schedules thereto — far more, Mr. Speaker, than any NDP 
administration ever did, or ever undertook to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been forthright. We will continue to be 
forthright. This deal, as the Prince Albert Herald said yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, in the area where this deal most affects people’s 
daily lives; in the area where people most understand forestry; in 
the area where people most understand what forestry means to the 
bread and butter on their table; in Prince Albert they say, 
“Weyerhaeuser deal easy to judge here.” And I read already the 
last paragraph, Mr. Speaker. “In Prince Albert, we know it is a 
good deal.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Responsibility for Roads in Prince Albert Northern Forest 
Area 

 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, your government has 
recently given away to the Weyerhaeuser company some 7 million 
acres of prime forest land in northern Saskatchewan. Now Mr. 
Minister, that’s about one-fifth of the total forest we have -about 
11,000 square miles of forest land, Mr. Minister. 
 
Further, you have admitted in this House that you think that it’s a 
good deal. You have admitted that you think it’s a good deal, Mr. 
Minister. And you have admitted that you are satisfied with the 
deal that’s been made with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Mr. Minister, will Weyerhaeuser be responsible for any of the 
roads within that forest? And if they are, can you tell us whether 
they will be responsible for the same amount of them as PAPCO 
has been till now, or are you going to assume some of the 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, indeed, I 
will certainly confirm that it is my opinion, and the opinion of our 
government, that the Weyerhaeuser deal is in fact a good deal for 
the people of Saskatchewan. I want to stress that point. 
 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, on the verge of striking one of the 
best deals with private enterprise in the history of this province, a 
deal that will provide jobs and opportunities for a number of 
people in our province, and the members of the opposition, what 
they can come up with is they can talk, as just the other day, about 
toll-bridges and toll-roads and all sorts of nonsense. 
 
As it respects the roads, yes indeed, there will be an  

agreement with the Weyerhaeuser corporation. And as I stated on 
a previous occasion, that deal will not be significantly different 
than any other deals that we have struck with any other major 
corporations, whether it be MacMillan Bloedel, Simpson Timber, 
potash companies, or any other corporation with whom we have 
struck deals. 
 
Indeed there will be a road agreement. It will be in nature very, 
very similar to other agreements we have entered into. The other 
day the members of the opposition quoted some figure of 1,000 
miles. That is absolutely ludicrous; it is nowhere near 1,000 miles. 
It may be somewhere in the neighbourhood of half of that amount, 
but as far as your accusations go the other day, they’re simply not 
facts. Our deal will be representative of other deals that we have 
struck with other major corporations. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, if you could do away with the long, boring, and 
irrelevant speeches of yours and get down to the question that was 
asked of you and give us an answer — maybe you don’t believe 
that we should be asking them, Mr. Minister, but we are asking on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’d like to know, and the people of Saskatchewan would 
like to know, is whether Weyerhaeuser is going to be responsible 
for the maintenance of those roads that are in that forest at this 
time. Could you just give me a simple answer as to whether they 
are going to be responsible for them, or whether you are going to 
be responsible for them as the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, indeed, I’d like to give you a very 
simple answer, sir. As I stated before, there will be an agreement. 
We have not reached any final conclusions to that agreement, and 
as I have stated previously, the agreement will be very, very 
similar to other agreements which we have signed with other 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you’re saying there will be an 
agreement. You are saying then, if I am correct, that there is no 
agreement signed at this point regarding the maintenance of those 
roads. Could you tell me at this point then if there is an agreement, 
and if there is one, who is going to be responsible for those roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well it would be very, very difficult — 
and I hope you will appreciate this, and I think the public of 
Saskatchewan would appreciate it — that it would be very, very 
difficult for me to give you the terms of the agreement when that 
agreement has not been finalized as of yet. And I hope you 
understand that when you are negotiating something as important 
as roads — and roads are indeed important, not only to people in 
the timber industry, but as well to the tourists and the general 
public in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have to take a considerable amount of time. Our officials have 
been negotiating for many, many hours with the officials of 
Weyerhaeuser corporation. And I am extremely confident that the 
deal that will be struck will be fair, not only to the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation, but to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2329 
 
 

Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, as I 
said before, at this point PAPCO is responsible for them. You 
always avoid the question in giving an answer to it. Will there be 
any new roads built into that forest, and if there are, will you be 
responsible for the maintenance of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
many times I have to say this, but the deal has not been finalized. 
We are negotiating with the Weyerhaeuser corporation, and 
whatever deal we make, I can give the hon. member the assurance 
that it will be a fair deal. And in order for a deal to be fair and 
good, it has to be fair to the taxpayers, and it has to be fair to the 
corporation. And I once again give you my assurance that it will 
be a fair and reasonable agreement. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, how do you expect the people of 
Saskatchewan to approve this Bill if you cannot even tell us 
whether they are going to have additional money spent out of their 
pockets to build or maintain those roads? How can you ask us to 
do that? Would you not agree that it would be best at this point 
then to shelve that Bill and go back to Weyerhaeuser, complete 
your deal, bring it back in this House so that the people can make 
a decision on it, and not ask us to do it before you complete the 
deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, once again, if we want to 
revert back to history, when in history did the members of the 
New Democratic Party ask the public of Saskatchewan whether or 
not they were in favour of nationalizing potash mines? When in 
history did the members of the New Democratic Party ask the 
general public of Saskatchewan whether or not it would be a good 
deal for them to buy the Prince Albert pulp-mill. Did you ask the 
people of Saskatchewan those questions? Well, no, you did not. 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, on a narrow subject of roads, a 
narrow subject of roads that is certainly going to form part of that 
agreement. And I know that the members opposite — perhaps 
they want toll-roads. 
 
Now if you want toll-roads, then you go and sign the agreement 
with the Weyerhaeuser corporation. But once again, while this 
government is in power, the deal that we will make respecting 
roads will be a fair and reasonable deal that will be very, very 
similar to other deals that we have struck with other corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct my 
question to the Minister for Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s desperate and bad deal with 
Weyerhaeuser involves your literally giving away a $250-million 
asset owned by the people of Saskatchewan, plus 7 million acres 
of northern prime forest in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You have stated in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, that you are 
satisfied with the forest management licensing  

agreement you have with Weyerhaeuser. That is what you said on 
Monday. And then yesterday, Mr. Minister, you cited figures 
based on that licence agreement. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: when you cited those 
figures yesterday, were you making them up, or were you citing 
an agreement with Weyerhaeuser? Which is it, Mr. Minister? 
What are the facts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are as I outlined 
them yesterday in question period in answer to the question from 
the same member. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You’ve cut the 
question, Mr. Minister. My question was: when you cited those 
figures yesterday were you making them up, Mr. Minister, or were 
you citing an agreement with Weyerhaeuser? What is it, Mr. 
Minister, are you hiding facts? Are you hiding facts from the 
public of Saskatchewan, or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Speaker, we have absolutely 
nothing to hide. I believe the hon. member — and I haven’t 
checked with Hansard — is referring to the figures I gave 
yesterday in reply to a question whereby the preamble stated we 
were somehow giving away the forests to a forest company, 
namely Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re giving nothing away to anybody. As I said 
before, all of the companies with whom we are negotiating will 
have to provide the government, through my department, with 
royalties called stumpage fees for the privilege of harvesting in 
Saskatchewan. And the increase will be 85 per cent or $550,000 
more than we were receiving from PAPCO. 
 
Mr. Yew: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, like all 
the PC ministers in your Devine government’s caucus you insist 
on giving speeches, Mr. Minister, instead of giving actual, factual 
information. 
 
It’s not a matter of right or left, Mr. Minister, but it’s a matter of 
right or wrong with the people of this province. And your bad deal 
— and I repeat, bad deal — with Weyerhaeuser is clearly wrong. 
Either you are making up the figures and the answers . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is referring to the 
minister making speeches. I believe the member is making 
speeches as well, and I would ask the member to get directly to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well I’ll simply go with the question, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask you then, Mr. Minister: are you refusing to make the 
documents, the agreement, the terms of reference of the 
Weyerhaeuser deal public, or are you in fact hiding the facts from 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we have absolutely nothing 
to hide, and I’ve been more than forthcoming in replies to 
questions from that member or other members. We’ve told them 
what type of an agreement we’re looking at. 
 
What we are getting rid of is 45 years of bad forest  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2330 
 
 

management and replacing it with integrated resource 
management based on sound forest management policy. 
 
I know the bottom line is: the opposition is opposed to the deal; 
they’re opposed to the Bill; they’re also opposed to sound forest 
management policy. He says it’s nothing to do with right or left. I 
agree. It’s a question of good forest management policy which we 
are committed to providing for the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
may say, the deal is not for North; it’s not for South; it’s for all of 
the residents of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grasshopper Infestation 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, my question deals with grasshopper 
infestation in southern Saskatchewan — the worst infestation that 
I’ve seen for a long time, much worse than it was last year, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I’m sorry to report, but contrary to your wishful dreams when I 
asked you this question last time — when you thought they’d all 
hatch at once — it’s very obvious now that it didn’t happen. Last 
night I saw grasshoppers a sixteenth of an inch long, and I saw 
some an inch long in the same field — lots of them, thousands and 
thousands per square foot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farmers are asking me — and I met with farmers. Mr. 
Minister, my question is this . . . The farmers are asking, will you 
give them the same kind of deal as you did Weyerhaeuser? Will 
you give them the same kind of deal when they’re fighting 
grasshoppers as you did to your friends from Tacoma, Washington 
— that if they make a profit, they’ll pay for the grasshopper spray; 
but if they lose money, they don’t need to pay for it. 
 
That’s the kind of deal the farmers want. They’re spending 8, 9, 
$10,000 on a section and a half of land fighting grasshoppers, and 
they come to their end; they ran out of money. Will you give the 
farmers the same kind of deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will quote from a 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool — I believe this was this morning or 
yesterday — it’s a CP story out of Winnipeg and their analysis of 
the grasshoppers. Part of what the hon. member says is accurate in 
terms of some areas. And I quote; it says: 
 

The worst is likely over the prairie grain farmers who have 
been battling swarms of grasshoppers with insecticide this 
spring. Most farmers feel that the infestation is reaching its 
final stage and they have it under control says, Ken Budzak, 
analyst with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 
The armies of the grasshoppers are actually worse than last 
year in some places. In those regions the hoppers have left 
nothing but dust in their path, and some farmers have had to 
reseed their crops. Prairie-wide, the situation is better than 
last year, thanks to a couple of factors that have worked in 
favour of the farmers. First is: the early rain this spring 
delayed the hatching so that the bulk of the 

 insects emerged from egg pods in ditches and pastures at the 
same time. That allowed farmers to get a good kill with one 
pass of their sprayers. Last year the hoppers hatched in 
waves, forcing farmers to do their spraying four or five times 
during the season. In 1985 we saw some shortage of 
chemicals. Grasshoppers cost an estimated $100 million to 
$200 million in crop losses. Across the West, farmers spent 
about 45 million on insecticide. Saskatchewan has been 
hardest hit again this year with the insects attacking wheat 
and other lines. However, farmers in pockets of Manitoba 
and Alberta have also had to pull on overalls, gloves, and 
respirators, the protective gear recommended to handling the 
bug killers. 

 
In summary, the wheat pool says that it is not as bad as last year. 
We have pockets where it is severe. We are likely getting a better 
kill than we have before, and in general, the growth, the rain, the 
moisture is giving much more competition to the grasshoppers 
than we had last year or the year before. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. This was an 
answer from the Saskatchewan part-time Minister of Agriculture 
reading from an article out of Manitoba. I don’t believe it, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, the grasshoppers that are affecting some 
farms . . . and the farmers have sprayed five and six times. I can 
give you the name of the farmer from south-west of Kincaid if you 
want it, but I met with him. And there was eight farmers that came 
to see me last night late, 10:30 at night, after a farewell party. And 
this is what he said . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Farmers are 
leaving — farmers are leaving. That’s right. That’s a joke. That’s a 
joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You may find that a joke when some farmers are 
leaving. That’s a joke, but this farmer sprayed his field six times. 
A crop adjuster came out and said, we’re going to make a report of 
this on your contract, and if you don’t spray them again, we’ll see 
what we’re going to do as far as your insurance is concerned. 
 
This is what crop adjusters are telling farmers. Six sprays. I’ll give 
you his name if want it, afterwards, but this farmer told me that he 
spent $6,800 on six quarters of land, and he said: I’ve reseeded;; 
they’ve eaten the reseeded field; it’s black; and the adjuster comes 
and tells me if I don’t spray it again, I’m not going to get crop 
insurance. That’s what your people are telling him. Don’t you 
know what’s going on? Don’t you know how many grasshoppers 
there are? They didn’t all hatch at once. Some places, maybe they 
did. 
 
My question to you is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The member 
is asking the same question several times and is repeating the same 
question several times, and if you have anything new to add, we’ll 
let you add it, otherwise we’ll let the minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . .  Order, please. Order! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2331 
 
 

Premier to what he told me in his answer. He told me that they’ve 
hatched, the thing is done, there’s not a problem. I’m trying to 
enforce on his pea-brain that there . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the member to 
withdraw that comment. That kind of comment is not allowed in 
this Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Order. I’m going to 
ask the member to withdraw that comment. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I withdraw the comment about the minister being a 
pea-brain. 
 
Mr. Premier, The Globe and Mail reports from a farmer at Viceroy 
and farmers at Swift Current that are having a problem, are having 
serious problems, and how much you spent. Are you going to 
penalize these farmers that have reseeded their crop? The crop is 
small; it’s eaten off a second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The member 
did not ask his question. He continued to make a speech, and the 
. . . Order, please. The question period is long gone. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take a 
few minutes to respond to a couple of things that were raised the 
last time that we were going through my estimates. I want to make 
the following observations with respect to . . . I believe the Leader 
of the Opposition was talking about the four years that he was in 
government, compared to the four years that we were here. I think 
it would be interesting to note for the general public of 
Saskatchewan, indeed the public of Canada, the last four years of 
our administration versus the last four years of theirs. 
 
From 1978 to 1982 we looked at the nominal real interest rates of 
about 4 per cent, expansion in world trade, very strong commodity 
prices, agriculture products increased 10 per cent in terms of 
prices, potash prices were up 23 per cent, world oil up 169 per 
cent. That was in 1978 to 1982. 
 
1982 to ’86 we looked at a world-wide recession, high real interest 
rates of 6.7 per cent, and obviously in terms of what people would 
have to pay, as high as 22 per cent, falling commodity prices, 
agriculture products dropped 6 per cent, potash dropped 13 per 
cent, world oil dropped 23 per cent and on top of that two 
droughts. 
 
Given those two situations, the Leader of the Opposition went on 
to point out that he did so much better than we  

did. Well obviously he had very, very good economic conditions, 
and we had quite poor economic conditions from the world, and I 
will point out very simply and quickly, Mr. Chairman, that our 
four years from 1982 to ’86 were much better than the four years 
from ’78 to ’82, even under more difficult conditions. 
 
I’ll give you the examples. We’ll look at population. From 1978 to 
1981 the population increased by 24,800 people or 2.6 per cent. 
But in the difficult years from ’82 to 1985 the population 
increased by 38,700 people or 3.9 per cent. In other words, we had 
an absolute increase in the more difficult times here of 1.3 per 
cent. So we had 13,900 people coming into the province more 
than the previous administration in 1978 to 1981. 
 
In terms of migration, 1978 to 1981 we saw a net movement out of 
the province of 7,113 people under the NDP. We saw an increase 
in ’82 to ’86 of 6,764. The difference was a plus 13,000 during 
some difficult times. Leaving the province, they looked at 101,000 
people leaving the province from 1978 to 1981. We lost 93,000 in 
terms of those leaving; we did 8,000 better there. Coming into the 
province, they brought 94,000 in; we brought over 100,000 in — a 
positive different of 5,593. 
 
In terms of migration comparisons, if we look at 1972 and then 
again in 1985, the net population was minus 17,000 in 1972; 
minus 4,900 in 1985. The difference is we beat them by about 
12,000 people. I could add, Mr. Chairman, in terms of 
employment . . . And the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, he isn’t 
here in the House today, but his chirpers are there in the back. But 
I’ll just give them this information just so that they can carry it 
back to him. 
 
From May ’78 to May 1982, the total population, employment 
increased 28,000, and for females increased 24,000. In our term of 
1982 to 1986, it increased 30,000 in total, 27,000 for female, for a 
plus 2,000 or plus 3,000, their period versus our period. 
 
And on the farm economy it was much more important. I think the 
members opposite from Quill Lakes and from Pelly would be 
interested in this. In 1978 to 1981 the NDP lost 16,000 people on 
farms — 16,000; 1982 to 1985, we gained 1,000 a net difference 
of 17,000 in rural Saskatchewan, their four years versus our four 
years. 
 
If you look at the unemployment rate, obviously we’ve had the 
lowest. If you look at the percentage increase in growth, Canada 
had 5.9 per cent. This is in population, 1982 to 1985. Manitoba 
had 4.3 per cent, and in the Government of Saskatchewan it was 
7.1 per cent, beating the other NDP administration and leading the 
nation. 
 
When I look at the various kinds of industries, the percentage 
changes. In the uranium business, it was 32 per cent growth in our 
administration over theirs; oil production is up 13 per cent over 
theirs; oil revenues up 79 per cent over theirs; value of natural gas 
and petroleum rights up 137 per cent over theirs; public and 
private investment up 17 per cent over theirs; personal income up 
47 per cent, 1982 to ’85 over 1978-81; retail trade, Mr. Chairman, 
up 30 per cent over the NDP administration 1978 to 1981. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2332 
 
 

I bring forward these numbers, Mr. Chairman, and I have more. If 
the members want to compare 1978 to 1981 versus 1982 to 1986 
on any of a list of comparisons, obviously we have done relatively 
well. I wanted to make that point, even though the Leader of the 
Opposition is not here to listen to it. His colleagues, I am sure, can 
take the information back to him so that he can have the actual 
facts statistically put forward by Statistics Canada. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The Premier, having begun his career as a 
cheer-leader, has now become a statistician. I think he’s going to 
be about as successful in the latter career as he was in the former. 
 
Mr. Premier, I am confused by your minister’s tactic with respect 
to Weyerhaeuser. He has given us a schedule to an agreement, will 
not give us the other two schedules, and will not give us the master 
agreement. I am curious, Mr. Minister, why you would give us the 
financial details and nothing else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as we have said many 
times, we believe, and I think you do, that having a new paper-mill 
come into the province is a good idea. I don’t think you would 
argue with that. If you can get $250 million of their money to 
build a paper-mill, fair enough. I think you like that. That’s a good 
deal. 
 
The second part of it is that if you had the new paper-mill come in, 
and we thought it was a nice idea, you have to have some land in a 
forestry agreement for them to have several million acres, and I 
think you’d agree with that. Right? I think you’d have to have that. 
 
Then the third question that you deal with is simply this: if you’ve 
got a pulp-mill that’s losing $91,000 a day, is there any way that 
you’d make some money with it? And you would say, well, I hope 
so. So you’d say, well, what’s it worth? You’d say, what’s it 
worth? And on the market, it’s worth anywhere from, as you 
know, 25 to $60 million. 
 
Now you might not, and I don’t want to sell it for $60 million 
because the public and the taxpayers have had to put so much 
money into it — $300 million into it. And you say to yourself, 
well, how in the world am I going to get $300 million out of 
something that’s only worth $60 million? I like a new paper-mill; I 
know I have to have a forestry agreement, and if you have one, 
you have to allocate millions of acres to the companies that are 
going to do it. You say, what am I going to do with this pulp-mill? 
You say, I’ve got all this money into it, but it’s only worth $60 
million. 
 
Do you know what the Peat Marwick Mitchell, who you hired 
when you were in government to look at all the books and give 
you the accounts for the P.A. pulp-mill — do you know what they 
recommended, and they’d recommend to you and me? They say, 
look, you’ll never get your money out. Why don’t you have a 
debenture, which is a promissory note based on the performance 
to get — not 60 million, not 100 million, not 160 million — but 
$248 million and tie it to $250 million of brand-new money into a 
paper-mill. That’s what professional accountants recommended, 
and they worked for you, and they work for me — they’re 
non-partisan. 
 

So we’ll say, I like the paper-mill; I sure want to see that because 
it’s new jobs. I like the new forestry agreement because they’ve 
got to have it. What am I going to do with this pulp-mill? Well, 
obviously, you wouldn’t want to sell it for 60 million; I don’t want 
to sell it for 60 million; so I look at the present value of $248 
million — what’s that? The present value of $248 million is $165 
million cash; I’ll take that for that paper-mill, given the losses that 
we have — and I’m sure you know what you paid for it and put 
the money into it — plus at the same time a chance to make 
money and profit, charge tax and income tax on royalties on a 
pulp-mill and on a paper-mill. 
 
Now any way you shake it, you can buy a house on a debenture; 
you can put money down; you can do the present value of the 
money you’re going to receive, anything you want to do. Okay? 
So what we’ve said is what we are going to sign, and what we are 
going to do is have 250 million come into the province on a new 
paper-mill. We are going to allocate a new forestry agreement to 
all the parties that are there, which is fair enough, and we’re not 
going to take 60 million for that pulp-mill, we’re going to try and 
get 248 million, which at present value is $165 million. That’s 
what a debenture is. 
 
(1445) 
 
Now if you want to argue what a debenture is, you can go explain 
a debenture to your constituents, and I’ll leave that up to you. You 
may go and say, politically, well it means nothing down. Well a 
textbook definition of a debenture may mean nothing down; that’s 
what a debenture is because it’s a promissory note based on 
performance, based on the assets that is going to get you a lot 
more than cash would get if you decided, I’m just going to put 
some cash up. That’s what a debenture is. That’s what Peat 
Marwick recommends to you, to me, to the public of 
Saskatchewan, because we’re losing $91,000 a day. 
 
So let me put it this way. I know philosophically you’re not 
against a new paper-mill; you’re not against allocating forest to a 
company that’s going to operate a new paper-mill. You want to 
get at least fair value out of a pulp-mill, so you can do it two ways. 
You can say, here is what it’s worth in cash, and nobody will offer 
you more than 60 million. You can’t just hand on to it because it’s 
losing and oozing money. So you say, is there any other way? 
Well of course, you go to your professionals, and they say a 
debenture will get you $248 million. And if we can get the new 
paper-mill to sign that, we can make money on the pulp-mill, 
make money on the paper-mill, and create new jobs, and put the 
whole entire package together with a new forestry management 
agreement. 
 
Now if . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Well, you seem to have 
trouble understanding a debenture. Well I can take you back to my 
accounting books and we’ll outline what a debenture means to you 
so that you understand it. And if a debenture is a problem, well, 
we’ll go through the exercise of outlining the problem. But I think 
that you’d have to admit that if you can get $165 million present 
value for the pulp-mill, and you can get a brand-new paper-mill 
with somebody else’s money, and you can create 165 new jobs, 
that’s what we’d both like to do - 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2333 
 
 

that’s what we’d both like to do. 
 
So if the problem is with the debenture. I can take some time and 
explain the debenture. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, with every degree of gratitude, I think 
I’ll not get the Premier to balance my cheque book if that’s your 
accounting methods. 
 
Mr. premier, do you remember my question, and will you answer 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, when we put the final 
agreement together, then we will be prepared to table the 
agreements. But as the minister said, while we’re in the 
negotiations, we’re not going to negotiate in public, and we’re not 
going to do it. So we’re going to continue to negotiate, put the 
package together. And I described it in principle and in theory, 
exactly what we’re going to do, so that the public doesn’t continue 
to lose $91,000 a day. 
 
And we’re going to put together an arrangement to build a new 
paper-mill: cash up front, $250 million; and 248 million on a 
debenture for a pulp-mill, which I know you can play with in 
terms of your politics, saying nothing down; well that’s what a 
debenture is; and $165 million in present-value money, and people 
do it all the time — maybe you don’t but certainly the public does. 
And that means that the public can stop hemorrhaging the money 
in the pulp-mill, and we can put together a package of a profitable 
pulp-mill, an profitable paper-mill, and 165 new jobs, and 250 
million in new capital coming into the province. 
 
Now that’s what I’m telling you I’m bringing you. I’m bringing 
that because that’s what I’m going to sign I’m going to sign that. 
And if I can get anything close to that then I would believe, for the 
taxpayers of this province, it more than covers the pulp-mill — 
and Lord knows, you signed the deal on the pulp-mill that’s losing 
all that money. We’ve got to get out from under that; taxpayers are 
tired of it. 
 
So we’re going to put the package together to make it profitable, 
to make money for the taxpayer, and to create a new forestry 
management agreement, and most important, as you read in the 
P.A. Herald, to create jobs, because people in P.A. think it’s a 
good deal. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have given us the financial 
arrangements. If anything were going to prejudice further 
negotiations, I would think it would be the financial arrangements. 
What is it in the rest of the agreement that you believe will 
prejudice subsequent negotiations? 
 
I’ll tell you what I think will prejudice you. What I think is going 
to prejudice you is the fact that there is no solid commitment in 
that agreement to build the paper-mill. That’s why you’re not 
giving it to us, Mr. Minister. You are not giving us the balance of 
the agreement. Sit down until I’m finished, and I’ll call on you 
when I need you. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I believe 
the Premier has the floor. 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, he hasn’t. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I had the floor. The light was on. 
 
Mr. Premier, if anything — I will repeat it — if anything were 
going to prejudice you, surely it would be the financial 
arrangements. What is it in the balance of the agreement that is 
going to prejudice you? I suggest to you it is the fact that you have 
no solid commitment to build that paper-mill. That’s why you’re 
not giving us the rest of the agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’m looking up the Bill. But no, I can 
say to my hon. colleague, there is going to be a paper-mill built in 
the province of Saskatchewan through the arrangement that we 
have put together. 
 
I’m reading here . . . This is Bill No. 56, 1986. I won’t read . . . 
I’m sure you’ve read the Bill. But I quote in about the third 
paragraph, or the first section 3(1). It talks about the entire 
arrangements to include improvements to a pulp-mill, and I quote: 
“. . . the development of a paper mill at Prince Albert.” 
 
Then I go to section 4, and it talks about the financial agreements. 
And it talks about facilitating the sale of the pulp company, and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, and the development 
of a brand-new paper-mill in Prince Albert. That’s what it says in 
the Bill. 
 
Now I have never gone into these negotiations, I’ll tell you straight 
up, with anything else in mind except building a brand-new 
paper-mill. Because in my view it will sincerely and credibly help 
make money with the pulp-mill that is in some trouble. I mean, 
that’s why it’s in the Bill. And I have negotiated nothing else but a 
new paper-mill. I want to see it there and I want to see this 
integrated. 
 
And I know you’ve raised some concerns, and fair enough. With 
respect to, well they might not make profit with that pulp-mill 
while they get this paper-mill built. And they might not. And I 
said, maybe there’s some room to move there, because I’m losing 
and the taxpayer’s losing every day in that pulp-mill. So I’ll give 
you some benefit of the doubt, under your management, under 
your connections and your markets. If you can’t do better, I’ll 
understand some of that for a short period of time, but I want this 
integrated into a paper-mill. Okay. 
 
So let there be no doubt the negotiations and the Bill and my 
intentions are for a brand-new paper-mill, because in my view that 
is a very important factor in making that pulp-mill profitable. And 
as you know, the pulp-mill, the future of the pulp-mill, the jobs 
and everything else, is costing you and me an awful lot of money, 
and we’ve got to do something about that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it form that, Mr. Minister, that there 
is not, in the written agreement to which the schedule was attached 
that we have, do I take it that there is not an unequivocal 
commitment to a paper-mill in that written agreement? Is that 
what I assume from what you just stated? That’s what you’re 
negotiating for and that’s what you want. Do I take it from that, 
that you don’t have 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2334 
 
 

 it yet, that it’s not in an unequivocal form in that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — This legislation is to put together an 
arrangement where we can sell the pulp mill and build a 
paper-mill. That’s what it says: the development of a brand-new 
paper-mill in Prince Albert. They’re connected; they’re linked — 
it’s right here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not in that Bill. No, there’s no paper-mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It says, the development of a paper-mill. 
Mr. Chairman, the arrangement is for the sale of the pulp-mill and 
the development of a . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? Order, order, 
order. Why is the member . . . 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I am attempting to follow some of this debate 
and do some work at my desk at the same time. And I am quite fed 
up with, Mr. Chairman, the constant nattering that’s coming from 
the NDP members when the Premier is trying to reply to their 
questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, they may not like the Premier, but I really 
don’t care. He is the Premier of this province and he deserves the 
members’ respect in this Chamber. And I want, Mr. Chairman, for 
that to be upheld in this Assembly if nothing else is going to be. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order, order! Order. The debate 
continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just let me say that the 
agreement, the Bill, the negotiations that are going on, are all 
linked and tied to a brand-new paper-mill. That’s what they’re 
linked to. This Bill here says the financial arrangements are tied to 
improvements and the sale of the pulp-mill and the development 
of a paper-mill. That’s what this says, and it says so in the third 
paragraph and in the fourth paragraph. And I will tell you, and I 
will say that all the negotiations that are going on to date are 
linked totally to building a brand-new paper-mill. 
 
Now if you could be satisfied — let me just . . . so I understand 
what you want — if you’re satisfied in saying . . . Look, if you are 
absolutely sure that there’s going to be a paper-mill, then would 
you say that, fair enough, the debenture idea is better than cash at 
too low a price? Would you say that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I sure wouldn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You don’t like a debenture. Well then it 
won’t much matter . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  No, but it won’t 
much matter. If you can’t support the idea of a debenture which is 
linked to performance, and you want cash — nobody’s going to 
give us cash to pay for this pulp-mill. Do you agree with that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — All right. If you can’t find people who . . . I 
mean, you can find people that are trying to give  

away pulp-mills across Canada — all right? — and you can’t sell 
them . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  All right, well then there’s our 
basic difference. You don’t believe that the facts are that 
pulp-mills are not making money. Obviously, I mean, this is Peat 
Marwick’s numbers — $91,000 a day the pulp-mill you bought is 
losing money. Now I think you’d like to get out from under that, 
and so would I. The taxpayer doesn’t like losing that kind of 
money. 
 
Now if you can’t get the cash for it, and nobody’s going to pay 
you cash — and you can canvass the world, and nobody’s going to 
pay you $300,000 for that pulp-mill. You know that. Well I can 
say sincerely we have asked people and looked and examined the 
world of pulp and paper, and you will not get people paying you 
$300 million for that pulp-mill. 
 
So put it another way, philosophically we’re back to the argument: 
no matter what I would sell it for in cash, you’d say that isn’t 
enough because the taxpayer has lost all his money and they’ve 
got 354 million. It’s only worth 60 million, but you’ll say, oh, my 
gosh, it’s never enough. Well the taxpayer right now to me is 
saying, enough is enough is enough; I’m tired of losing the money. 
 
I can only wrap it up and say: we are going to build a new 
paper-mill; the new paper-mill is in the legislation; the new 
paper-mill will be in the agreement; and when the agreement is 
signed and sealed and delivered, you will see a brand-new 
paper-mill on the line. That’s what I can say, and that’ll be the 
case. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, do I take it that you evaluation 
of the mill is 60 million? I think you said that. I would just like it 
said with a little less clothing on it. Do I take it that’s what you 
think the mill is worth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No. What I said is $60 million is the best 
offer we’ve received from anybody in terms of what they think 
that mill is worth today in cash. I know that you paid 165 million 
for the 70 per cent, and 3 million, or somebody else did, for the 
rest of it, and we’ve got 350 million into it, because we’ve had 
$91,000 a day loss for the last five years. So if the cumulated 
losses are #354 million, now all I’m saying is that nobody will pay 
us $354 million for that asset. They’re saying right now, the most 
they might pay cash is 60 million. 
 
Now what they will do . . . maybe the former minister of Finance 
could help you out there. What they will do is say, I’ll give you a 
debenture for 248 million over 20 years which present value today 
is 165 million. So I could ask the former minister of Finance, 
would he take 165 million? Would he take that? Would you take 
165? You see they won’t respond, as I said, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order! Order! I have 
called order. The noise level is just getting too great in here, and I 
would ask that when the question is answered, that we have the 
politeness to listen to the answer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — State your point of order. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2335 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — What we’re in here for, Mr. Chairman, is to ask 
questions to the Premier for him to answer, not for the Premier to 
say that he is receiving no replies to his questions. And certainly 
he should be called to order for abusing the rules, or not knowing 
the rules of the House. That’s precisely what he’s doing. He gets 
cornered with his questions and then he starts accusing the 
opposition of not answering his questions, if you can believe it. 
That’s how astute this Premier . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order, order. With the kind of 
verbiage that has been going back and forth, it leads its way into 
this. I would ask members that when there is a question being 
answered that they give the courtesy to listen, and I would like the 
debate to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — On the $60 million, the 60 million is the 
most people are prepared to pay cash for it, and I’m not prepared 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Companies, okay. It’s the 
maximum they would be prepared to pay. And I am not prepared 
to sell it for 60 million, but I will take 248 million on a debenture, 
which is 165 in present value; that’s the difference. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it, Mr. Premier, that the offer of 60 
million in cash came from Weyerhaeuser; you refused that and felt 
this was a more appropriate arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I would say that the best market estimate of 
what the pulp-mill is worth in cash, from companies, companies 
that we have talked to, their estimates are 60 million. And I’ve 
said to myself, if I can trade 60 million for 248 million over 20 
years, which is 165 present value, I’ll take 165 over 60 million. 
Now anybody that won’t take 165 over 60 million . . . Okay! 
 
Now you’ll say, well there’s some risk, and fair enough. You 
could say there’s some risk of the operation over 20 years. Well, 
for an investment of $248 million and the chance to get $248 
million I’m prepared to take, as any investor is, some risk in the 
development of northern Saskatchewan. I am prepared to do it. 
Lord knows we have taken a lot of risks so far under your deal 
because it’s cost us 354 million and we haven’t got anything. I 
mean, that’s just oozing money. 
 
What I’m saying: I’ll take cash — $165 million present value, and 
that’s more than anybody will offer me in terms of dollars and 
cents today or any estimate that I can get. And Weyerhaeuser says, 
you give me a chance to perform over the 20 years and you’ll get 
$248 million, and we’ll put 250 million in a new paper-mill and 
we’ll combine the two and we’ll all be making some money, and I 
can charge some taxes and royalties and so forth as opposed to just 
taking taxpayers’ money from Moose Jaw and Estevan and 
Regina and pumping it into a pulp-mill that you bought that’s been 
losing money ever since you bought it. That’s the concept. A 
debenture is present value terms, a long-term note that gives you 
cash linked to performance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, I take it you were offered  

$60 million in cash. Will you tell us, yes or no — if no is the 
answer, we’ll go on the next — will you tell us who offered that 
60 million in cash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No. I’ll say the best market estimate from 
any of the firms we talked to of what that pulp-mill was worth in 
cash was a no-starter, okay, never got off the ground. Because I 
said, if you would offer me 60 million I wouldn’t take it. And they 
said to me, nobody’s going to offer you any more than that; some 
might offer you zero, some may offer you 25 million. And I said, 
well if all you’re ever going to offer me is 60 million in cash, I’m 
not taking it; you’ve got to look at something else. And that’s 
when I shifted to, on the advice of Peat Marwick, a debenture. 
Look at a debenture, and maybe I can get 165 million for it — 248 
million over 20 years. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, I take it that that in fact is what 
Weyerhaeuser said to you: we will not pay more than $60 million 
for this. So this was an alternative arrangement . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, he said, no such thing. I would thank the 
government members for all their assistance in asking these 
questions, but I’d prefer to put them in my own words. 
 
Mr. Premier, I take it that Weyerhaeuser offered the $60 million 
and you determined that that wasn’t an appropriate arrangement 
and that this debenture, as you call it, was a better arrangement. Is 
that the case? Is that the case that Weyerhaeuser said to you, the 
maximum we’re going to pay is 60 million, and you said, well 
that’s not satisfactory. Is that what happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What I would say, and I’ll say it again, is 
that I asked our consultants, and I asked them to ask industry 
people, how much is that paper-mill worth in cash right up front? 
and they had various offers. And the maximum might have been, 
for the pulp-mill, as high as $60 million, and I said I wouldn’t 
accept that. So you better look at another mechanism. And that’s 
why we look at 165 million as opposed to 60. Okay? So it’s just as 
simple as that. I wouldn’t take 60 million for it. You got to find a 
better way. And that’s when they recommended a debenture 
which is tied to performance, $248 million. And I’d take 248 
million over 60 million any time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, I think it’s a fair assumption that 
Weyerhaeuser said to you, all we’ll pay is 60 million, and you 
said, that’s not satisfactory . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
know the minister of — your portfolio is of such importance it 
escapes me at the moment, but I know the member from Meadow 
Lake is having a bad time of it, and I know he’d dearly like to 
create a ruckus. 
 
But I refer the Premier to the schedule B. Schedule B states in 3(d) 
that if 60 million hasn’t been paid after the seventeenth year, then 
the pay-out formula sweetens somewhat. So I think it’s a fair 
assumption that Weyerhaeuser said to you, all we’re prepared to 
pay is 60 million, and you said, politically I can’t live with that, 
but I’ve got to have the paper-mill to get re-elected. So let us set 
up a new arrangement which provides for nothing down, nothing 
paid over 30 years, and nothing at the end of 30 years. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2336 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can say two things 
clearly. You bought a pulp-mill and it’s been losing a great deal of 
money. It’s lost money every year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Mr. Chairman, they don’t believe that, so that’s the first thing I’m 
going to make clear — that the pulp-mill today, and has been since 
the time it was bought, losing money. Losing money. 
 
In 1981, Mr. Chairman, the interest cost on that purchase was 36 
million. The NDP borrowed 165 million from two banks to buy 70 
per cent of it, and they don’t think that they did it. You don’t even 
remember . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose that I could have a farm, and if I 
didn’t have to pay for it it would be profitable — $36 million . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Peat Marwick and Mitchell have outlined 
the interest costs and the operating costs, and it’s costing us 160 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to make a point for the hon. 
members. I hope that they’re interested in the paper-mill and the 
pulp-mill project. If they are, they’ll at least give me the time of 
day to go through the numbers for them. 
 
We have lost for the taxpayers since 1980 the following sums: 
1981, $11 million; 1982, 39 million; 1982, 49 million; 1984, 15 
million; and 1985, 51 million — $167 million in the pulp-mill. 
That’s interest and operating losses. That works out to $68,000 a 
day in interest it’s cost since you signed it, plus $23,000 a day loss 
in operating, or $91,000 a day today, yesterday, tomorrow, and for 
as far as we can see that pulp-mill is losing. Now that’s the first 
point. 
 
The second point is, how are we going to fix it? How are we going 
to fix it? We want to get as much, I think you do and I do, as much 
money as possible out of that pulp-mill and build something 
better. Right? That’s what you want. You want as much money 
out of it as possible. He shakes his head, he does. I do. I want as 
much money as possible. And we want to make it profitable, we 
both agree. So what we do is get a company to bring in 250 
million of their money, pay us 248 million for this pulp company 
that’s losing money, and put together a profitable forestry 
management arrangement so the private sector and small operators 
and everybody else can make money. That’s what we want to do. 
 
I think and I know and understand you could be embarrassed with 
all the losses that you have in the pulp-mill. But all right, we’ll 
forget about that. We just want to fix it. We’ll combine it with the 
new paper-mill, get 165 million present value, write today’s cash 
money for that pulp-mill, build ourselves a new paper-mill with 
somebody else’s money and create 165 jobs. 
 
As the P.A. paper says, people in Prince Albert are happy with 
this. They think it’s a great deal. I believe the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition is in Meadow Lake, and he’s saying this; he says: 
 

. . . the Meadow Lake pulp mill the Weyerhaeuser deal will 

. . . become a provincial issue. By making it an issue, he said, 
the NDP could pick up support throughout the province but 
do poorly in Prince Albert . . . 

 
Well, I mean, if this is a political argument, then maybe it’s a 
trade-off. If you expect to win . . . what is it, in Assiniboia, or in 
Gravelbourg, and Regina Centre because you’re . . . 
 
People who understand the issue — I’ll give you the chamber of 
commerce in Prince Albert. They say this: 
 

We are deeply worried that these jobs are going to be killed 
if approval is not given in the Legislature for the 
Weyerhaeuser agreements. Northern Saskatchewan cannot 
stand the loss of these new construction jobs, new direct jobs 
at the new mill, these new indirect jobs, and this population 
growth. 

 
And they go on to say: 
 

Workers at the mill appear to be happy about the new 
project, and about Weyerhaeuser. 

 
This is in Prince Albert. 
 

The community is excited. And the business community is 
particularly keen to see that this expansion takes place so that 
we can become one of the fastest growing cities in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
This is Prince Albert people saying this. 
 

The Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce will fight with all 
its resources for the new paper mill in Prince Albert, and will 
join with other community leaders to make sure that no one 
tramples in Prince Albert’s flower bed. 

 
Well I say, Mr. Chairman, to the member from Regina Centre, 
your leader is in Meadow Lake saying, well it probably won’t help 
us in P.A., but it might give us some political brownie points in 
other parts of the province, which means that he’s written off P.A. 
P.A. chamber of commerce and the P.A. newspaper are saying it’s 
a very good deal because it means the survival of the pulp-mill and 
a brand-new paper-mill and a new forestry agreement. They like 
it, and you’re standing here in the legislature arguing about 
whether you should have money down or whether you should 
have a debenture or not. I mean, you hire professionals. You know 
Peat Marwick understands a debenture. Peat Marwick could cook 
up a debenture for you. I mean, you’re $400,000 in debt for your 
political party. Maybe you need a debenture. Maybe you need 
somebody to go invest into . . . I’ll tell you we’ll give you a deal 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I won’t have to get into that. All I’m saying 
is that it is among the business community, among the 
professional consultants, Peat Marwick and Mitchell, they are 
saying that it’s a good thing for Prince Albert and  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2337 
 
 

a good thing for the province. Around the province people are 
saying, I’m tired of the loss with the pulp-mill. So I mean, 
sincerely we’re looking for a way to have some new industry and 
cut losses, protect the pulp mill and protect the paper-mill and put 
it all together. 
 
So I can only say, Mr. Chairman, that it is my intention to build a 
new paper-mill; to save the pulp-mill; to create a new economic 
forestry agreement in northern Saskatchewan; to create 165 
brand-new jobs; and to get $165 million present value money for 
the pulp-mill, which is three times as much as anybody would 
offer for it in cash today. And that’s what I’m going to do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that’s a useful bit of 
background. I take it to be established and admitted that 
Weyerhaeuser said to you: we’re not paying more than $60 
million for that mill. And you entered into these arrangement as an 
alternative. What you have done is created an entirely fictitious 
figure of $248 million. It might have been 348 million; it might 
have been 448 million. It didn’t matter, because it isn’t going to be 
paid. So you entered into this agreement as a substitute for taking 
$60 million. That’s what you said. 
 
I can understand why Weyerhaeuser . . . I want you to think about 
what you’ve said. What you said is that Weyerhaeuser said they 
won’t pay more than 60 million, but they’re delighted to enter into 
this agreement as an alternative. I think it’s obvious why: ‘cause 
they ain’t going to pay 60 million under this agreement. They’re 
not going to pay anything at all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s not what you said. You said 60 million. You said the most 
you could get for that mill in cash was $60 million, Mr. Premier. 
 
(1515) 
 
So, Mr. Premier, in lieu of taking $60 million cash, you gave them 
this. That seems to be what happened. That’s what you said 
happened, so we’ll take that. So what you have told us is that in 
Weyerhaeuser’s view the maximum this paper can be worth is 60 
million, because that’s all they paid for it. They’re not going to 
pay more under this agreement than they would in cash. So I take 
it, Mr. Premier, that you have entered into an agreement which is 
no more onerous than a payment of 60 million in cash. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to get back to the . . . and I’ll just say that I 
can understand why Weyerhaeuser would rather enter into this 
than pay 60 million in cash. That’s not hard to understand. Given 
the fact that they pay nothing down, pay nothing unless their 
profits exceed 12 per cent — and that’s almost an unimaginable 
figure — and pay nothing at the end of it except to provide some 
shares upon which there’s no dividends and no redemption unless 
the directors feel generously disposed towards Saskatchewan. I 
take it, Mr. Minister, that . . . I could well understand why 
Weyerhaeuser would rather enter into this arrangement than pay 
$60 million in cash. Indeed, if you know of anyone who will lend 
me or the New Democratic Party money on these terms, I wish 
you’d give us their names because anyone could use these kinds of 
financing terms. 
 
Mr. Premier, I asked you earlier if there was a written  

commitment in the main agreement to which we have a schedule 
to build a paper-mill? Is there an unequivocal commitment to 
build that paper-mill? If there isn’t we’ll go on from there. But if 
you can answer that, yes or no, and save us this description of all 
that was wrong with the former administration, these estimates 
might move a little quicker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We will have a commitment to build a 
paper-mill. We will have a commitment to build a paper-mill. I 
don’t know what words you want to put in this Bill. Design some 
words that you can put in the Bill and say, well, there will be a 
paper-mill. It says here the development of a paper-mill, and here 
it says the development of a paper-mill. There will be a paper-mill, 
and I will sign an agreement that says there will be a paper-mill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, we don’t then have a 
commitment to build a paper-mill; that’s a goal that you hope to 
achieve. But that, at this point in time, is a goal. You say we will 
have a commitment to build a paper-mill. You therefore do not 
have it at this point in time. It’s a goal which you think you can 
achieve, and you might well have a commitment to build a 
paper-mill, but you don’t at this time. 
 
Mr. Premier, is the — and this is a key point — is the transfer of 
the P.A. pulp-mill in the main agreement conditional upon 
entering into an agreement to build a paper-mill? Or is the transfer 
of the pulp-mill absolute at this time, whether or not a paper-mill 
is ever built? 
 
The clear suggestion in the agreement is that this agreement to 
transfer the pulp-mill is not conditional, because it states that the 
deduction of losses from principal continues until 1989 or the 
start-up of the paper-mill, which ever occurs first. So it’s clearly 
within the contemplation of someone that the transfer of this 
pulp-mill is not conditional upon making the paper-mill. They get 
the pulp-mill now, and you negotiate over the paper-mill. That’s 
what this schedule states. Is that accurate? Is that accurate that this 
agreement is not conditional upon building the paper-mill; that 
you’re transferring the pulp-mill right now and you’re negotiating 
over the paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can read paragraph 
(3) here which says that the two go hand-in-hand. Now you might 
think of some other wording that would work but it says: 
 

With the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the 
Minister of Finance may guarantee on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan the payment of the principal 
and interest and any other moneys that may become owing 
with respect to: (a) any securities of Weyerhaeuser; (b) any 
loans to or indebtedness of Weyerhaeuser; (c) any 
indebtedness or liabilities for the payment of money incurred 
by Weyerhaeuser or to which it may be or become subject; 
(and this is where we get into it) whether such securities, 
loans, indebtedness or liabilities are issued originally or in 
exchange for or in replacement of or upon transfer of other 
securities, loans, indebtedness or  

  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2338 
 
 

liabilities, in respect of a Saskatchewan project . . . 
 
Now what’s that Saskatchewan project? 
 

. . . which will include improvements to a pulp mill and the 
development of a paper mill . . . 

 
That’s what the project is. That’s what it says in the Bill. It doesn’t 
just say, improvement to the pulp-mill; it doesn’t just say, selling 
the pulp-mill. It says, the project, which is improvements to the 
pulp-mill and the development of a paper-mill. That’s what it says 
right in the Bill. 
 
Now I go to the next paragraph: 
 

With the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
(this is 4(1)), the Minister of Finance or such other member 
of the Executive Council as the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may designate may enter into and execute 
agreements and indemnities, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, with any person, agency, organization, 
association, institution or body within or outside 
Saskatchewan facilitating the sale of assets of Prince Albert 
Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation and the development of a paper mill at Prince 
Albert. 

 
Now that’s . . . They’re linked; they’re tied right together in the 
Bill. Now how else could I word that to make you feel more 
comfortable? I mean, obviously . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can I give you some assistance with an 
amendment to this Bill . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well look it, I would . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. I find that we’re entering 
into the clauses of a Bill that are not presently under discussion. 
We can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. You may deal with 
broad aspects, but certainly not . . . We’re not discussing clause by 
clause of Bill No. 56. So I ask that we keep our comments in the 
broadest aspect of Weyerhaeuser or we get on with other 
expenditures under Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to make a comment pursuant to this 
ruling, Mr. Chairman. I want you to understand what you’re 
doing. And please let me finish. This is a quarter of a billion 
dollars in assets. It is by far . . . No, let me finish. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. No, order. I have given my ruling. We 
are not discussing . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Order. Order. 
We are not discussing clause by clause of Bill 56. That is final. 
We are not going to go through clause by clause. We will do that 
in the committee of the whole when we are discussing Bill 56. If 
you want to range in a broad sense under Weyerhaeuser, I agree, 
but not clause by clause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, maybe I can be helpful here. 
If the hon. member . . . And this Bill is still before the House in 
committee of the whole, and the minister will be quite prepared to 
review it. If you have suggestions on how the Bill should be 
worded, by all  

means. I mean, I’d look at suggestions because . . . I’d be glad to. I 
mean, fair enough. In my estimates we don’t usually go clause by 
clause in Bills that are there; the principle of it . . . 
 
Because you asked, I mean, are you going to build a paper-mill? I 
said, yes, it’s in the Bill. And you say, well maybe the words 
aren’t good enough. Well clearly, sincerely, we’ll look at words. If 
you want to come up with words for the hon. member, he’ll look 
at words that you could put in the Bill clause by clause. 
 
All I can say: this is designed — I can say, in principle, Mr. 
Chairman, and in theory and in practice — this Bill is designed to 
show that the two go hand in hand. Because if they’re side by side 
— the project is the pulp-mill and the paper-mill — and if you 
think there’s a better way to word that, I want you to rest assured 
— rest assured — that the pulp-mill and the paper-mill are hand in 
hand, and they’re together as one project, and we have got it in the 
Bill that way. And we’ll look at different words, but I’ve never 
thought of it any other way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it’s apparent that you haven’t thought 
this through very well. It’s apparent to a good portion of the 
population of this province that you didn’t think this thing through 
very well. 
 
Do I take it, Mr. Premier, that this Bill is what you look to as a 
guarantee that the pulp-mill . . . that the paper-mill will be built? Is 
this your guarantee that that paper-mill is going to be built? Or is 
there . . . Is this your guarantee? Is that all you got? Is your whole 
case in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to do 
anything until we have an agreement that there’s going to be a 
paper-mill. This says that there will be moneys transferred to the 
project, and the project is the improvements to a pulp-mill and the 
development of a paper-mill. 
 
And I’m saying, I’m going to sign an agreement that says we’re 
building a new paper-mill. And when I sign that, I’ll show it to 
you. What else can I add to that? Okay. But I’m not going to show 
it to you before I sign it, and you have never done that in your life 
either. 
 
So I mean, you want a new paper-mill; I want a new paper-mill. 
I’m going to sign a deal for a new paper-mill. And when I sign a 
deal for a new paper-mill and we pass this Bill by me signing the 
deal on a new paper-mill and this Bill saying that we’re going to 
build a new paper-mill, we’re going to have a new paper-mill. 
That’s what it’s all about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What you have is an agreement transferring 
the pulp-mill. Well, you’ll be a good deal better off now that 
you’ve got the benefits of the Minister of Labour. This is going to 
be of some considerable assistance. What you have . . . What we 
have — I think, by accident; I do not think the member from 
Meadow Lake intended to give it to us — what we have is an 
agreement transferring the pulp-mill. 
 
What you don’t have is an agreement to build a paper-mill. You 
look to a Bill which nowhere says that the  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2339 
 
 

transfer of the pulp-mill is conditional upon building the 
paper-mill; it does not say that. And no amount of obfuscation — 
or that’s quite a term as I can put it; there’s a far, far more 
descriptive term which I don’t think is parliamentary — but no 
amount of commentary by you will insert in this Bill a statement 
that the transfer of the pulp-mill is conditional upon the building of 
the paper-mill. This agreement clearly states the opposite. 
 
This agreement clearly states the opposite because it says that the 
losses are to be deducted until the start up of the pulp-mill, or until 
1989, whichever occurs first. So this agreement, which your 
deputy, which the president of CIC, Crown investments 
corporation, signed, states the paper-mill may not start up and, 
therefore, there’s going to be limitation on the amount of losses 
that can be deducted from principal. 
 
It’s apparent that the guarantee isn’t in that agreement. It is 
apparent, Mr. Premier, that the only guarantee that you have that 
the paper-mill is going to be built is in this Bill. And I say, Mr. 
Minister, try as you might, you’re not going to convince a child of 
three that there’s anything in this Bill which guarantees a 
paper-mill. 
 
This guarantee simply provides that if a paper-mill is built, then 
the government can guarantee a third of it. But there’s no 
guarantee in there a paper-mill’s going to be built. That is simply 
the Premier’s blind optimism that everything will occur as it 
should. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you’ve come into office you have been guilty 
of best-case planning. You always plan on the assumption that 
you’re going to get all the breaks and that every time you roll the 
dice it’s going to come up seven. Mr. Premier, one of the reasons 
why we are into our fifth year of office is that you don’t always 
get seven. Sometimes when you roll the dice you get snake eyes. 
 
And I say, Mr. Premier, you’ve got yourself into difficulty in the 
past with this best-case planning of yours, and you’ve done it 
again. You have entered into an agreement to transfer the 
pulp-mill, and you blissfully assume that the paper-mill will be 
there on stream. It may be, but this agreement you have is most 
unwise, because you have transferred the pulp-mill now, and 
you’re still working on the paper agreement. Now if that isn’t 
best-case planning, then I don’t know what is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member . . . I 
mean, when the members get off on my personality or somebody 
else’s personality, I’m not so sure that they’re interested in the 
facts. The facts are — you talk about rolling dice — you rolled 
snake eyes when you bought the pulp-mill, and you lost $167 
million. It’s lost every year since you bought it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, there’s the numbers. You never even 
paid the interest on it in one year — ever. So you lost all that 
money, and now you’re blaming everybody else in the country 
because you bought this and lost it. You had a chance to see 
somebody else buy 70 per cent of it, and you wouldn’t do that 
because philosophically you don’t like to see the private sector.  

You don’t like it. I mean, you’ve said that. The member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg goes on about how he likes that, and he 
reads from the Regina Manifesto that he’s going to tear down 
capitalism. 
 
(1530) 
 
Well, fair enough. You rolled snake eyes. You’ve rolled snake 
eyes since you wrote the Regina Manifesto. You have been buying 
things that have been losers. You’ve put the province in jeopardy 
financially by buying Crown corporations like potash industry. 
We’re still paying New York, and we’re still paying New York for 
this. You borrowed the money from the banks — from the banks 
— to buy a pulp-mill that’s lost money every year, and you expect 
the people to like that? No wonder the people don’t like you. 
 
The people don’t like you because you don’t know about 
economic development. Do you know what you practise? I’ll tell 
you what you practise . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Well, they 
don’t like you — they don’t like you. And do you know the reason 
they don’t like you . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  They don’t like 
you. They didn’t like you in ’82; they don’t like you now because 
of the very things that you bought. You paid bankers in New York 
$354 million. You paid them over that for the potash, and we’re 
still paying the, and it’s costing money. The people can’t afford 
the NDP. 
 
Do you know what you practise? I’ll tell you what you practise. 
You practise economic apartheid, right? You blacklist some 
people that don’t work for the government. As long as it’s in the 
public sector and we can lose a whole bunch of money, then you 
are blessed with your philosophy. And if you’re in the private 
sector, no way; you will probably end up cheating and lying and 
doing all these things. 
 
That’s what you do. You don’t trust anybody in the private sector. 
You want to own their farms. You want to nationalize their 
companies. You want to buy potash; you want to buy pulp, and 
they’re all losing money. It’s economic apartheid. You just 
blacklist all those in the private sector. You have no use for the, 
and philosophically you can’t stand to see that pulp-mill go back 
in the private sector. You can’t stand it. 
 
Your leader can’t stand it. He can walk all over, and he knows it’s 
good for Prince Albert. He knows it’s good, but he can’t bear the 
thought that one of these Crown corporations that you bought, 
that’s lost all this money, would ever go back to the private sector. 
You have blinders. It’s like you’ve been hit with a broad axe right 
between your eyes. You can’t see out of the right side of your 
head, and the right side is economic development and the private 
sector that built this country. 
 
This Crown corporation, this pulp company owned by the 
government, never built a thing in this province. It didn’t settle this 
country. People did. People owning their own companies, owning 
their own farms, and it wasn’t because of some sort of economic 
apartheid that you guys have trumped up and lost and continue to 
lose money. Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you, when the member  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2340 
 
 

opposite says that they did so well on the pulp company and have 
done so well on the potash company, we are paying hundreds of 
millions to Wall Street to New York bankers, and they’re proud of 
it. 
 
The former minister of Finance sits over there with a grin on his 
face. He doesn’t even understand a debenture. Well if you can’t 
understand a debenture, how you could run either your party or the 
government? You can’t. You got the people of Saskatchewan into 
this mess, and I’ll tell you, you’ll never get another chance to get 
them out of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This, Mr. Premier, has been a useful 
afternoon. We have established the following this afternoon. We 
have established the following facts which have been worth 
something. This has been an hour well spent. We have established 
the most Weyerhaeuser would pay for that mill is $60 million, but 
you entered into this agreement instead. You thought this was 
better. You said that, and so we’ve established that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s advice of Peat Marwick. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I gather that was advice from Peat 
Marwick. All I can say is that you’re lucky that you don’t say out 
of this Assembly that Peat Marwick advised you to do this, or 
they’d sue you. They would sue you, I’ll tell you. No reputable 
firm of chartered accountants would advise you to get into this 
mess. So we’ve established that the most you could get for this in 
cash was 60 million, and this you preferred. It’s patently obvious 
that you preferred it for political reasons. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve also established apparently that there’s no 
commitment to build a paper-mill in the agreement, but that, if it 
exists at all, is in the Bill. The Bill is only two and a half pages 
long, so it appears that we have established that the Bill contains 
your only guarantee that the mill is going to be built. The Bill 
contains no such guarantee, so there isn’t one. It’s been a useful 
afternoon, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Premier, both you and the minister have used a figure of 20 
years. That doesn’t appear in the agreement. Where does the 
figure of 20 years come from? Is this your expectation that it will 
be paid off ahead of time, or is . . . well I’ll leave it at that. Is that 
an expectation that it’ll be paid off ahead of time, because the 
minister used 20 years for some months before the agreement was 
signed, and you used 20 years a couple of times. Where did you 
get the figure of 20 years from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the debenture is based on 30 
years, $248 million. On the 30-year calculation the present value 
of that, present value today, is 165 million. Now the expected 
pay-out is 20 years, which means if you can pay it off faster, you 
have more money up front, which means it’s more valuable to us 
in a present value term. 
 
An Hon. Member: — If you’re day-dreaming, why not 10? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I grant you that if they pay it off  

ahead of time, the mill is worth more to you. Mr. Minister, the 
mathematics — well you’d fail a grade 8 student for that sort of 
mathematics. The present value of 248 million in 30 years, sure as 
the devil, isn’t 165 million; I can tell you that. I don’t know what it 
is ahead of time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The present value means today. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know that. I, like you, began life with the 
English language, and I know what that word means, but $248 
million in 30 years is not worth 165 million today, I can tell you 
that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s worth more. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s worth a great deal less. I want to say this 
again for your benefit: 248 million at 8 and a half per cent interest 
in 30 years is not worth 165 million now; it’s worth a great deal 
less than that. 
 
But leaving the mathematics aside, I take it then that the 20 years 
was another fit of optimism by the government that you were 
going to be paid off ahead of time. Is that right? I didn’t quite 
follow how you come to get the 20-year term. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I guess, has phrased 
the question: what advantage would it be to Weyerhaeuser to pay 
it off in 20 years rather than 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well that’s the whole philosophical point 
that you seem to miss. It’s to the advantage of the company to 
make money and profit. That’s why they’re spending $250 million 
here. That’s the whole point. 
 
I mean, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has had a 
moving company, or a sewer and water company, or whatever it 
was he had; he wanted to make money with it. And if we gave him 
a 20-year debenture to build a sewer system for the town of 
Midale, it’s in his best interest to make money and make profit and 
pay off his bonds, and pay off his secured assets as quickly as 
possible. That’s in his best interest. 
 
Now Weyerhaeuser is putting $250 million in to a new paper-mill 
and wants to make money and pay off the pulp-mill as quickly as 
they can. I mean, you impute that they want to lose so that they 
can get a hold of a losing pulp-mill. Well, who would want to lose 
money so that they could have in their possession a losing 
pulp-mill? It doesn’t make any economic sense. That’s what I 
mean; you don’t understand. This company wants to make money 
and pay off this pulp-mill and employ people and do good. That’s 
what it wants to do. And rather than come up with cash today, 
which it can’t afford, it says, give us a chance to use aspen — 
poplar that can’t be used before — make fine paper, take this pulp 
and combine it into a paper operation which we have good 
markets for. We will make money in paper, make money in pulp, 
and the whole province will make money. And you’re saying, well 
I wonder whether there’s any incentive for them to make profit. 
Well of course there is; that’s why they’re doing it. I mean, if you 
were an adviser to them, you’d say, make money, pay that thing 
off as quickly as you can, and let’s get this thing on the road. 
They’re shaking their head. They don’t think that they want to 
make money. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2341 
 
 

Look it, I’ll tell you what you understand. You understand, we’re 
losing money. Okay. The pulp-mill is hemorrhaging, bleeding 
money. Weyerhaeuser wants to take 250 million in cash and build 
a new paper-mill and pay off this pulp-mill as fast as we can so the 
public doesn’t lose any money, and the present value of a 30-year 
note is a lot more than $60 million. And we’re saying if they can 
pay it off faster, they can make money. The forest industry, the 
farmers out there, the private sector — I know you don’t like the 
little guys involved — but they can cut those poplar trees, and they 
can take them to the new pulp and paper-mill, and there’s a big 
market for them. They’ve wanted that for years. 
 
Well you asked, what incentive? The incentive is, simply, they 
want to make profit, and profit employs people. That’s how you 
pay their salaries. Right now we’re not making profit; it’s coming 
right out of the taxpayers in Regina Centre, Assiniboia, the Quill 
Lakes, Regina North East, and Shaunavon to pay for people 
working in a pulp-mill which you bought that’s losing money. 
 
Now you ask your constituents: do you like that? I’ll go door to 
door with you, and they’ll say, well I think that’s enough . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . .  There’s saying that they like it. Well 
I’ll tell you what, we’ll tend the whole Bill to the member from 
Regina North . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Premier . . . Order, order. I’m even 
wearing an ear plug and I cannot hear the Premier’s comments 
because of the noise coming from the opposition. So please . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
I’ll just say in response to the question from the member from 
Regina Centre, the incentive is so that they can make money and 
profit which they want to do to be able to pay for their employees 
and pay off the pulp-mill. I mean, they would like to be able to pay 
for this thing in three years, five years, as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in the blizzard of nonsense 
which comes from your seat — occasionally a gem of truth comes 
out — I take it that the 20-year figure was based on your 
expectation, the profits and cash flow would be such that it would 
be paid off in 20 years. I take that to be what the Premier just said. 
Do I accurately paraphrase that answer? It is your . . . You believe 
the profits from the mill will be such that the formula, which is 
based on earnings and cash flow, will see this paid off in 20 years. 
Is that where the 20-year figure came from, the expectations of the 
profits would be sufficient which would result in a sufficient cash 
flow to pay it off in 20 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What I’ve said — I’ll make it perfectly clear 
— that when they put together the paper-mill — it’ll take them 
two or three years to get the paper-mill up, in operation with the 
pulp-mill — that the total package will hopefully make money. 
You want it to make money and I do. As it makes profit, it pays 
for the pulp-mill. 
 
Now it’s in their best interest and in mine and in the taxpayers’ to 
pay off that pulp-mill as quickly as they possibly can, so that you 
have to wait for, and I have to  

hope for, that they make money and they make profit. Now if you 
don’t think it’s a good idea that they pay it off, well, I mean, again, 
I don’t think you understand the economic . . . You know, I want 
the money as quickly as possible. I want them to make money so 
that they can pay it off. If they don’t make money, then they’re 
going to be losing, just like the pulp-mill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, okay, I follow you. You believe 
that the profits will be such that, according to the formula which is 
based on cash flow and not profits, this will be paid off in 20 
years. 
 
Mr. Premier, I assume that you got a study for those calculations 
in writing. Did you get that estimate of earnings and cash flow 
from Weyerhaeuser, or did you get it from a firm of chartered 
accountants who reviewed their earnings record, or from a firm of 
consultants, or where did you get that estimate of cash flow that it 
would pay off in 20 years? 
 
(1545) 
 
I assume that this isn’t something you did at the cabinet table. I 
assume that you have something on which to base that 
assumption. I assume somebody gave you an estimate of that sort. 
Where did you get that from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we get it from every source. 
We do our own analysis, and Crown Management Board has 
being doing economic forecasts in the forestry and the pulp and 
paper business steadily. I can recall several meetings that I’ve been 
briefed on. We get the economic analysis from the industry. 
 
Obviously Weyerhaeuser does their own, and we have MacMillan 
Bloedel and others that we have talked to, that have examined the 
pulp-mill here, shared their economic forecast with us. So we’ve 
got it from the private sector, from several ranges in the private 
sector, from the public, from the market analysis. We’ve done it 
inside and outside. 
 
Now if it shows, as Peat Marwick will tell you, that the best way 
to go is to put the two together, give yourselves some time to turn 
it into a profitable operation, and what you do is you get more 
money for the pulp-mill than it’s worth today if you ask anybody 
to pay you cash. And that’s precisely what a debenture is. That’s 
what it is. 
 
And debentures have been used for a long time in the world. 
Debentures. A long time. And they work. It’s just like a bond. 
Okay? They say that I will pay you over time as I make money. 
And that’s what professionals, economists, and chartered 
accountants recommend to us, recommend to other people. That’s 
how you make it work. It’s a debenture. 
 
As I said, I could get 40, 50 million, maybe 60 million cash, but I 
said, that’s not good enough. My gosh, the public has got 300 
million in cash in this and they’ve been losing it. Can’t we do 
better? and they said, yes, you can on a debenture tied to a 
profitable operation, make it profitable, make it go, and they’ll be 
paying the pulp-mill off, making profits. We can tax the profits. 
We can have royalties on trees.  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2342 
 
 

I mean, you want profitable companies in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan, that’s what it’s all about. I mean, you want to see 
profitable companies so that they can hire people and pay taxes 
and so forth. So that’s what the long run agreement is about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this has been a useful 
afternoon. I take it, Mr. Minister, from your description of all the 
sources from which you got this 20-year figure, that you didn’t 
have an outside source; you didn’t get this from Peak Marwick or 
from any other independent source. I take it this was a figure 
which was developed within the public service of Saskatchewan. 
You didn’t have any outside sources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member, I didn’t say that. I mean, 
I just answered the question, and I didn’t say that. I said, inside 
and outside. I’ve got it from outside market analysts. I’ve got it 
from outside companies who have come to look at the pulp-mill 
— and we’ve had no end of them look at it, give us their best 
estimate of what the forestry and the pulp and the paper business is 
going to do. So I’ve had it outside and inside, both, okay? — the 
private sector, the public sector, our own. We’ve compared notes. 
We’ve compared it with our internal economic computer analysis 
and their analysis. I mean both, okay? — both, inside and outside. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now, Mr. Premier, I want to remind you 
what you’re asking us to believe. You’re asking us to believe that 
this mill can earn 13 per cent because unless it does, nothing is 
payable. You say it’s 6 per cent — we say it’s 13 — but you won’t 
tell us how you arrive at your figures. But it’s got to make that, 
which is a deductible; and then from what’s left over, you then are 
going to make 8 per cent interest and pay off one-twentieth of that 
principal each year. That is an enormous level of profits. 
 
And I want to know, who in the name of Heaven thinks any 
pulp-mill on the face of the earth can make that sort of profits? I 
want to know what outside sources believe that that level of profits 
is possible. I remind you that not only have you got the deductible 
of 6 — 12 per cent — we say it’s 12 per cent — but not only have 
you got that deductible, but then it’s paid out of cash flow, and 
only approximately half of the cash flow is made available for this 
purpose. 
 
So this mill has got to make an enormous amount of money to pay 
that off in 20 years. It will be one of a kind. It really will be one of 
a kind. So you’re asking us to believe in a hitherto absolutely 
unheard-of level of profits for any pulp-mill on the face of the 
earth. 
 
Mr. Premier, if someone outside the government is telling you that 
that level of profits is to be expected, will you tell us who, and will 
you give us the study that you got which apparently leads you to 
this wild fit of optimism? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Look, if you believed that this was your 
own . . . believed your own rhetoric, who in the world would try to 
run a pulp-mill that’s losing this kind of money if you’re right in 
terms of any kind of estimates? I mean, you have just buried the 
pulp-mill; it’s just gone. If you don’t think there’s any kind of 
economic future in the 

pulp and paper industry, then to leave this as it is, you have just 
buried it; it’s gone. 
 
On the other hand — on the other hand — if you think that there is 
some optimism and you want cash for this, who in the world could 
pay you $165 million in cash and make any money? If you said 
that’s impossible because you can’t do it, how are they going to 
come up with 165 million and make money? That’s impossible 
too. I mean, you can’t have it both ways, my boy. 
 
We are tying this to a new integrated system that is more 
profitable and . . . Look, you can believe it or you can argue one 
way or the other, over the two projects it’s 5.3 per cent, and they 
will use the pulp-mill, and they’ll use the paper-mill in an 
integrated operation to sell fine paper into the United States and 
make money. And they can’t do that alone with the pulp-mill as 
we see here right now, because every day it’s losing $91,000. And 
nobody could pay cash for it and make money the way it is, and 
they’ll tell you that. 
 
Now if you gave it away for 20 or $30 million, they might not 
even be able to make money now because even if you assumed 
there was no debt, for Heaven’s sake, they lost 9 million, 24 
million and 33 million, and the thing was paid for, in theory, 
because we never even charged interest. I mean, without even 
charging them the debt and assuming the thing was free — 
assuming that it was free, they didn’t make money, let alone pay 
the debt. And you’re arguing, well my gosh, if there’s no profit in 
the industry, we’ll just keep it the way it is. The status quo is pretty 
good. 
 
Well look, our forecasts tell us that the paper business with new 
technology has the best chance of being successful in the pulp and 
paper industry. If you combine — upgrade it as we have in the Bill 
— an upgraded, improved paper-mill, and link a pulp-mill with 
that new paper-mill; if you take the aspen and you take the new 
forestry management agreement, you have the best chance that we 
can think of to put that package together to make money for you 
and me and our kids and the taxpayer and everybody. 
 
Now I suppose you could say, I could build, or the public sector 
could build, a new paper-mill. We’d put up $250 million. But I 
have no confidence in the public sector running a paper-mill into 
international markets, and what’s more, why wouldn’t I want to 
get somebody else’s money to put in a paper-mill so that they 
could make some money and they have the expertise. 
 
We want to stop and get out of a bad deal that you got us into and 
get into a profitable arrangement with a new paper-mill, and new 
pulp-mill, and 165 new jobs with the best forecasts that we can put 
together; and if you don’t like the forecasts, well then you can say 
the forecasts, if they’re doom and gloom, this one’s dead. The 
pulp-mill is sewered, and it will just cost us for ever, and we’re 
saying no, there’s some life, but you’ve got to change the 
ownership, and you’ve got to integrate it into brand-new 
technology. That’s what the plan is. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2343 
 
 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to take a 
few minutes to introduce some visitors that we have in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are seniors, I understand, from North 
Dakota, with the exception of a couple of them, I understand, from 
Minnesota. They’re here visiting our legislature, of course, and I 
want to advise you people in the galleries that we’re in committee 
of finance right now, reviewing, of course, the Premier’s 
estimates, and the opposition, as you see, are asking a variety of 
questions, and our Premier is replying. 
 
I want to, on behalf of all members, welcome you to our 
legislature, to the province of Saskatchewan. Myself and of course 
our Premier, spend considerable time, as do some other members 
in the government benches, in the United States. We’re glad to be 
your good neighbours, and we hope you’re glad to have us as your 
good neighbours. I spend considerable time as well in Minot, 
North Dakota. And I just want to have all members join with me 
in welcoming them here. I will meet with you if you like out on 
the rotunda on the second floor. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, after making a comment, I’m 
going to leave this subject. I want to give the Premier . . . I’m 
leaving it temporarily. The Premier’s estimates are going to be 
here for a while, and you’ll have an opportunity to think this over. 
 
If you would be prepared to give us the forecast you claim you 
have from an outside source — I assume it’s a group of chartered 
accountants — that might go some distance towards resolving 
some of the issues. If you expect us to take that on faith, then all I 
can say is, I hope this is a good spot to spend the summer, because 
we’re not taking it on faith. But if you’ve got an outside 
consultant’s report . . . 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I’m going to get off it, subject to the following 
comment, Mr. Premier, and that is that you have, throughout this 
entire debate — you and your ministers — have by and large 
stonewalled. What we have got out of you is one portion of an 
agreement that you won’t give us the balance. It is apparent to any 
experienced observer in this Chamber that we got that by mistake, 
that it wasn’t the intention of the minister to give it to us. Mr. 
Premier, you refer to other studies that have been done, and you 
won’t give them to us. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Minister, is if you insist on continuing to 
stonewall, then you’re going to get exactly what you deserve if 
you’re not going to engage in the debate. If you’re going to 
stonewall, you’re not engaging in the debate. If you’re not 
engaging in the debate, then you may find the public believing the 
only side of the story they’re hearing, which is ours. We say, this 
is the deal as we understand it. And you say, ah, but it was a bad 
thing  

to buy; and you people are against Crown corporations, and you’re 
against jobs, and you’re against Prince Albert. But you never did 
engage in the debate. 
 
So I want to give you an opportunity to think about this, Mr. 
Premier. If you’d engage in the debate, if you’d answer questions, 
if you’d give us the study, then we may be able to resolve this 
matter. But if you insist on fleeing from the issue, then you’re 
going to get exactly what you deserve — a lengthy, protracted 
debate and very little support from the public. 
 
So I want to give you an opportunity to think out the course which 
you’ve followed, which is every bit as disastrous for you as it is 
for this province. I want to give you an opportunity to think about 
it, and we may go to some other issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say, if I can 
come up with some forecast that would help you, I certainly won’t 
be in . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order! I think the member 
from Regina Centre was given an opportunity to speak, and would 
now let someone else do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say to the hon. 
member, we could come up with forecasts and we could give them 
to the hon. member. Now, I ask the question — I’ll ask it to 
myself and to the members in general because I know you won’t 
have to respond. But if it was a good forecast, what will that do for 
you? If it was not a good forecast, what will it do for you in terms 
of the operation of the pulp-mill, in terms of the paper-mill? 
 
It won’t answer a thing for you. Because either way you could say 
philosophically, well, it’s a good forecast. Look, they’re going to 
make money. We’ll just hang on to the pulp-mill. Right? And if it 
isn’t a good forecast, you’ll say, well for Heaven’s sakes, they’ll 
never pay it back and we’ll just have to hang on to the pulp-mill 
anyway. Okay? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So either way, you will just use any 
information to say that philosophically you want to hang on to the 
pulp-mill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. This is just unbelievable, this kind of 
conduct when you have been given an opportunity . . . Order, 
order. Would you please let the debate go on with a little bit of 
decorum. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just say to the 
hon. member, we can . . . I know that we have done forecasts 
inside and outside with respect to prices and the profitability of 
paper-mills and so forth. And the hon. member says if he could get 
a hold of some good forecasts, then he can move along. 
 
Well I would say that I will see what’s available in terms of 
forecasts. I’ll also say, Mr. Chairman, that if it’s a good forecast, 
they’ll say that they want to hang on to the pulp-mill; if it’s a bad 
forecast, they’ll say they’ll never get  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2344 
 
 

their money out, and they’ll have to hang on to the pulp-mill. I 
mean . . . So I’m not sure where that would take us. 
 
Finally, let me say, Mr. Chairman, that I will not be easily 
intimidated by the member from Regina Centre or anybody else 
sitting over there and saying, well, Mr. Premier, you may just be 
sitting in the legislature June, July, August, and September, and so 
forth. 
 
On the principle of this, whether we can make money in the 
private sector and whether the people of Prince Albert think it’s a 
good idea, I will not be blackmailed. I will not be easily 
intimidated from the members opposite standing there and saying 
they will sit in here and holler and scream till the cows come 
home. Well they can. 
 
But if I believe that it’s right, and I believe it’s good for the 
province, then I will make sure that we are here if we have to be. 
But I don’t see that we necessarily have to get into the kind of 
personal arguments that we’ve been into. I’ve outlined the details, 
and I’ll be glad to answer any more questions with respect to my 
general estimates. If they have any, then let’s proceed. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, earlier in question period today I 
raised the issue of grasshoppers, and you suggested that you were 
informed from your department that it was just some small 
pockets of grasshoppers. Have you staff around that could indicate 
how serious the infestation was? 
 
I don’t know where these pockets and how small these pockets 
are, but our indications are that the chemical companies have sold 
more chemicals, out-paced chemical sales this year by far 
compared to what it was last year. All the indications are that the 
farmers have made a very, very serious effort to control the 
grasshoppers. They’ve reseeded; the reseeded crop is eaten off. 
What should they do now? Where should they go? 
 
Where, and at what level, is it reasonable that a farmer can say, I 
give up? You know, I’m going to have to resort to collecting 
insurance or whatever. It’ll average out. I’ll likely get twice as 
good a crop on some of mine. What have you got other than from 
what the press are doing? What is Harry Zilm and some of these 
people that are good at stats and know what’s going on . . . What is 
happening? And give us an indication that is positive, as a 
Minister of Agriculture and a Premier would handle, rather than 
what some press report says. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The press report was the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool doing a survey across the areas where there’s 
grasshoppers. I have my own advice from the department officials, 
crop insurance officials, inspectors, and so forth, plus the wheat 
pool, and we agree with the wheat pool. That is, generally we have 
control of it better this year than we did last year, but there are 
pockets where it is extremely bad, and in some cases maybe even 
worse than last year. That’s what the report said. We’ve got those 
pockets. 
 
Generally we’re getting a better kill, and there’s better growth on 
the broad section say, from the Manitoba  

border south of No 1 Highway right through the Alberta border. 
Generally we’re better. There’s far better growth and a far better 
kill, and many more grasshoppers hatched all at the same time, 
and they are spraying; you’re right. And they’re getting a good 
kill. But you’ve got pockets, whether it’s just the way nature 
works or whether it’s because people didn’t spray as much last 
year or whatever, I’m not quite sure, where they are very, very 
bad. And people have reseeded and lost even the reseeded, and 
that’s the situation. 
 
Now, I say on general and on average it’s better. We’ve got those 
pockets. I mean, that’s as the wheat pool sees it, and that’s how 
our department officials see it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Of the seeded acreage in southern Saskatchewan, 
let’s say that 12 million acres was about what was in the drought 
area last year, would you consider that size a pocket? You know, 
how big an area are you talking about when you’re talking about 
pockets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I don’t have that with me, Mr. 
Chairman, but generally they said across the piece in southern 
Saskatchewan, south of the No. 1 Highway, we are generally 
better off than we were last year because of the growth, because of 
the immediate hatch, and because the spraying is really doing the 
job. 
 
You could have pockets, let’s say, part of an R.M., that you’ve got 
a pocket that is maybe surrounded by grassland or something else, 
that is a rough area where they’re as bad or even worse than last 
year, but generally across the piece, it’s better. So you may have 
identified one where you’ve got a pocket of farmers in there and 
they have a sincere problem and it’s worse than last year, and that 
could very well be the case. So not necessarily hundreds of square 
miles, but part of an R.M., or cutting across a couple of R.M.s in 
corners. I mean, that’s what I’ve been told as being identified, but 
generally we’re doing a better job. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The point the farmers were raising with me, and I 
don’t know if that’s considered a pocket, but there were people 
from as far away from my place as Ponteix on one side, and 
Assiniboia on the other, and Mossbank on the other. Now if you 
take that triangle in, that’s a pretty fair-sized pocket. Whoever is 
wearing those trousers has a big waistline because that pocket is 
serious. 
 
I’ve sprayed some fields; I’ve reseeded personally 150 acres. And 
I think that’s a wipe-out because when the wheat was this high on 
Monday, there were no grasshoppers, and this morning it’s gone. 
You know, what do you do at this stage of the game? And this is 
what the farmers are asking. I bought some more spray, and I’ve 
got a neighbour spraying as soon as the wind dies down enough so 
that he can spray it again. 
 
But the serious part is this fellow that came to me and he told me 
that on six quarters you can’t reseed any more. And if they can eat 
it up in a day when it’s only that high . . . if you’ve got wheat 
that’s that high and looking lush and lovely, and you can take one 
plant and count 30 grasshoppers, that’s pretty severe. That crop is 
not going to stand it no matter how lush the growth is and how 
good it looks. So the farmers are getting very concerned. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2345 
 
 

In Alberta between Elkwater and Medicine Hat and down south 
there, the Alberta government had four airplanes in there that were 
spraying the grassland. They were not asking farmers or anybody; 
they just went in, and where the grasshoppers were they sprayed it. 
This is what I was told last night on the telephone. The farmers 
down there that want to spray their crop land, keep their bills, turn 
them in, and they get paid for half of it. The crop that’s gone, the 
crop that’s been reseeded and is now gone . . . When I flew in this 
morning across Mossbank and south of Moose Jaw, as close as I 
could get to the air base — you can’t come right up — but I took a 
good look to see what it was. And the fields that were reseeded are 
again black. It looked nice on Monday; today it’s eaten back off 
again. That’s a big area — that’s a big area. 
 
And all I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, I think those farmers will 
spray again because they know if they don’t spray, I’ll have them 
again next year. And those farmers will spray, but that spray 
they’re spending is an insurance or a guarantee to help somebody 
else, because those grasshoppers are going to move on. Some of 
them are still hatching. We looked at some that, like I said, were 
small enough you got to get down on your knees to see, and 
standing right beside them were grasshoppers an inch long. And 
they’ve been sprayed. 
 
Now I’ve talked to some suppliers, and there’s a supplier at 
Gravelbourg that sent some Furadan back that the farmers were 
coming back saying it was ineffective. It was hurting them; it’s 
congesting their chests, and I can prove it that it affects the 
operator more than it does the grasshopper, I think. Now I’m not 
sure if that’s a general problem, but most people down our country 
are using Furadan as a contact spray because you can do it for 
about two bucks an acre. 
 
And I think it’s time we take a look. I’d like to have somebody 
show me the numbers that were around and do some research, 
because when my dad used Dieldrin, he sprayed once and that was 
it. The stuff killed the grasshoppers for that season and cleaned up 
the spot that was controlled and sprayed. 
 
Now if there’s a way of getting your people to look at licensing or 
approving under special conditions, in those pockets where we’re 
not controlling a crop, where it’s not going to go back into the 
food chain because the crop’s gone, and we could license and 
bring up some of the stuff that you could use — and in those days 
you could do it for very little. And I’ve had very many farmers tell 
me that they think that’s easier on you, and that’s less harmful to 
the human body than using Furadan every third day. 
 
And I was wondering if there’s been some test done, or some 
studies, or if you’ve looked at some areas where we can get in 
with some control that will take a grip on grasshoppers and work, 
rather than work on the bodies of the individuals using it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe it is federal law, 
federal environmental law that limits the use of Dieldrin because 
of its environmental impact. I think it was at the time when you 
were Legislative Secretary to the minister of Agriculture that in 
fact that passed that we  

couldn’t use Dieldrin. But it would take a change in federal 
legislation to make that happen, and obviously it has some pretty 
significant environmental concerns. 
 
I mean, we’re looking at a situation as I mentioned, and I’ll get 
more information for you if you like with respect to the size and 
the depth and the breadth and what not. I mean, north of Moose 
Jaw where I farm, it’s not much different. We’ve sprayed and 
sprayed. I’ve worked up 160 acres of winter wheat and half my 
lentils and so forth. I mean, I’ve sprayed and sprayed. 
 
We have $8.5 million out for R.M.s to spray and to spray public 
lands as well. And where we sprayed a lot last year, we’ve seen 
some positive impact this year. But in some areas they’re worse 
than others. So all I can say is that we will examine any or all 
alternatives. If you’ve got suggestions, like you recommend 
Dieldrin, I’ll take a look at it. But I’m not optimistic that I can get 
the federal government to change its mind with respect to the 
environmental law that’s already been passed, but I’ll be glad to 
bring you back information on as much detail as I can on the depth 
and breadth of the pockets that have been described by the wheat 
pool and my officials. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I used Dieldrin as an example, and I know it was 
outlawed before the time that I was Legislative Secretary to the 
minister of Agriculture. And the reason the environmental people 
got involved and outlawed Dieldrin that time was that they were 
finding we were killing off natural predators to grasshoppers. 
 
Well I can take you around a field, and I think the sea-gull is about 
the toughest of all the birds that are out there, and when you see 
dead sea-gulls and you know you’re killing that off by the amount 
of Furadan that’s pumped out there, and when that even affects 
some of our birds . . . and not necessarily only Furadan, it’s Decis 
and some of the other chemicals that are used on a repeat basis. 
When farmers are telling me they’ve sprayed the same field as 
many as six times — and I’ve witnessed that myself by going 
along with a bike and crossing the track where a neighbour went 
around the outside. It’s like a road where he hauls his wheat home. 
 
I think it’s time you made some special consideration. I’d like you 
to make an announcement. I would really like you to make an 
announcement, saying to the farmers of Saskatchewan that where 
the grasshoppers are severe and where you’re doing everything 
possible to control the grasshoppers, we’re going to pay half your 
chemical. Because a guy isn’t going to buy chemical and not use 
it. There’s no way that they’re going to do that. 
 
In Alberta it’s working; the program is out there, and if that 
program would have been in place — and I asked for it last year 
— I still maintain where there wasn’t a crop and the farmers 
weren’t spraying because there was no crop to protect, if those 
grasshoppers would have been controlled and sprayed, they 
wouldn’t have moved up to the Tuxford area and that far north. 
They’re moving north because they moved in where it was green 
last year, and that’s where they laid their eggs and that’s where the 
problem is. 
 
I’ve got grasshoppers on my farm this year, and I didn’t  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2346 
 
 

have a problem with grasshoppers last year. We couldn’t find any. 
Late in harvest and after fall, when we got some rain we saw some 
flying in. The grasshoppers move, and I’m telling you the farmers 
that are on the front line of it . . . And I’ve been suggesting to your 
Legislative Secretary, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, that he 
doesn’t have any this year, but if it keeps on spreading the way it 
has, he will likely have grasshoppers in areas . . . Like you say, 
that isn’t a normal problem in the plat in the good land north of 
Moose Jaw. It isn’t generally as big a problem with grasshoppers 
as it would be in Bengough, but this year there’s more there than 
there are in the southern part. So I think those pockets are 
growing, and they’re growing because the government hasn’t 
gotten a hold and hasn’t contributed to the costs. 
 
I think just adding this one little story to it because you are also 
Minister of Agriculture and as Premier, I think you should 
seriously consider making that kind of an announcement because 
there’s some farmers have invested very, very heavily in those 
spray costs. 
 
And when they look at the kind of deal you give Weyerhaeuser, 
they’re thinking, surely you can give us the same kind of break. 
Surely you can give us the same kind of break, if we’re spraying 
something that isn’t there to protect anyhow. The crop’s already 
gone. Like you say, it’s too late to reseed now. And the crop that 
was 2 and 3 inches high and is eaten off the second time, what are 
those guys supposed to do? Where are they supposed to get that 
kind of funds to control their grasshoppers so that they don’t have 
a problem next year? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ve been through this before. I give a 
great deal of credit to the farmers who have sprayed and sprayed 
like you have and my family has and others, but I will also say that 
there isn’t a company in Canada that’s got a better deal from 
government that the farmers have from this administration in 
terms of money. They get $125 a cow, interest free. You get 6 per 
cent money. We’ve got over a billion dollars out at 6 per cent. I 
mean, you’ve never seen money like that. 
 
You’ve got farmers in your area that normally farm half and half, 
and they’re farming 2 or 3,000 acres, 4 or 5 or whatever; but take a 
nice 2 or 3,000 acres farm and they’ve got access to 6 per cent 
money. That’s a great deal of money and it’s locked in at 6 per 
cent. And if they’ve got cattle operations, they’ve got zero per cent 
interest rates on top of the wheat board cash advanced and some 
major payments in terms if drought, and new crop insurance 
changes, and a disaster mechanism. 
 
So in terms of cash, I mean the cash that we got out, the cash 
payments, direct cash, those that are on loans, 6 per cent, zero per 
cent, it’ll beat Alberta’s, it’ll beat Manitoba’s, it beats Montana’s 
or North Dakota’s or anybody’s. 
 
Now I’m sure that when we got a billion dollars out and we’ve 
added it up, and fair enough, you say, well I think they need some 
more. Well, I mean, I’ll look at it, and I’ll examine it and so forth, 
but I want to make sure, as I think your colleague pointed out, the 
member from Quill  

Lakes, you’ve got to make sure that it’s fair, and it’s fair across the 
piece. 
 
So I can remember, I’m getting a lobby from areas that were 
wiped right out because of midge, and they lost it and they had to 
spray and it cost them fortunes, and so forth. They didn’t have you 
arguing for more payments for them and more payments for them 
and more payments for them. They had our members standing up 
and arguing. And I said, no; I said, look, we’ll do it across the 
piece, 6 per cent money, and we’ll help everybody. 
 
Once we get into the boundaries — which grasshopper area? 
Which farmer? How many times? What did he use? How often? 
Did he do it right? You know the problems. I mean it’s a real can 
of worms when you get into the whole problems of carving up 
boundaries; when we’ve done it on a universal basis, just like the 
wheat board. 
 
You’ve got access to cash, zero per cent, you got it. Six per cent 
money, you’ve got it. Drought payments across the board, cash 
advances for livestock, you’ve got it there. So we’ve got a great 
deal of money out. And you know what? I believe they have 
sprayed, and they’ve sprayed a great deal. And they’ve sprayed 
and sprayed, and they ate the crop off, and they seeded it, and they 
sprayed again because they had the money to spray, and they’ve 
done that. 
 
Now, I mean, you can’t seed it again. Okay. So if you’ve got 
pockets now where it’s beyond that, then that’s it. You will collect 
your crop insurance, you summer-fallow it, or the combination 
thereof. I mean, you can’t be seeding it this time of year and 
expect anything favourable to happen. 
 
So I will get the information. I will stay on top of it and look at it, 
but I am still reluctant — I guess where you and I come to an 
impasse — I’m reluctant to start paying specifically for chemicals 
that farmers use because we’re into a very complex and difficult 
problem. Because you’re into which chemicals, which farmers, 
how much, how often, what area, drawing the lines, this farmer, 
not that farmer, can’t do it for midge. 
 
Some people spray in advance of seeding — $16 a acre to take 
care of all kinds of insects, and they do that. Should we do them 
too? And then they get some other insects on top of that. We said 
no, across the board, universal. You can apply for the money if 
you need it and use it; if you don’t, fair enough. 
 
So I will get you as much information as I can, but to date I am 
still reluctant to get into personal payments for chemicals because 
I believe that it’s not the way to go. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, you should talk to Mr. Getty then because 
they believe it is the way to go, and the farmers in Alberta that are 
involved in that are doing a job that’s going to help their 
neighbours. 
 
This isn’t the kind of situation where you spray for wire-worms or 
something like that, and so if you’ve got wire-worms there, 
they’re not going to necessarily be a problem for my colleague in 
Pelly. But the situation with grasshoppers is quite unique because 
of the ability they  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2347 
 
 

have of propagating. They’re like socialists because when the 
Tories show their kind of government, they pop up all over. And I 
think if you would have had the courage to call an election, we’d 
be dealing with the grasshopper situation from a different 
perspective right now. And I’m telling you, it would have been a 
different kind of program. 
 
We’re into a situation here where farmers are concerned. I’ve had 
them approach me; I promised I’d raise it on their behalf. 
 
The other issue that I raised and I really want to get into, and that 
is this whole aspect of crop insurance. A crop adjuster told this 
farmer that you spray it or we’re going to endorse your contract 
and we’ll decide what we’ll do with it afterwards. Did that 
direction come from your office? Is that what crop adjusters are 
told? 
 
A crop adjuster stopped at a farmer’s name, and I told you at 
question period I’ll give you his name today yet and in private. 
But that farmer was very, very perturbed because he was told, you 
spray the second crop; the second seeding was gone, was eaten 
off. He was told, you spray that or else we’ll take a look at 
whether you’ll get crop insurance or not. And he brought the 
adjuster out to say, look, this is what we adjusted last week. Here’s 
where I reseeded. It was up two inches; it’s gone again. And he 
says, look, you spray it again or you’re not going to get crop 
insurance. 
 
I think that’s a decision to decide . . . He told me he’d sprayed that 
particular field six times — six times. Now that would have to 
make close to 30 bushels an acre to pay his expenses if he’d have 
no other expense at all, just what he put into that field. 
 
I’m wondering, have you issued a directive? Has the crop 
insurance board or somebody talked about how they’re going to 
handle these cases? It’s a difficult one to deal with. In some 
respects they’re wondering, how far do we have to go? How many 
times do we have to do it to be legit and say, now we’ve done our 
part, here’s where we’re going to back off and it just doesn’t pay 
to do any more. Where is that cut-off and what reason are you 
going to use, particularly in those pockets where it’s severe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, it’s common sense. If they’ve sprayed 
and they have to reseed, they get paid for reseeding. And if it’s 
eaten up, then obviously they can collect crop insurance. 
 
I would be surprised if crop insurance adjusters are running around 
and saying, you sprayed six, you have to spray seven . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . .  Well you raised it in here. You have to 
spray seven times. I mean, you know, the crop insurance people 
have been working hard in trying to be as fair as possible. If 
people have sprayed six or seven times they are certainly going to 
go collect crop insurance, and I would doubt whether, on a general 
fashion, the inspectors are running around saying you’ve got to 
spray eight or nine or 10. 
 
It’s common sense. If you were advising them or you were 
training crop insurance, you’d say look, if the guy’s trying, he’s 
reseeded, he’s lost it again and even after he’s  

sprayed, of course he’s going to collect crop insurance. I mean, 
what’s the alternative. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And then the aspect of crop insurance. I’ve got 150 
acres that looks like it’s going to be bad, but the rest looks, I hope, 
good enough that you still won’t be able to collect on that. You 
know what I mean. It’s not a spot-loss type coverage. 
 
The other question that a fellow . . . and he’s from the Shaunavon 
constituency, too; I suppose I should have let my colleague ask 
these. He was wondering, what is the deal if a particular field 
that’s eaten up by grasshoppers and he decides to work it. He gets 
an adjuster to look at it. Can he work it down so he can prepare it 
to seed winter wheat in it? 
 
Can you get somebody from crop insurance to give me a written 
answer on that maybe, or a ruling, because it gets complicated, and 
I’m not sure. I couldn’t give him an answer. I didn’t know what 
would be applicable or would he just get covered for reseeding 
and his insurance would be carried on that far down. It’s a 
problem. If you can get a ruling on that one. People are looking at 
that as an option. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’d be glad to get that for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
would like to pursue another topic for a while this afternoon. One 
of the areas in which I take it it’s become well-known where there 
have been some difficulties experienced by your government and 
particularly your cabinet, is the area of cabinet ministers’ use of 
aircraft, and that’s been debated at some length in here. 
 
During question period on a number of occasions we have raised 
questions about things like trips that have been taken by executive 
aircraft — four round trips to the city of Saskatoon in one day to 
carry four different people on each trip when, through even a small 
amount of organization and co-ordinating, that could have been 
done in maybe two trips. 
 
And there are other examples. There’s a case of — and I’ll give 
you the date, October 29th of 1985 — where there were three 
different cabinet ministers again from Regina to Saskatoon and 
back when you could have organized that into one trip probably, 
and even, let’s say two. It would have saved a trip. You know as 
well as I know that to get this plane running and the standby and 
everything else is a very costly proposition. 
 
You indicated — I think last fall; it was in December — that in 
light of the result of Regina North East and other difficulties, and 
what happened to the minister who was the MLA, and I guess still 
is, for Wilkie, that there were going to be new guide-lines 
established. Are there new guide-lines in place now, and what 
have they changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there are new guide-lines. I 
took a look at the situation, and I said, I believe that we can cut 
down on one airplane, and we sold one. I believe that we can 
co-ordinate the trips better, and our records have showed that we 
can and we have. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2348 
 
 

From the experience that we . . . we were following the same rules 
and operations that the previous administration had. And I can, if 
the hon. member wants, get into the large number of trips that 
MLAs made, and the expenses and the airplanes that they took 15 
ways from Sunday, but I won’t pursue it. 
 
But yes, I said I thought we could do better and the public wanted 
to see us do better. And I designed a mechanism where we would 
scrutinize the flights as closely as possible, sold an airplane, and as 
a result we saw some improvement, and I hope that it can continue 
to improve in the future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What is the mechanism, Mr. Premier? 
What is the new mechanism that scrutinizes this system, and who 
does the co-ordinating? You’ve indicated that you’re doing both. 
You’ve indicated that there’s a co-ordination now — I’m wanting 
to know who does the co-ordinating — and that there is a new 
system in place that scrutinizes. Can you tell me, what’s the 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it’s just better co-ordination, just better 
co-ordination in terms of who’s going and when they have to be 
there, and trying to juggle — as you pointed out. You said, if you 
could have . . . you’ve got a meeting with the chamber of 
commerce, you’ve got a school board meeting, and you’ve got 
something else. Is there any way that we can co-ordinate these to 
make sure that you can put as many people on the same airplane 
and get them back at the same time as possible, knowing that 
you’ve got responsibilities in the legislature, some other people. 
 
Just co-ordinating it as much as possible, getting all the 
information together, knowing that you made commitments. I 
make commitments that I have to speak at a function, and you 
might make commitments, and somebody else makes them, and 
we all have to get there and we all have to come home. So it’s 
co-ordination and pulling all that information together so that we 
can be as efficient as possible in putting together the flight 
schedule. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree, co-ordination can save a lot. If 
there’s a speaking engagement in Saskatoon and one in North 
Battleford and one in Lloydminster, I’m sure that with any even 
small amount of co-ordination, you could probably arrange for one 
flight to be able to look after all of that, rather than doing shuttle 
service where you go and return, and go and return, and go and 
return. But you didn’t answer my question, Mr. Minister. Where is 
this co-ordination placed, and who is responsible for the 
co-ordination of the new arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it’s involved with the executive 
aircraft and the staff and the people that are co-ordinating the 
flights. I mean, they were doing it before, but we’re asking to have 
as much of that information brought in advance so that we can 
co-ordinate it and look at it. I didn’t hire more people to do it. I 
just said I want a better job of co-ordinating and bringing the 
information together, and the results are we’ve had a 27 per cent 
improvement — a decrease in ministerial flights because of the 
co-ordination and information brought together. 
 

We were operating under your system — same rules, same ideas, 
same concepts — and we’ve said that we will try to make it and 
save the taxpayers some money, and we have. It’s resulted in a 27 
per cent improvement. I hope that it can even get better. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What do you mean, Mr. Premier, by a 27 
per cent improvement? Twenty-seven per cent fewer flights? Can 
you describe that to the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Precisely that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, I want to go back to the 
guide-lines. You indicated that there are new guide-lines in place 
which are regulating this. Can you table those guide-lines? I’m 
sure you cannot operate this kind of an operation without written 
guide-lines because you’d have to have it distributed to all 
departments and all governments. 
 
I’m asking if you would undertake to provide us with those 
guide-lines so that we are aware of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well under the new system we are 
gathering the information so that we can made as efficient use of 
aircraft as possible. We have executive air service — the 
guide-lines which says who can fly and how you fly and so forth 
— I’ll be glad to table those. I’m sure you’ve seen them. 
 
So with respect to the management of the system, we’ve said, look 
it, I want to know all the flights; I want somebody to know; I want 
to know where you’re going and why, and if we can do a better 
job of cutting down. We have a 20 per cent decrease in ministerial 
flights since we’ve initiated the new system, which says, I want 
you conscientiously to watch what you’re doing and co-ordinate it 
with your colleagues, and do it through executive air service so 
that they can make efficient use of flights; and it’s working — 27 
per cent improvement. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m familiar with the executive air service 
brochure you’re talking about, but that’s not your new guide-lines. 
You made a specific commitment and declaration as of last year, 
late last year, that you were going to have prepared new 
guide-lines, and we’re asking what the guide-lines are? 
 
You’re standing and you’re talking about generalities again. Well 
let’s get specific. Will you provide us with the guide-lines? Surely 
you must communicate. I’m quite prepared to accept the results, 
but we would like to know the guide-lines that have brought about 
those results, if you indeed have the guide-lines. 
 
I’m sure there’s nothing secret about the guide-lines. Heavens, it’s 
not a Weyerhaeuser deal or any of that kind of a fiasco; it’s a 
simple, formal kind of arrangement that any government who is 
managing their affairs would have. So are you able to provide the 
guide-lines, the new guide-lines which you have put together, 
which you said you put together some months ago, to this 
committee? 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2349 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the guide-lines are simply this: you 
only fly when it’s necessary — only when it’s necessary — and if 
you can’t do it in our service, then you’re going to take a 
commercial flight; and I want you to co-ordinate all the activities 
with all the other flights that will take place during the same day, 
going to the same place or in linked trips. to make sure we are as 
efficient as possible; and to use your head, and not to waste the 
taxpayers’ money, and to be as efficient as possible. So don’t fly 
unless you have to — that’s the guide-line. And if they’re not . . . 
And as a result we’ve got a 27 per cent saving, and you want me 
to write it down. 
 
Well, I mean, I know you don’t understand what a debenture is. I 
will write that down for you. I’ll put it on paper — don’t fly unless 
you have to. That’s the guide-line. Okay, there it is. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, that was the guide-line before. 
I mean, are you saying that you used to say to your ministers, fly 
all over the place, don’t pay any attention to whether you have to 
or not? What has changed? I mean, the whole question here is 
whether you actually just make statements or whether you do 
something. And I’m asking you, what have you done in the new 
guide-lines? 
 
For you to say that you told your ministers to only fly when you 
have to, but you waited until December of 1985 to do that, I mean, 
it leaves the obvious question, what the devil were you doing prior 
to December of 1985, which showed all kinds of abuses by 
ministers to the point where one of your ministers had to resign? 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I don’t want to spend a lot of time on this 
except, once again, you’re therefore saying that you really had no 
guide-lines; you simply instructed the people in your cabinet again 
what you probably should have done in 1982 — fly only when 
you have to. So nothing has changed. I will accept that there are 
fewer flights, and part of it may be because of the time of the year, 
but I don’t know that, but I will accept that. 
 
But you’re saying therefore that the only guide-lines you have 
prepared is simply saying, fly when you have to, and it’s up to the 
minister to decide that, and that may be fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What I’m saying is that when we look at the 
guide-lines which were zero under your administration — zero; 
you didn’t have any; none recorded — and in 1981-82 you made 
910 executive air flights, what were your guide-lines? Didn’t have 
any. Didn’t have any guide-lines at all. And you have no record of 
guide-lines and there are no record of guide-lines. And you’re 
asking me for guide-lines when I’ve made a 27 per cent 
improvement. 
 
I go back and look at the member from Shaunavon who made 58 
flights — 58 flights in 1981-82, and 37 of them just happened to 
stop in his home town of Shaunavon. And that’s more than 
anybody from Unity ever did in the last four years. What were the 
guide-lines? What were the guide-lines? 
 
I said I’ve made a 27 per cent improvement, and you’re belittling 
it — a 27 per cent improvement by saying, I want to see as much 
co-ordination as possible wherever  

that you can avoid extra flights, where we can have as much 
co-operation; I want to see it there because I want to see the 
results. And do you know what happened? I got the results. 
 
And you’re saying, well, show me what you said on paper. I said, I 
want to see an improvement. I got an improvement; it’s much 
improved over yours. I mean, the member from Shaunavon, for 
Heaven’s sakes, is obviously embarrassed by his flight activities 
that made everything else we’ve seen in ’82 look rather small. 
 
So we have new guide-lines, and the new guide-lines are to tighten 
up and to make sure that we don’t waste the taxpayers’ money. 
And we’ve got a 27 per cent improvement over your record and 
our previous record. 
 
So you’re saying that you were not without sin and we were not 
without sin in terms of using the taxpayers’ money with respect to 
flying as efficiently as possible. I’ve got a 27 per cent 
improvement because I’ve tightened it up. Well that’s precisely 
what I wanted to do. I got the results, and they’re significant. And 
we’ve said, I want people to be aware — not to go about it in a 
casual sense, but to make sure you don’t waste the time or waste 
any taxpayers or waste any airplanes, and it’s working. And they 
are more conscious of it; they pay more attention to it; and it pays 
off. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m glad that in the fifth year of your 
government when cabinet ministers have become concerned about 
their re-election, they’re finally paying attention to some 
guide-lines. Its a pity that in the previous four years, they paid no 
attention to the guide-lines. And your former minister of 
Highways, the member from Wilkie who apparently is about to 
resign, who resigned from the cabinet, you should have spent 
some time talking to him about the guide-lines because there was 
an abuse, and he did the honourable thing and he resigned. I think 
that was a noble move on his part. 
 
I ask you now, Mr. Premier, in light of the difficulties you had 
with your former minister of Highways and in light of the question 
which we asked of the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, the 
minister in charge, whether that member from Wilkie has 
reimbursed the government for the misuse of the aircraft, can you 
inform the House whether that indeed has taken place, because the 
Minister of Supply and Services had undertaken to do an inquiry 
when we asked in question period, as to whether there should be a 
repayment? Are you able to inform the House as the Premier 
whether there has been any follow-up on this and whether there is 
going to be a repayment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will say that it will be repaid, and it 
will be repaid to the government either from the member or from 
the party or from one or the other. I don’t know whether it has or 
not, but you can rest assured that it will be. 
 
And when you’re saying that the guide-lines were the reason that 
the member from Wilkie resigned, well the member from 
Shaunavon flew far more and stopped more than any member 
from Wilkie ever did. Right? He made more flights and he abused 
the aircraft more often  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2350 
 
 

- he stopped it 37 times. And you’re kind of chuckling over there 
saying, well the member from Wilkie resigned. He didn’t fly as 
much as the member from Shaunavon, or stop in his town as 
much. What guide-lines did he use? 
 
So the member from Shaunavon was the first guy to ask and say, 
you know, we’re supposed to file our conflict of interest 
guide-lines and our information. And who was chirping from his 
seat for months and months about the conflict of interest? The 
member from Shaunavon and he didn’t file his. And he had an 
agreement and a deal cooked up with civil servants here in the 
government. he didn’t file it. So don’t get too self-righteous when 
it comes to flying and/or conflict of interests because your record 
stands pretty clear that you flew a lot more than anybody from 
Wilkie. 
 
And with respect to conflict of interest guide-lines, all of a sudden 
you remember to enter them into the books. We took over the 
same operation that you had. I didn’t see any guide-lines that kept 
the member from Shaunavon from doing what he wanted to do. 
He flew and flew and flew far more than the member from Unity. 
Right? You did. He certainly did and he stopped in 37 times which 
beats more than anybody else. 
 
I have said I’m going to make it better; and I have improved it by 
27 per cent with the co-operation of all the cabinet ministers, 
legislative secretaries and members in our caucus, and it is 
working. So I think it would be fair for you to give us a bouquet 
for improving it because it’s better than what you were doing, it’s 
better than what we were doing, and we can always improve, and I 
agree that we should improve. It’s better and it’s working, and I 
hope that it even gets better in the future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, you really do not understand 
the issue here — or choose not to. I would not question flights 
taken by your ministers. I understand what the responsibility of a 
minister is and sometimes it is necessary to fly. If the member 
from Meadow Lake needs to fly to Prince Albert to meet with 
Weyerhaeuser to talk about the give-away, then he will fly. 
Nobody would question that. 
 
The question is a matter of abuse — abuse of the flights. And we 
have had a case of abuse of the flights. The member from Wilkie: 
are you saying that wasn’t an abuse? Wasn’t the member from 
Wilkie abusing it . . . (inaudible interjection)  . . Well I don’t have 
to tell you about it. He said it. He admitted it in the House. 
 
Now, if your guide-lines prevent that from happening again, and 
hopefully they will, then that’s fine. I asked whether there will be 
a reimbursement of the costs. You’ve said yes. We’ve established 
that, and I hope that when we get in here again and some of your 
members who might get re-elected are asking the questions and 
that, we on the other side will be able to say yes, indeed, we 
received the payment from the reimbursement. And really it 
doesn’t matter to me whether it comes form the Progressive 
Conservative Party or from the member from Wilkie personally, 
but it ought to be done. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to turn, along with these flights, to a similar 
issue. Now with your improved system I wanted to  

know why, since in mid-March there was submitted in this 
Assembly an order for return dealing with your travel as a Premier 
from December 3rd, 1985 to March 18th, 1986, there has been not 
a response provided yet to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it’s my understanding that they’ve 
been tabled. If the hon. member doesn’t have them, he can 
certainly have them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You’ve passed them over. I have not seen 
them. I’m afraid that I do not think they have been tabled. If they 
have been, I will stand corrected, of course. 
 
Are these dealing with the order for return, ordered in March, for 
the period December 3rd, ’85 to March 18, ’86? I think we’re 
talking about two different . . . You obviously didn’t get the 
question or I didn’t make it clear. In mid-March of this year there 
was an order for return from this Assembly asking you about your 
travel from December 3rd of 1985 to March 18, 1986. This is 
return for order 699, which I think is a different one altogether. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my officials are not 
sure that that’s been an order, but what I believe that you will have 
is up to December 1985. If there’s information you want from 
December ’85 until date — if that’s been ordered, well, we’ll 
certainly try to dig it up for you. 
 
What’s the number? The one you’re asking for — order of return? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t have the number with me, but 
tonight we’ll have it. It was issued in March, I’m told. I’m 
prepared to let your officials check it. If there’s some error in this, 
that’s fine, but will you check it? 
 
I have here, you have given me a return no. 699 which was issued 
on November 26, 1985, for the period of travel between January 1, 
1984 to June 12, 1985. Some two years ago, Mr. Premier, there 
was another return that was ordered, numbered 691. Are you able 
to table that today, as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, 691 has been tabled; 
however, we’ll send you over another copy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When was it tabled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yesterday or today. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. Maybe today. That’s why we don’t 
have it, obviously, if it was just tabled today. 
 
Mr. Premier, we want to take a look at that information. The point, 
I think, that needs to be made is that these returns were ordered 
two years ago. They were ordered two years ago. Repeatedly in 
this House you’ve been asked for the tabling of that information. 
Now in your estimates you finally table them. Can I ask, why has 
it taken this long to go down whatever records you keep, or your 
officials keep — I don’t expect you to keep them — and prepare 
the return so that it could be made available before this? 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2351 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the hon. 
member has asked this no end of times in question period; he’s got 
the same answer. We table 90-some per cent of all the things that 
you asked for — the record is very good — and during my 
estimates, or prior to my estimates, we table information on my 
flights so that you can have them and that you can look at them. If 
you want to make an issue of comparing your record and others’ 
records and my record about delivering information, we have been 
up front with information. And as I’m sure the House Leader has 
pointed out, we have provided 90-some per cent of the 
information as quickly as possible, and the information that 
you’ve been asking on my travel, you can certainly have it. So if 
you want to get into my record versus your record, fair enough. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, let me . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . .  They haven’t; they’re still on the order paper. 
Okay. I’ll accept that. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m not accepting your response that you tabled them 
at the end of your estimates, but assuming that I did, why would 
you not have tabled them at your estimates last year if that’s the 
argument you’re gong to use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t put together all 
the accounting data, and if it wasn’t available, it wasn’t available. 
It’s now available and you have it. It will be the same as it would 
have been then, and you could review it and do whatever you like 
with it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Premier, you may not put 
together all the data, but somewhere the buck stops and it stops 
with you. You’re responsible for the return of your department. 
The House Leader obviously will do the tabling. I accept that. You 
chose to do it here today. But the point is you have hidden your 
travel expenses for those periods of time which those returns 
asked for, for two years. 
 
Now I don’t know there was any reason to hide it because I 
haven’t had an opportunity to study them. We shall do that. But 
the point is that it’s not an appropriate way for any minister of the 
Crown to behave. They could have been tabled a year ago, and 
you could have saved yourself an awful lot of embarrassment in 
the public, who began to question the approach of your 
government on such kinds of matters, where you say certain things 
and you don’t do other things. And when it comes to saying 
certain things and not doing other things, I want to ask you some 
questions about the commitments which you solemnly made, or 
your government made in the throne speech. I want to ask you 
what has happened to those commitments. One of the things that 
was mentioned in the throne speech is that there would be 
measures to protect municipalities from dramatically escalating 
liability insurance costs. And it was very specific, and I quote: 
 

Finally in this session, my government will announce 
measures to protect municipalities, hospitals, and school 
boards from dramatically escalating liability insurance costs. 

 

Your throne speech didn’t say you would initiate a study. Your 
throne speech said you would announce measures. We are now on 
a day of the session which is probably making it the longest spring 
session ever. There is still no measures announced. Can you 
justify, Mr. Premier, your promise and commitment just a few 
short months ago to take action, in light of the fact that there is no 
action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the liability insurance 
issues are under very active discussion between the minister, and 
the municipalities, and people involved in the private sector, to 
design any kind and all kinds of mechanisms that we can 
announce with respect to dealing with liability insurance. 
 
So the hon. member some time ago was asking, he says, well gee, 
you should have called an election in April or May. We wouldn’t 
have had our pension legislation passed; we wouldn’t have had 
store hours fixed; we wouldn’t have this. That didn’t seem to 
bother him at all. And now when we’re into the House and we’re 
passing all this legislation, he says, oh well, my gosh, you haven’t 
finished this. Well you can’t have it both ways. You’re about as 
interested in liability insurance as you are in the man in the moon. 
I mean, you obviously were asking for things to happen that you 
didn’t care whether they passed the legislation or not. 
 
We are working on liability insurance, and we’ll be announcing 
measures when we’ve got them prepared to announce, in 
discussions with the municipalities, the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), and the private sector. And 
they’re ongoing, good discussions taking place right now with 
respect to the ministers and all those organizations to see what can 
be possible not only within Saskatchewan but in international, 
interprovincial, and the whole combination. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, I’m not prepared to take 
responsibility for your fear to call an election. I think what you 
have done, is you’ve highlighted your indecision. You’ve 
highlighted your record and history of indecision, and this is proof 
of that once again. 
 
If, Mr. Premier, you knew as the Premier of your government that 
all that was going to happen with liability insurance was that there 
was going to be another study, why did you allow in your throne 
speech a statement such as was made which said that you would 
be announcing measures to protect municipalities? You did not 
talk about a study in your throne speech. Why, knowing that you 
were only going to do a study, did you try to fool the public of 
Saskatchewan once again by announcing something else? 
 
Clearly what you were doing, Mr. Premier, is you were making 
announcements, which because the session has now gone at some 
length, and because you ran away from an election which you 
were planning to call, you now are in a position where you have to 
actually live up to some of the things that you announced. 
 
Now in many ways you’re living up to it, as the Minister of  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2352 
 
 

Urban Affairs will testify with the fiasco that he created in the 
management assessment agency. You seem to be determined to go 
around and make as many enemies as you can. And you certainly 
succeeded with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 
and you certainly are succeeding with the cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon who are concerned about the politicizing of the 
assessment process because of the way your minister is going to 
appoint the directors. That’s only an example of where, because of 
your indecision, you’re having to do things without clearly 
thinking them out. 
 
Now I come back . . . (inaudible interjection)  . .  Well the Deputy 
Premier keeps speaking from his seat and says nothing of interest, 
so I will try to ignore him. 
 
Why, Mr. Premier, I ask you, knowing that you were just going to 
do a study, did you say in the throne speech that you were going to 
announce an actual program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as I said, we have been in 
very close discussion s at SGI, the Department of Justice, the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, with the 
private sector, with SARM, with SUMA, and others, and in our 
best judgement we believe that we can come up with some 
solutions, and believed months ago that we’d come up with some 
solutions, that would be applicable to the province of 
Saskatchewan. I would be the first to admit that the liability 
insurance difficulties are complex. And you can carve out a 
solution that maybe SGI could have, and at the same time it 
doesn’t handle or deal with the interprovincial and international 
problem. And the more that you get into it, the more complicated 
it is. 
 
So we were prepared to make some announcements on further 
research and discussion; we find out there may be some better 
things that we could do, and we are into those discussions with 
SGI, Justice, Commercial and Consumer Affairs, the federal 
government, neighbouring governments, and people involved in 
municipal governments as well. So we want to make sure that we 
do it right as we have with the pension legislation. It is going to be 
well received, and we’ve done it right. 
 
With respect to venture capital for labour, we have researched it; it 
will be well received, and we have done it right. With respect to 
the store hours, we have talked to people and examined it from 
every option we can. The same with respect to agriculture 
programs. It takes time. 
 
I remind the member opposite, clearly when they look at all the 
suggestions they had and all the alternatives they had, they 
obviously missed something because they didn’t even recognize 
22 per cent interest rates when they were a problem. In 1971 they 
did promise a pension plan and never did deliver. They promised a 
new tech school in Prince Albert — never did deliver. They 
promised all kinds of things and never did deliver. 
 
Well, I mean, if he wants to get into promises and delivery, we 
promised and we delivered interest rate protection and gas tax 
improvements, build an ag college, rural gas distribution, build 
up-graders, a new pulp- and paper-mill, etc., etc., and I could go 
on at length. So if he wants to examine all the reasons that he  

lost the election in ’82 and all the reasons they lost every seat but 
eight, I’d be glad to get into their record. 
 
But in terms of the things we promised to do, we have delivered 
and where we haven’t . . . I’ll admit, liability insurance is pretty 
difficult and it’s a complex problem. Our research with SGI, with 
legal people, with governments on either side of us and indeed 
with the American governments, it’s a complex problem. It’s 
going to take a great deal of work, and you don’t just snap on a 
solution. 
 
We examined it and thought there were things that SGI might be 
able to do immediately. As we look at, it’s very complex, and we 
want to make sure that we don’t jeopardize the kinds of things that 
could be a longer-run solution. So we’re still examining the 
possibilities of things that we could announce. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I agree it takes time, but you 
have taken four and one-half years and done nothing. The liability 
insurance . . . and I know you’re gong to stand up maybe and say, 
well it’s just a new problem. It’s not a new problem. The liability 
insurance problem has been building for at least four years — at 
least four years — and for four years you sat on your hands and 
you dithered, your government and you, and you’re doing the 
same thing. Now you’re sitting on your hands and you’re dithering 
— the whole question of indecision once again. 
 
Four and a half years, here’s what the result of your inaction is. I’ll 
give you one example. Take the example of the Saskatoon Public 
School Board where their liability insurance costs have gone up 
from $270,000 to $340,000, and you’re saying, we want to study 
it. What kind of an answer is that? 
 
There’s another case of the Regina separate school system. 
Liability insurance costs for them were proposed to go . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . .  Well the member from Sutherland said 
there were bad teachers in the system. Well I think that’s an 
unfortunate comment. Now the government is going to blame the 
teachers for liability insurance. Well, I’m sorry, I’m not prepared 
to take that blame, and neither are my colleagues. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, the Saskatoon Catholic school system were 
looking at an increase in their liability insurance from $76,000 to 
$95,000, and you say you have to study it. Some of the liability 
insurance costs have been going up for school systems from 
between 100 and 600 per cent. What kind of . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . .  Yes, yes indeed, what kind of study do you need 
to establish that? 
 
It’s also affecting the private sector. You talk about the private 
sector. You talk about it and don’t do anything for it, but here’s an 
example of how people are being hurt because you people are not 
prepared to do anything. You simply want to delay and put things 
aside, and then talk about it prior to an election and hope that you 
get lucky, and then you don’t have to deal with it any more. 
 
There’s a question of Moose Mountain bus lines. I’ll give you one 
more example. Their liability insurance costs have gone up from 
$26,000 to $155,000 a year, in one  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2353 
 
 

year, and they claim in their submission to your government to 
discontinue a line that they’re running between Regina and 
Bengough, doing away with a service that people, I’m sure, in 
Bengough and along that line would like to have and find it 
necessary. They say that they can’t afford to operate that line 
because their liability insurance has increased more than their 
profit last year. You’ve had four and a half years to deal with it, 
and instead, after you say in your throne speech that you’re going 
to do something about it, you announce a further study. And it’s 
not as if you discovered it yesterday. Your ministers knew about 
the problem a long time ago. I don’t object to consulting with 
municipalities. In fact, that’s the appropriate way to do. 
 
The question is: why was the consulting not started two years ago? 
Because you weren’t prepared to act with substantive issues that 
actually caused municipalities and school boards, and recreation 
boards and others, this kind of cost. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, that’s not the only example of your dithering 
and indecision. Your throne speech also provided another 
commitment which you didn’t keep. It’s like your promises of 
1982. The promise to cut income tax by 10 per cent, you didn’t 
keep. The promise to do away with the sales tax, you didn’t keep. 
You’ve had brochures all over the province with your picture on 
them, saying, we’re going to do away with the sales tax. It’s still 
there. In fact, the only thing you did with the income tax is you 
increased it. You increased it by putting on the flat tax, which in 
1986 is going to be double what it was in 1985. So this year the 
flat tax is increased even over last year when you instituted it. 
 
In the throne speech you say again that your government will 
introduce a freedom of information and privacy Act in this 
session. You were going to introduce an Act. We are now . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2354 
 
 

Corrigendum 
 
In the Hansard No. 68B TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986, 7:00 p.m. 
on page 2279 in the left hand column about 10 cm. from the top, 
the recognized speaker should read Mr. Shillington, instead of 
Hon. Mr. Lane, viz. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you think this is going 
to be taxable income . . . 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


