


















































June 3, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 3, 1986 
 
 

1653 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the often-referred-to 
member of Regina North South, it gives me pleasure to introduce 
to you, and through you to this Assembly, some 22 young people 
from the constituency of Regina South that are sitting in the 
Speaker's gallery. They're grade 5 students from W.C. How 
School and are accompanied here today by their teacher, Jill 
Ready, as well as a number of parents. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, having lived around the corner from their 
school for about 15 years, and although my children didn't attend 
that school, I am fortunate enough to know a great number of their 
parents and families whose children still did or do attend W.C. 
How. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit to the legislature this afternoon 
interesting and informative. I look forward to meeting with them a 
little bit later and determining how they enjoyed question period, 
as well as explaining to them how hard I work now that I've got 
two areas of the city that I'm baby-sitting. 
 
I ask all members to join me in a warm welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like today to 
introduce some students from Vanguard, Saskatchewan. There are 
19 of them, grade 8 and 9. They're sitting in your gallery there, 
Mr. Speaker, and they are accompanied by their teachers, Jerry 
Elliott and Jim Lyding. 
 
I have a special regard for that school for a number of reasons. 
They initiated in Saskatchewan, on their own initiative, and the 
teachers from that school initiated, a no-smoking program in their 
school. They were the first school in Saskatchewan to be 
recognized for that, and I think they should be given a bouquet for 
that. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — I know that the members have appreciated that, 
and we in Saskatchewan have appreciated that, because of the 
good things that you do down there. I also want to say that the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview is a graduate of that school, and 
he's going to make a few remarks. So on behalf of the Assembly 
here, we want to welcome you. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my welcome to the people 
from Vanguard. I recognize some familiar faces. I see Erickson 
Schissler and Gader. And Jim Lyding, the teacher with them 
today, taught me in grade 7. I graduated there in 1969. And 
coincidentally, I was going to school with Larry Hopfner at the 
time, who is my  

seat-mate's cousin. And Larry helped lay the bricks for the school 
that you kids go to now in Vanguard. He got a summer job there 
when the school was under construction and helped lay the bricks. 
I think the year was '66-67 that that was built. But I'll be meeting 
with you with Harold Martens, your MLA, after question period 
for pictures and drinks, and I'll see you guys then. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Myers: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
a grade 8 class from Vincent Massey School in Saskatoon. I'm 
doing this on behalf of my good friend and colleague, the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview, who is unable to be here today. The 
students, 28 in number, are accompanied by their teachers, Harold 
Semchuk and Mike Thiessen. I would like the Chamber to join 
with me in welcoming these students to the Assembly, and hope 
their stay is entertaining and educational, and wish them a safe trip 
home. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Trade Negotiations 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. When Mr. Reisman and Ambassador Murphy next meet 
for free trade negotiations, and I think it's in Washington on June 
16th, will Saskatchewan have a representative at the bargaining 
table; and if so, who will it be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will be making a ministerial 
statement after question period with respect to the meeting that 
took place last night, and I will outline it in some detail. 
 
But the process that we've agreed to, as briefly as I can, is that the 
provinces will be involved in four ways in the participation with 
the negotiations. One, is that the professional committee — in our 
case it's chaired by Mr. Art Wakabayashi — will be meeting on an 
ongoing basis and getting as much information as they want and 
they desire. 
 
Secondly, we'll have a committee of ministers of trade that will be 
meeting as often as they think is necessary, getting all the 
information from Mr. Reisman and others. 
 
Third, the first ministers will be meeting at least every three 
months, and oftener if we have to, after the first three month 
period, between now and the end of August and 1st of September, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then if we need any more information, including having people 
sitting in the room or people at the table or whatever, the Prime 
Minister has given us his assurance he will look at any or all 
suggestions or combinations of ideas that we could to get more 
information to the provinces if, in fact, they feel that they don't 
have enough information. 
 
For my purpose, Mr. Speaker, I can say that I'm absolutely  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1654 
 
 

satisfied we will get all and every bit of information, and the 
consensus in the room last night was that there will be no 
negotiations without the consent of the provinces, and that will be 
clear. So, in fact, Mr. Speaker, it was an historic evening as a 
result of the provinces have never had so much power with respect 
to dealing with the federal government on any sort of international 
negotiations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I gather 
that the answer then is no, there will not be a Saskatchewan 
representative at the bargaining table. Would you indicate, again, 
whether or not there will be a Saskatchewan representative in the 
room to monitor negotiations on behalf of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that whole suggestion of 
whether we have one member in the room or more members in a 
room will be fully reviewed in the next three months as we go 
through the process of negotiations. If the provinces feel that they 
want to have more access to various kinds of information, Mr. 
Speaker, the Prime Minister said we can review that at that time. 
We have virtually received every bit of information that the 
federal government has. And anything that I want, or anything that 
the premiers want, can either come through the professional 
committees, the ministerial committees, or the first ministers' 
committees. And if I'm not satisfied, or any premier's not satisfied 
he's not getting the information, all he has to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
contact either the Prime Minister or Mr. Reisman, and he will get 
all the information that he wants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It is clear 
that we will not have a representative at the bargaining table. It is 
equally clear that at least for a period of time we will not have a 
representative in the room. The future of Saskatchewan industries 
and Saskatchewan jobs will be totally dependent upon Simon 
Reisman, the federal government bureaucrat. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you satisfied with that arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy with 
that arrangement because every premier in the country gave the 
consensus to a mandate to negotiate with this process. And every 
premier will tell you we've never had so much access to 
information with the federal government on any international 
jurisdiction, which is clearly in the federal government's area. 
 
So we have got access through the Premier's office, access through 
the minister's office, access through the committees that we've set 
up, and any information we want will be available, Mr. Speaker. 
So the Prime Minister said: you can have those three mechanisms; 
if you want more mechanisms we can look at it next week or next 
month, and we're certainly going to meet within the next three 
months, and review it entirely again. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a precedent-setting arrangement where the 
federal government shares absolutely all information with the 
provinces. And the provinces obviously, as you can see in the 
media, are saying: yes, we are in full endorsement of this; and yes, 
we will have a consensus in the kinds of things that we're going to 
do, or 

 in fact we won't be doing anything. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, new question. New 
question to the Premier with respect to the trade talks. 
 
Mr. Premier, you indicate that we will have all the information, 
but you will not have anybody at the table or anybody in the room 
or any way of knowing whether or not the information you have is 
all of the information. 
 
Mr. Premier, at Swan River, according to press reports, it is stated 
as follows: 
 

In a strongly worded communiqué the Premiers, four western 
Premiers, said Canada's chief negotiator, Simon Reisman, 
should demand a standstill to trade protectionist measures while 
negotiations are proceeding. 

 
Mr. Premier, has Mr. Reisman been given strict instructions to 
demand a moratorium or a standstill on further protectionist 
measures by the United States as a basis for further trade talks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the range of things that we 
could do tactically in dealing with the United States was fully 
discussed last night by the first ministers, and that included a 
standstill, a moratorium, countervail, and the various kinds of 
tariff and non-tariff strategies that we could use. It was agreed by 
all the first ministers that we wouldn't just put our entire strategy 
up on a billboard to tell the United States what we are going to do. 
 
But I can assure this Assembly that the recommendations and the 
tactics that we talked about in Swan River, and others, were fully 
viewed and explored, given to the Prime Minister with our 
blessing and saying: these are things that you can use, and I will 
leave it to the negotiators to see how they use them and when they 
use them because we will be assessing it on a weekly basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I'm not sure 
I understood your answer. Has Mr. Reisman been instructed to 
demand a moratorium or a standstill, or has he not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I'm not telling you. That's as clear as I can 
make it. We are not going to be putting on a billboard all the 
strategies that the negotiator is going to use in the United States. 
 
All the premiers gave consensus and a mandate to the Prime 
Minister to negotiate for Canada, and they said: here are the things 
that you can use. And they told him how to use it. Now I'm not 
going to say what it is in public, and the Prime Minister isn't, nor 
will, I suspect, any premier in Canada will. 
 
So yes, we gave them all the instructions. Yes, they have all the 
tools. They know the kinds of things that I can do and the kind of 
things the Prime Minister can do, and those negotiating strategies 
will be used at the table in the next few days and the next few 
weeks and the next few months, and we will be reviewing it and 
assessing it on a daily and a weekly and a monthly basis. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1655 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Last week 
at Swan River you were quite free to "demand a standstill to trade 
protectionist measures while negotiations are proceedings." 
 
This week in Ottawa you decided that that's confidential 
information. What happened between Swan River and Ottawa 
which caused you, first, to demand a moratorium, and secondly, to 
say you will not say whether you did so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously as the former 
member that used to sit here knows, that the discussions that go on 
among first ministers are confidential, and I'm sure that he could 
respect that. When we are negotiating with United States on 
something as important and as historic as trade relations, then 
obviously all of the strategies are not going to be made public. 
 
I can only say that we made our demands and we laid them out 
clearly. The Prime Minister outlined the kinds of things that he 
could do. He outlined the conversation between Mr. Clark and Mr. 
Shultz, between the Prime Minister and the President of the United 
States, and all the things that were on the table and the strategy 
that we could use. 
 
Now we agreed among all first ministers, all premiers, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would not elaborate on the strategy. But quite 
clearly we have full confidence that we are involved in it, and we 
will continue to be involved in it and use the kind of tactics 
necessary to make sure Canadians get the best arrangement 
possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you went down to Ottawa demanding full participation in 
these talks. You went down to Ottawa demanding that Canada see 
to it that the United States agree to a moratorium or a standstill as 
a basis for further trade talks. You come back empty-handed, you 
don't have anybody in the room, and you are at least mute on the 
question of whether or not anyone agreed with your proposal for a 
standstill. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you not agree that you don't have any mandate to 
carry on these talks on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
don't you agree that you ought to call an election and give the 
people an opportunity to pass judgement on your performance? 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know very clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP are against trade negotiations with the 
United States. They have made it very, very clear that they don't 
want to trade with the United States; they don't want negotiations 
with the United States. It wouldn't matter if the United States put 
on tariffs on every hog that went into the U.S., whether they put on 
tariffs on steel, whether they put on tariffs on potash or anything 
else. 
 
Well I can say, Mr. Speaker, we signed an historic agreement last 
night, and every premier in Canada, including the Premier of 
Manitoba, the Premier of  

Albert, the Premier of British Columbia, the Premier of Quebec, 
and the Premier of Ontario and all the premiers in the Maritimes, 
agreed that we should negotiate with the United States because it 
was a very important thing for us to do as a nation — to stand 
together to take on the United States to make sure we had a good 
deal. And every one of them said it was a good idea, not because 
they didn't have a strategy, but because they had a strategy to stand 
together, not be divisive like the NDP that's always divisive 
against negotiations with the United States. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If 
you, Mr. Premier, are so confident, so confident that the people of 
Saskatchewan support your position, will you call an election and 
give them a chance to have a voice? 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we did last night 
could not have happened if we had NDP premiers across Canada 
or in three or four of the provinces. They would not enter into the 
negotiations, and I'm the first to know that. 
 
I'll go back, Mr. Speaker, if I could just give you one example, one 
example, Mr. Speaker, that came up last night. In 1964 and 1965 
the Canadian government got into negotiations with the United 
States government on a free trade arrangement on automobiles. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Ontario legislature will show that the NDP 
were against it, the Liberals were against it, union leaders were 
against it, and they convinced half of Ontario and the media that it 
was not good. Well, Mr. Speaker, today there is full employment 
in southern Ontario, and most of that, Mr. Speaker, comes from 
the automobile arrangement where it's free trade. And the NDP are 
still against it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you right now, a freer trade 
arrangement for negotiated markets in the United States has full 
employment in Ontario today — full employment as a result of 
that free trade arrangement. They're at 5 per cent and the hon. 
member knows that, in his books, is full employment. Well as a 
result of that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the rest of the 
country have the same access to those kinds of jobs that Ontario 
has. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it's our turn in western Canada, and last 
night we got our best lick at it that we've had in years. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Advertising Budget 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Deputy Premier, in the absence of the minister of SaskTel. Mr. 
Minister, this morning in Crown Corporations Committee, the 
minister confirmed that his department, SaskTel, a monopoly 
utility, had spent something near $2 million — 1.8 to be exact — 
in advertising in 1985. Now, Mr. Minister, at a time when your 
government is running a $2 billion deficit in this province, and 
taxpayers are asked to pay the highest taxes in the history of this 
province, why, Mr. Minister, does a  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1656 
 
 

utility company like SaskTel need to spend $1.8 million in 
advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an indication of . . . 
well, they're really digging for questions. They're sitting there in 
Crown corporations . . . I understand that SaskTel is before Crown 
corporations at this very moment . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: No, it isn't. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Oh, you finished it, and you forgot to ask 
the question, is that it? 
 
An Hon. Member: We didn't get an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And if they couldn't get an answer from 
the minister responsible, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how they can 
get an answer from me. I don't know what goes on in SaskTel. I 
pay my monthly bill just like members opposite. And you know, if 
the Premier wants to make me minister responsible for SaskTel, 
and I would do an excellent job — just like I do with Sask Power 
— and I would have those answers for you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to Mr. Deputy Premier . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If I can redirect my question, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister responsible for SaskTel is here. Mr. Minister, I asked a 
question, and maybe I should re-ask it. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning in Crown corporations you had 
confirmed that SaskTel had spent something . . . it's a monopoly 
utility within the province that spent something like $2 million on 
advertising, 1.8 to be exact, Mr. Minister. Can you tell this 
province why the taxpayers of this province, at a time when your 
government is about $2 billion in debt and the taxes for ordinary 
taxpayers are the highest that they have ever been in the history of 
this province, Mr. Minister, why does a monopoly utility have to 
spend $1.8 million on advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the numbers keep getting exaggerated 
all the time. as I indicated this morning — unfortunately the 
member was talking, and we know that he can't do two things at 
once, and so he didn't listen — that one-third of the advertising 
budget went to Telecom Canada, which is the national, 
long-distance advertising program. That is done to encourage 
people . . . The hon. members opposite wonder why it's done. It's 
to encourage people to use the long-distance services. We use the 
long-distance services, Mr. Speaker, to increase the revenues for 
the corporation. It sounds to me like it's a legitimate expense. 
 
Secondly, I indicated that . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the members on both 
sides of the House to calm down so that we can hear the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I indicated as well 
that another nearly 15 per cent, I recall, is for public service 
announcements, for example, "Dial before you dig." The reason 
we have that particular program is that we don't want people 
digging up the buried telephone  

lines while they're doing contracting work or anything of that 
nature. It strikes me as a rather a legitimate activity. 
 
And thirdly, we use it to encourage telephone service. We happen 
to have some new telephones. I recall when the NDP were in, you 
couldn't get a telephone from anybody else in the province. As a 
matter of fact, if you tried to buy a phone from anybody else, the 
NDP had severe penalties and fines, Mr. Speaker. We are now 
encouraging people to look at some of the diverse products that 
SaskTel has. Some of the new telephones — I know the hon. 
member probably has a Garfield phone or a Mickey Mouse phone, 
and we made those changes so the hon. member would have 
access to telephones, Mr. Speaker. We made the changes, and 
we're promoting our new products and promoting them as a 
legitimate expense by the corporation. 
 
Mr. Lusney: A question to the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
Mr. Speaker, I can see the minister makes light of all the money 
that they are spending in advertising. Mr. Minister, may I remind 
you of your party's promise in 1982. And I'll quote from your 
book here. It says, Pocket Politics. And that was a promise that 
you made to the people of Saskatchewan. And it says: 
 

We will cease all advertising by Crown corporations, except 
advertising which promotes specific productions and programs 
offered by the corporations, where a monopoly does not exist. 

 
Where a monopoly does not exist, Mr. Minister. Can you explain 
to the people of Saskatchewan how $1.8 million worth of 
advertising by SaskTel gets around that promise of yours — where 
a monopoly does not exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all, I think we should put the 
advertising in perspective. The NDP, prior to 1982, were 
advertising the glory of government ownership and the family of 
Crown corporations. 
 
It strikes me as there is a big difference between advertising the 
availability of phones, which are now available to the people of 
this province . . . people now have choices on the telephones that 
they can use or buy or lease or whatever options they wish. And 
we are promoting that option, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's interesting to note that phone ownership on the extension 
phones is no longer a monopoly, thanks to the initiatives of this 
government. I'm sure that if the NDP were to get back that people 
would no longer have the choice of phones, no longer be able to 
buy their own phones, would have to go back to the total 
government ownership of phones. 
 
We have Telmarts now, and we're opening them up in various 
communities around the province so people can go in and select 
the type of phone they want. We are promoting Agritex. We are 
promoting the other services that we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, to be critical of the promotion of 
SaskTel is somewhat strange. I think it's typical of the differences 
in approach between the two parties. We believe that people 
should have the choice;  



 
June 3, 1986 

1657 
 

the NDP don't think that they should have that choice and wouldn't 
want to see them advertise that choice. 
 

Lack of Commitment to Reforestation 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. yesterday in 
this Assembly we revealed a confidential document from your 
department which confirms that your government secretly cut the 
budget of the four provincial forest nurseries by $360,000 this year 
— a reduction of 33 per cent. In the process, you are threatening 
the jobs of a number of northern Saskatchewan citizens and the 
entire provincial reforestation program. 
 
Can the minister tell us what he has done since April, when this 
confidential document was written, to get this budget cut restored 
and to protect the jobs of northern citizens which depend upon the 
provincial reforestation program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry I wasn't here 
to deal with this in person yesterday, and certainly glad I'm here 
today, and that the hon. member would get up and raise the 
question again. 
 
Let me set two or three things straight. We're not planning on 
closing any nurseries. We have a commitment to produce tree 
seedlings which we will fulfil. We don't plan to reduce production. 
We've got about 40 million trees in our four nurseries which we're 
growing for future years. We don't plan any unusual or premature 
staff reductions, and we are at present, in all four nurseries, sowing 
seeds for seedlings which will be planted in 1989. 
 
Now somewhere along the line there was reference to a 
confidential document. Some confidential document, when all the 
members of the media have got it. The guy who wrote the 
document cc'd several officials, has crossed all kinds of desks; it's 
hardly confidential. But in reference to that memo, a copy of 
which I received this morning, you note in the first paragraph — 
and this is one bureaucrat writing to another bureaucrat, which is 
bureaucrats wont, and is their right — and in this he says: ". . . the 
attached table indicates the blue book allocation for labour service 
at nurseries." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I defy you; I defy any member of the opposition to 
find any reference in this book whatsoever to nurseries, which 
would put at some degree of risk, belief in the rest of the material 
in here. I hasten to point out it was a "what if" exercise — a typical 
bureaucratic exercise, whereby a gentleman was asked: what if 
you receive a little less money this year than last year. What are 
the implications. He replied with the implications. 
 
However, notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, there's some allegations 
came out of this little band yesterday when I read Hansard, that 
we are in fact reducing the amount of reforestation. Typical NDP 
scare tactics. Let me set the record straight. The Grant Devine 
administration for four years, Mr. Speaker, we planted 45.6 
million trees. The NDP in their administration in the last four 
years planted 39.8 million trees. We increased the amount of trees 
planted in Saskatchewan by 5.8 million. In fact, in  

1977-78 they only planted 6.7 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last time I was in estimates here, I pointed out the 
vagaries of the previous administration, the fact that you can't trust 
them, and the fact that you can't . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I see the Conservative members 
are very happy today because they have a reprieve for another four 
months until they lose their jobs. But I want to say, Mr. Minister, 
are you denying what's in this document that the nurseries — and 
a new question, Mr. Speaker, and by way of information — that 
the nurseries at Prince Albert will run out of money in July; Big 
River in June; in the south branch, end of July; and Chitek Lake, 
end of July. Are you denying that these nurseries will not run out 
of money, and are you also denying that Simpson Timber will not 
get their allotment of 500,000 trees for this fall's planting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we will fulfil every 
commitment which was undertaken. I already said that in the 
estimates, and anybody can check the record. I confirmed what 
will be done. But as I was saying, in those same estimates it came 
out about some of the things the former administration had been 
doing. And the former minister of this department under their 
administration, Reggie Gross, whom I described as Reggie the 
tourist, Reggie the football . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 
Report of First Ministers' Meeting 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
to briefly report on the meeting that we had last night with the 
Prime Minister. 
 
The first ministers of Canada met for three hours in Ottawa, and it 
was a very historic meeting, with respect to trade negotiations with 
the United States. I believe, as a result of the meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have set this country on track with some very, 
very exciting opportunities with respect to one of the largest 
trading partners in the world — obviously our neighbour — and to 
the United States. 
 
I want to say two or three things, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
certainly Saskatchewan and western Canada won last night with 
respect to the historic meetings. For the last three years the 
western premiers' conferences have had communiqués talking 
about the fact that we needed to fight protectionism in the United 
States, and that we needed to negotiate with the United States to 
make sure that we had access to markets. We certainly wanted to 
be involved, Mr. Speaker, and we said so. With the four premiers 
in western Canada, we elaborated that position. 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, at the western premier's 
conference, just last week, we said the same thing all over again. 
We wholeheartedly, unanimously, every premier, endorsed trade 
negotiations with the United States, and that cut across all political 
parties and,  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1658 
 
 

obviously, all four western provinces. We wanted to be involved, 
and we wanted the negotiations from this side of the border to be a 
consensus to stand still and to be as strong as we can. 
 
As a result, last night, Mr. Speaker, we have the following: we 
have a complete consensus of all first ministers in Canada that the 
federal government has a mandate to negotiate trade in a bilateral 
trade arrangement with the United States. This is historic, Mr. 
Speaker. We've never done this before. But every premier there, 
and the Prime Minister, agreed that Canada should sit down and 
now discuss with the complete support of the provinces a 
negotiated bilateral arrangement with the United States. 
 
The objective of that mandate, Mr. Speaker, is as follows: first, to 
reduce protectionism that we see obviously rising very rapidly in 
the United States; secondly, to reduce tariff on non-tariff barriers 
that exist between our two countries; and third, Mr. Speaker, to 
protect jobs and to create new jobs for people in Saskatchewan 
and across Canada in the future. 
 
The second major part of the meeting last night, Mr. Speaker, was 
the fact that, in an historic move, the Prime Minister agreed that 
the first ministers of this country will meet every three months, on 
a regular basis, or sooner if need be — and the next meeting will 
be within the next three months — to stay abreast and to stay on 
top of the trade negotiations with the United States. The Prime 
Minister offered this as an historic opportunity for the provinces, 
Mr. Speaker, to participate fully with the negotiations that are 
going on with another country. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, obviously 
government-to-government negotiations around the world take 
place between the federal government here and a federal 
government in other places, and certainly the federal government 
in our country has the right to sign international treaties without 
the support of the provinces. The Prime Minister said every three 
months the first ministers will meet to review and to discuss and 
examine the strategy and examine the negotiations in detail. 
 
The third part that was discussed, Mr. Speaker, was how the 
provinces will be participating fully in the negotiations. And the 
Prime Minister outlined four ways that we can participate. 
 
The first is that we will have professional committees that have 
now met five times, and get full access to the information from 
Mr. Reisman, the federal negotiator, and will continue to get 
access. Mr. Art Wakabayashi is our professional negotiating 
chairman. 
 
Secondly, the ministers of trade will have access to all the 
information, and they can bring committees together that involve 
business, labour, or other people, and they will be given full access 
to the information. 
 
Third, as I mentioned, the first ministers of Canada will have all 
the information and can meet with the Prime Minister at our call, 
or his call, and, at a minimum, every three months. 
 

And fourth, Mr. Speaker, if after the next period of time within the 
next three months that the Prime Minister or the premiers or the 
first ministers want to have more information or more 
participation, including having people sit in the rooms or people 
having reporting mechanisms or whatever, all that will be 
reviewed and can be adopted if we all believe that it's important. 
 
The fourth thing that was discussed, Mr. Speaker, is the 
ratification process. And we will put the final package together 
when we meet in August or the first part of September. 
 
And the upshot of the entire discussion, Mr. Speaker, was simply 
this: that without a consensus you will not have trade negotiations 
that work. We agreed that we have federal jurisdiction in some 
areas, provincial jurisdiction in others, and in some cases they 
even overlap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're looking at this as a board of directors for 
Canada or, if you will, a large cabinet for Canada. We believe that 
no trade negotiations will take place that have an impact on the 
auto pact or on agriculture or on marketing boards or anything else 
unless there's a complete consensus among the first ministers. Mr. 
Speaker, we will be putting the ratification mechanism to bed. 
We'll put the final touches on it when we meet in August or 
September. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will just say that — and as it refers a 
bit to what we talked about with respect to question period — the 
entire strategy that we will use as a country in negotiating with 
another country, the United States, will be fully shared and 
designed and implemented by all the first ministers. 
 
And that involves such things as were mentioned here today: the 
standstill strategy — what part of it can work, where the people in 
the United States can deal with it, where they can't; moratorium on 
certain kinds of things; the countervail; the tariff, the non-tariff 
barriers; the strategy that the provinces can use; the individual 
strategy that the Prime Minister can use in the federal government; 
the joint strategies we can use. 
 
All of those are on the table under full discussion and scrutiny of 
not only the Prime Minister and the federal government but all the 
provinces across Canada. And obviously that includes all political 
parties and all premiers. And all of them agreed last night, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is a full partnership, and that we will be going into 
negotiations standing together, shoulder to shoulder, and 
negotiating what we believe to be an very historic arrangement 
with the United States, where we can have more liberalized trade, 
more access to markets, more access to jobs, and a symbol for not 
only generations to come, but indeed, Mr. Speaker, for the rest of 
the world. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will just add a word or 
two. No one agrees more fully than do I and my colleagues with 
the need to fight protectionism in the United States. The GATT 
negotiations of previous years have been fully supported by the 
New Democratic party federally and provincially. And everybody 
agrees on the  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1659 
 

need for negotiations to protect existing markets. Not everybody 
agrees to complete free trade. 
 
We, for our part, don't understand why we need to dismantle our 
brewing industry and our dairy industry and our poultry industry 
and our egg industry in order to protect markets we have now had. 
What we need is governments who are willing and able to 
negotiate to ensure Canadian access to the United States markets 
that we already have, and, vice versa, United States access to 
Canadian markets which we already have and already negotiated 
over the past several decades. Everybody agrees to protecting 
markets we now have. In the past, this has not been a major 
problem. Only recently have our governments in Canada failed to 
keep the doors open. And I hope that we can do better than we 
have done over the last two years in keeping the doors opened to 
U.S. goods in Canada and Canadian goods in the United States. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don't have confidence in Mr. Mulroney's 
government that the Premier obviously does, and I don't think that 
there's very much in the last two years which gives anyone a basis 
for confidence. I only hope, Mr. Speaker, that all of the talk which 
we have heard from Ottawa, and now from Regina, will led to a 
more effective strategy than the ones we have now seen; will lead 
to someone speaking for Saskatchewan and speaking for Canada, 
speaking in a clear way to keep our markets opened; and not 
simply talking and pleading and promising to hug, and not 
promising to stand up for Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise on a 
point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night in committee, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg used a term that, in my opinion, was very 
degrading to a valued sector of our ethnic culture and that I found 
personally disturbing. Having worked a long time, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Chinese community in this city, I believe his remarks cast 
a racial slur on my Chinese friends when he said, and I quote from 
Hansard: 
 

And would give your candidate down there at least a 
Chinaman's chance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that the member should retract his statement 
and offer an apology to all those that he offended with those 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — As you can appreciate, I was not in committee. I 
will take time to review the record and bring back a ruling 
tomorrow. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in the interests of time, 
there has been an understanding worked out between the 
government and the opposition that private members' day would 
be waived today and we'd go direct  

to government orders. So I ask leave of the Assembly to move 
down the order paper to government orders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The House Leader has asked for leave to move 
down the order paper to government orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. members, 
Mr. Speaker, have been given copies of the proposed amendments 
to The Direct Sellers Act. These amendments are significant and 
will enhance consumer protection in Saskatchewan, where direct 
sales transactions are involved. 
 
Hon. members will perhaps know that under The Direct Sellers 
Act a recession or cancellation right exists. This is a special right, 
Mr. Speaker, not found in many other pieces of legislation. The 
cancellation right exists because of the nature of direct sales, 
which are normally transacted in the home, where buyers may be 
more susceptible to high pressure sales tactics or other dubious 
selling practices. Senior citizens, widows, and rural people are 
often the targets of a few unscrupulous direct sellers who may be 
operating in the province. 
 
The time during which the recession or right may be exercised is 
often referred to as "the cooling-off period." Mr. Speaker, the first 
amendment would extend the cooling-off period from the existing 
four days to 10 days. Consumers would, under the proposed 
amendment, have 10 days to cancel any direct sales contract. 
 
This is especially important for senior citizens or people living in 
rural areas who may not have the same access, or easy access, to 
information or government offices as people living in larger urban 
centres. I feel that extending the cooling-off period from four to 10 
days, Mr. Speaker, will only cause problems to those sellers who 
engage in questionable practices, and will not at all affect the 
many, many good direct sales people that we have working in the 
province. 
 
(1445) 
 
A second important amendment would now regulate sales made 
by telephone, or what we refer to as telephone solicitations. Many 
hon. members will themselves have had the experience of being 
solicited by telephone. And, Mr. Speaker, I speak in the context of 
direct sales only, of course. 
 
But consumers generally have experienced, or experience, a 
growing number of problems connected with telephone soliciting. 
The practice has grown tremendously in the last few years. While 
there is nothing at all wrong with this very effective sales 
technique, there is a clear need for some type of regulation to curb 
abuse. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1660 
 
 

The proposed amendment would allow a regulation of people who 
engage in telephone selling. The same protections, such as 
cancellation rights, would exist as for other direct sales 
transactions. Contracts made by the telephone would be subject to 
cancellation by the consumer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another amendment involves a proposed change to 
five-year licensing of direct sellers from the current one-year 
issuing. The department has moved to five-year licences in a 
number of similar areas over the last few years. 
 
Significant savings in administration and improved efficiencies 
have resulted. Administrative costs represent about two-fifths of 
the total licence fee at present time, where the direct sellers' 
licensing is concerned. Accordingly, a vendor who cancels before 
the end of the third year of the proposed five-year licence would 
also receive a refund upon request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same level of consumer protection is assured, 
despite eliminating the unnecessary annual licensing. The 
protection afforded by the bond, which direct sellers must post at 
the time that the licence is issued, still prevails. 
 
Another amendment would make it an offence, Mr. Speaker, to 
carry on business of a direct seller without having secured the 
necessary penal bond, or after a bond has been cancelled. 
Members will appreciate that this deterrent is necessary to better 
protect the consumer. Unscrupulous direct sellers will think twice 
before attempting to avoid their bonding responsibilities because 
of the possibility of criminal proceedings and penalties. 
 
The Bill does not affect the civil rights of Saskatchewan citizens, 
and no additional administrative or other costs will result from 
these amendments. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there will be significant 
savings for Saskatchewan taxpayers and the industry itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would recommend that this Bill be approved by all 
members of the House and supported by all members of the 
House, and I now move second reading. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, we, in the 
New Democratic Party caucus, are always interested in any 
legislation that may be in the interests of the consumer. And in the 
period of the '70s, I think it is well known that much of the 
consumer protection legislation which we now have on the 
statutes of Saskatchewan, including some provisions in The Direct 
Sellers Act, were introduced by a new Democratic Party 
government. 
 
In principle, we do not disagree with what this Bill is proposing to 
do. We think that there are some good provisions in here, but I 
want to raise for the benefit of the minister — and then hopefully 
she will be able to respond better when we consider this later in 
her closing remarks and in committee — some questions that, I 
think, need to be answered. 
 

The proposal that the provision apply not only to door-to-door 
sellers but also to direct sales by telephone strikes me as a 
welcome proposal. I have had experience and have had people 
from my constituency, as well as from other parts of 
Saskatchewan, talk to me about the kinds of telephone calls that 
they receive from people proposing to sell items and goods and 
commodities and to promote items, goods, and commodities. And 
I might say that some of the practices that have been taking place, 
I think, are not far from being able to be defined as harassment. 
And I don't know that this Bill will handle that. In fact, I suspect it 
will not, because I really do not see how some of this will be 
enforced, but maybe the minister will be able to explain. 
 
I am a little concerned — and I refer now, Mr. Speaker, to the 
explanatory notes. On the first page it says that the Act will not 
apply to such a person if the contract is not part of an ongoing 
business and if the person is not ordinarily a direct seller. 
 
Now I'm concerned about that because it seems to me to weaken 
the enforcement possibilities of this Bill. That, Mr. Speaker, has 
the possibility of being a loophole, the magnitude of which — as 
the proverbial saying goes — a Mack truck could drive through. 
And we will be very interested in hearing from the minister, and 
particularly with the help of her officials in committee, how this 
will now be able to be enforced, and how those who are involved 
in direct sales and may — and there are those who are not very 
scrupulous operators — how will they not be able to avoid having 
this legislation enforced with this kind of provision in the Bill. I 
am worried that this is weakening the Bill, and therefore we will 
want to study it some more, and I certainly hope the minister will 
consult with her officials about it as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just another example of, I think, why we need to be 
looking at protecting citizens from some of these so-called direct 
sales people and direct sales people is, I think, best of all provided 
by the experience of particularly senior citizens who are, for 
example, taking advantage of the home repair grants, and then 
having people come around door to door, selling siding, window 
installations, you name it — even when they are not necessary; 
and this happens time and time again — saying that they are there 
under the authorization of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 
not always being there under the authorization at all of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and therefore taking, quite 
frankly, some people for a ride and causing a lot of grievance that 
need not be there. And I think, with an extension from a four to a 
10-day period, this may assist in this, what I think to be a very 
serious problem area. 
 
I refer now . . . In principle, Mr. Speaker, there is a suggestion in 
the Bill, or a proposal in the Bill, that the licensing should be 
extended to a five-year rather than the one-year. I simply ask the 
minister to consider whether that will be a fair provision. there are 
indeed university students who may take on a summer job as 
direct sellers. They don't need a five-year licence. Will this not — 
and I suggest it might — will this not put an onerous burden now 
on them, or high school students, who will now have to take out a 
five-year licence when they only need a licence for a summer, and 
a one-year licence could have  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1661 
 

been quite sufficient? 
 
I hope that the purpose of this is not to get some quick cash — 
because the amount for a five-year will be a lot more than it will 
be for a one-year — to help to ease some of the budgetary 
pressures that the Minister of Finance finds himself under in one 
year. I mean, you look after things one year, and you don't worry 
about the future. I hope that's not why this is here, and I hope that 
the minister will be able to explain why indeed it is necessary, and 
how the kind of people that I have just used as an example are 
going to be affected by this provision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also the bonding provision, although I don't object to 
it, I have a concern because I have seen examples, particularly in 
The Pyramid Franchises Act, and I know it's got nothing to do 
with this Bill, but it is similar to this Bill. But there are many, 
many examples where the department or the government has 
waived the bonding provisions for certain people who apply for a 
licence. The result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that then when people 
get caught, they have no recourse, because there is no bond on 
which you can claim against. 
 
I would want the minister to tell us, when we consider this Bill in 
committee, whether there is that kind of exemption provided under 
The Direct Sellers Act and how many direct sellers or direct 
selling operations have indeed been exempted from the bonding 
provisions of The Direct Sellers Act. 
 
I worry about the exemptions and the waivers because they 
certainly, I think, obviously open it up to political influence. And 
I'm not suggesting that's happening, but it certainly opens it up to 
that. And I don't think that in this kind of licensing operation that 
that should be open and available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say on this another day when 
we've had a chance to consider the explanation which the minister 
gave in the House today, and therefore I would beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax 
Credits 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left is Jack 
Vicq, association deputy minister of taxation, economic and policy 
division; and on my right is Kirk McGregor, assistant director, 
taxation economic policy branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, a 
couple of questions on the general scheme of the Bill and how it's 
going to work. First may I ask, to what securities does it apply, 
more particularly . . . I'll ask you two or  

three questions and I think this will outline the nature of the lack 
of clarity in my mind. 
 
Does it apply to any existing securities, securities which have been 
issued and outstanding, to which I assume the answer is to be no. 
Does it apply to a securities issued by new companies, companies 
which are formed after the date of the Act coming into force 
where the securities are listed on a Canadian stock exchange — a 
small "c" Canadian stock exchange, one of the five stock 
exchanges in Canada, and I'll use Canadian not to refer to that 
stock exchange in Montreal known as the Canadian Stock 
Exchange, but to a Canadian stock exchange — where such 
securities are listed, and I take that to the answer to be yes. 
 
(1500) 
 
And the third question is the one I'm really directing my attention 
to. Where there is an existing company, let us take Develcon, 
which is listed on a stock exchange, and if it issues some 
securities, let's call them preferred shares, after the date of them 
coming into force of this Act, and let us assume that Develcon is a 
Saskatchewan company for the purposes of the definition, which I 
believe to be, will the Act apply to the new issue of the securities 
of an existing company? And if my previous assumptions were 
wrong, you'll correct me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It will not apply to existing securities; it will 
apply to securities of new corporations. It will apply to certain new 
securities of existing corporations. 
 
If I can read the technical response to the latter aspect, the section 
5, which deals with the eligible securities, prohibits, unless 
prescribed by regulation, securities eligible for other provincial or 
federal incentives from being eligible securities. Additional 
securities that are acquired pursuant to a stock dividend, a stock 
option, or a dividend reinvestment plan are not eligible securities. 
 
Securities that fall into these classifications are prohibited because 
they do not represent new equity capital which is the thrust of the 
Bill, where there are, in some cases, other acquisition incentives 
that may have applied. The overall objective is new equity capital. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this 
question may be too technical and have no real . . . perhaps it 
doesn't matter, is what I'm saying, but do the securities which 
qualify have to be an issue, a new class of security, or can it be 
more of the same? Thus if we have common shares outstanding — 
let's say the authorized capital of a company authorizes 10 million 
common shares, and 5 million are issued in outstanding, and 
there's a further issue of 1 million shares, will that qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The intent is, it would have to be a new class. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
gather from what you've already told us that it has to be new in the 
sense of new capital, that share exchanges and the like, where a 
new class of shares is issued in exchange for the redemption or 
surrender of existing shares, will not qualify. There has to be . . . If 
there  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1662 
 
 

is a thread running through it, new money has to be coming into 
the company, never mind what sort of paper pushing may yield 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That's correct. It may be money or other 
property that's new coming in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
with respect to the method of operation of the Act, do I understand 
it to be that the company will proceed in the ordinary way to issue 
its securities — it will obviously be trying to structure them so that 
they qualify — that these will be offered through the channels 
which it might otherwise have offered them had this Act not been 
in force; that individual investors will go to their investment 
company and in effect say, I am an investor, I would like to 
purchase shares in — I'll call them qualified shares — and he 
purchases them in the ordinary way as he would purchase any 
other share that he might be dealing with — when I say share or 
other security, eligible security — then at the end of the year he 
goes to his investment house and they give him a statement of his 
net purchases, If I may say so, that he may have purchased and 
sold during the year, and on that basis he applies for a rebate. Is 
that about how it works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The normal course would be that they would 
probably . . . You would have the corporation issuing the new 
issue. There would be the preliminary prospectus and then 
ultimately the final prospectus. There would have to be a 
certificate of eligibility, which will be issued by the investment 
dealer — Okay — so that would ensure that that particular issue is 
an eligible security. Once the investor then buys, he would get at 
the end of the year from the Department of Finance the statement 
as to his investment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is the 
tax credit available only if you buy this security at the time of its 
primary distribution, if I may use the technical term, or can you 
buy it secondarily? Can you buy it on the market, on the stock 
exchange, and still get your tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it's for primary distribution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So if that is so, then clearly that makes it 
a good deal easier to handle, in the sense of administer. Then your 
investment dealer — and I'll use Richardson Greenshields as an 
example — your investment dealer would . . . he may be 
participating in the primary distribution. he doesn't need to be, but 
if it's underwritten by Pemberton, he could get part of the primary 
distribution. And you buy it at that time, and then that's all that 
needs to happen. But once that primary distribution is completed, 
then any trading in the shares is irrelevant from the point of view 
of qualifying for the tax credit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That's correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, how do 
you see this . . . I think you may have answered this before. I may 
not have fully understood your answer. How does this Act mesh in 
with The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act? Can you stack or are 
they alternates? It's  

reasonably unlikely, I guess, that anything that would qualify for 
the venture capital tax credit would be listed. I suppose that's 
reasonably unlikely — but I don't know what the Alberta Stock 
Exchange is listing these days — but can you stack that or are they 
alternates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Listing of a venture capital is technically 
possible, but stacking will not be approved. We can't think of a 
circumstance where it would be approved; that's not the intent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what 
other tax credit arrangements, if taken advantage of, disentitle one 
to apply for and receive the stock savings plan tax credit? What 
other kinds of tax credits disentitle you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The following securities: I've indicated the 
unlikelihood of venture capital tax credit; the share purchase or 
scientific research tax credit, provided for pursuant to the federal 
Income Tax Act. I might add that I note further, that clause 5(2)(b) 
provides that where an investor has incurred certain 
resource-related expenses under an agreement to acquire shares, 
these shares will be ineligible, unless prescribed by regulation. 
These resource-related expenses include Canadian exploration 
expenses, Canadian development expenses, and Canadian oil and 
gas property expenses. So we're not trying to add a stacking on to 
some of the federal initiatives, and they're excluded. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, on 
clause 12, and I obviously might have asked this on an earlier 
clause, and perhaps should have. Is this Bill patterned on any Bill 
which is operating now in any province of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It's patterned generally on Alberta's. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, does it 
have any marked differences from the Alberta legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Alberta, of course, has differences on the 
stock exchange. They're, I believe, using the Alberta Stock 
Exchange . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but we are using . . . 
because we don't have one here, we are using all of them. Alberta 
also recognizes three types of corporations and a different tax 
credit for each. Those are merging, expanding, and mature 
corporations. We just took the one level applying to all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, and 
again I apologize to the Chairman because perhaps these could 
have been asked under some other heading. This has to do with it 
being a Saskatchewan company and what the qualifications are. 
Do I understand that in summary, 25 per cent of the payroll has to 
be in Saskatchewan? Is that a fair summary? And would you refer 
me to the provision which defines the eligible  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1663 
 

companies as opposed to eligible securities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, section 
6(1)(e), the corporation incorporated in Canada. It must have a 
permanent establishment in Saskatchewan on the date of the 
certificate of eligibility, with a permanent establishment not less 
than 25 per cent of all wages and salaries paid in the year by the 
corporation. 
 
(1515) 
 
Subclause (4) in section 6 — I won't get into the details — is 
designed to exclude things like holding companies; and then the 
assets of less than 500 million. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Clause 21 has a House amendment 
substituting the word "the minister" for "Her Majesty." 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The amendment reads as follows, at section 
21 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 21 of the printed Bill by striking out "the 
minister" in the first line and substituting "Her Majesty." 

 
Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 
 
Mr. Chairman:— We also have an amendment to section 22, and 
it reads as follows: 
 
To amend subsection 22(5) of the printed Bill by striking out 
"subsection 4" in the first line and substituting "subsection 3." 
 
Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 23 and 24 agreed to. 
 
Clause 25 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Again, Mr. Minister, this might well be 
asked under another clause, but with respect to the dealers, is there 
any restriction on the investment dealers who can issue the 
certificate? Is it required that they be registered, let us say, with the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission as an investment dealer or a 
broker dealer, or do they have to be members of the Investment 
Dealers Association of Canada, or any other qualification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — A qualified dealer is defined in the Act in 
section 2. It is defined as a person who has a permanent 
establishment in Saskatchewan and who is a member of the 
Investment Dealers Association of Canada, or a member of one of 
the four Canadian stock exchanges. This definition excludes 
brokers who are able to sell public offerings in Saskatchewan who 
are not members of IDA or a Canadian stock exchange. The 
reason for that is  

that the IDA has a national contingency fund which is some 
protection to investors. They also have a higher capitalization than 
would others, so it's a protection for the investors, as opposed to 
any other reason. 
 
Clause 25 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 26 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we're 
dealing with Bill 42, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. And 
this Bill, Mr. Minister, contains a fairly substantial number of what 
appear to me to be technical amendments, but it is also 
characterized by what it does not contain. 
 
It does not contain— at least I would say does not contain — 
anything which would move us towards the tax reform which was 
spoken of so highly by the member for Kindersley a year ago, a 
little more than a year ago. And we are simply finding nothing 
here which could be called tax reform, if by tax reform we mean 
tax simplification or tax fairness. 
 
The Bill itself is replete with the most complicated provisions that 
one could find anywhere, and this from a government which has 
spoken, and spoken often, of tax reform. I mentioned some of 
these matters earlier in another debate, but I want to remind 
members again just how complicated the provisions of this 
legislation are, and what little has been done in order to achieve 
the provisions of tax reform which have been spoken of so 
frequently by members opposite, and particularly by the member 
for Kindersley. 
 
I look at, for example, the new section 10(3), and it is just about 
incomprehensible even if you had two tax lawyers. I'll just read it. 
I just use this as an example, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Where this section is applicable to the computation of an 
individual's tax payable under this Part for a taxation year, the 
amount, if any, by which the aggregate of all amounts deducted 
under subsection 8.3(1) in computing the individual's tax 
payable for the preceding years exceeds the aggregate of the 
provincial taxes as determined under clause (1)(b) is to be 
added in computing tax credits allowed pursuant to subsection 
8.3(1). 

 
One is perhaps not expected to be able to understand changes in 
subsections, but that is a very good example of why the ordinary 
citizen finds The Income Tax Act absolutely and totally 
incomprehensible, and why a very large and increasing number of 
citizens with pretty ordinary incomes are having to go to tax 
consultants and tax advisers in order to get their income tax forms 
completed. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1664 
 
 

I know that the proposal for a simple, clear, and fair income tax 
system is perhaps visionary, but we don't need to make it more 
and more complicated with every single piece of income tax and 
corporate tax legislation which we introduce. We don't need to do 
that, but we certainly do it. And we find ourselves making our tax 
system more and more complicated, more and more arcane, so 
that it becomes impossible for an ordinary citizen and, in many 
cases, an ordinary lawyer to understand what the Act is saying. It 
certainly is a matter for great regret that this Bill before us 
continues the practice of making our tax system more 
complicated. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I mentioned what was not in the Bill, and what is 
not in the Bill is any action with respect to the flat tax. And while I 
will not repeat all the arguments I have given on several occasions 
here about the unfairness of the flat tax, I will raise it once again, 
and raise the fact that any tax calculated on the basis of net 
income, being line 224 on the T1 General, is bound to be a very 
unfair tax in its application, since it allows virtually all of the 
ordinary business deductions — with the exception, perhaps 
notable exception, of the dividend tax credit — and allows 
virtually none of the deductions which ordinary people look to to 
reduce their income tax, and I will refer to a few of those again. 
 
There's the married exemption which is not available; the 
exemption for dependent children which is not available; the 
exemption for medical expenses; exemption for charitable 
donations; the deduction for blind persons or persons confined to a 
bed or wheelchair; well, a number of others — some of them are 
financial in nature. 
 
But the ones that I have mentioned, and one or two others, are the 
ones which are for the most part used by people of ordinary 
income to reduce their tax. They are not able to use what 
everybody has for many decades agreed as reasonable exemptions 
in order to make the tax system fairer. They are not able to use 
those in the calculation of their flat tax. And I find that a matter for 
regret, and I am sorry that this Bill does not contain provisions 
which will make the flat tax a fairer tax or, as I and my colleagues 
would advocate, eliminate it altogether. 
 
I want to refer again to what I referred to in a general way in 
second reading, and that has to do with the repeal of section 8.2 of 
the Act. And I again feel that this is unfair for the minister to have 
done what I understand this section does. I mentioned the reasons 
for it in second reading, and I won't belabour those until we have 
an opportunity to consider that particular section in committee. 
 
I want to say that I will be asking some questions about section 9 
and the livestock facilities tax credit and just exactly how they 
mesh in with the existing income tax provisions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I guess that's all the comments I will make at this 
stage under this first section, and we'll deal with one or two of the 
others as we go through the Bill. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to make a couple of comments,  

too, about the complexity of the forms. They really are getting 
awesome, particularly in this province where we have a number of 
innovative — I'm being very flattering to call them that — a 
number of innovative features to The Income Tax Act. I hear 
people of ordinary means who complain of a tax form being 20, 
30 pages long. I personally know that my own was 46 pages long. 
Now that includes some income from my law office as well, but 
it's still getting to be a very complex form. And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if any serious thought has been given to attempting to 
simplify these forms. 
 
It used to be, even a decade ago, people who were self-employed 
could, by and large, complete their own income tax. Sorry — 
people who were employed could complete their own income tax. 
It's getting so that fewer and fewer can do it. If you have anything 
beyond a simple T-4 slip, it's getting very, very difficult to do. And 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if any thought has been given to try and 
return the system to something that's more manageable and a little 
less complex. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may, Mr. Chairman, I would respond to 
the Leader of the Opposition's comments about complexity as 
well, and I share the concerns. I think, on the question of 
complexity, we realistically have to go back to the Benson 
reforms. And prior to 1971, I say, and I'm sure that the last two 
opposition members that have spoken will agree with me, that 
prior to that time the Act was drawn and written by lawyers. 
Subsequent to that time, it became drawn and written by 
accountants, and of course as a result, quite frankly, a different 
technical language came into play. That has continued and 
obviously exists today. 
 
I can recall when the major amendments came in, I believe for 
1971, after the Benson review, that there were many people that 
made the decision then that they would no longer bother filling out 
their forms and turn it over to qualified accountants. So it's not 
new, but the problem is getting increasingly greater. 
 
There is some, I gather, initiatives at the federal finance level to try 
and redraft the federal Income Tax Act. I don't know where that's 
going to go, but there are some internal initiatives along those 
lines. 
 
Secondly, I suppose the alternative as it applies to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers would be, is that Saskatchewan to collect its own 
income tax. The difficulty with that is the cost of our estimates is 
in the range of somewhere between 20 and $30 million a year. It 
does have some advantages, although we have two systems. In 
fact, we could deal with the question of simplicity. 
 
Secondly, it would allow us to more finely tune the tax system and 
the fiscal policies to stimulate specific activities in the province. 
But overall I do suggest that the question of complexity comes 
about as a result of the fundamental change in the thrust of the 
Act, the drafting of the legislation as a result of the Benson 
reforms going back to 1971. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well part of the complexity of the Act comes 
about because one seeks to achieve so many different purposes 
under The Income Tax Act apart from  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1665 
 

raising revenue. One seeks to spur investment in oil wells in the oil 
field. One seeks to provide a decent level of housing for 
Canadians. One seeks to spur investment in our cultural life 
through films. And now one seeks to provide, I gather, investment 
in Saskatchewan companies through a piece of legislation here. 
All of those things add to the complexity of The Income Tax Act 
because you're attempting to do so many different things that raise 
revenue. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you're not going to be able to 
simplify The Income Tax Act until you return the Act to the 
purpose of raising revenue and pursue all of your other goals 
through some other means. The vast bulk of the area in The 
Income Tax Act is taken up filling in blanks which have very little 
to do with raising revenue for the state. We're filling in blanks with 
respect to various tax shelters. We are filling blanks with respect 
to Canada pension and all of those things. 
 
I'm not arguing with any of those things as such. But I say you're 
not going to be able to simplify the form until you return the tax 
system to its function of raising revenue. As long as you continue 
to bring in Bills, as you did the other day, providing for an 
investment tax credit for investment in Saskatchewan companies, 
you're going to continue to add length to the income tax form. And 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, you have done that with the Bill 
which was given second reading the other day. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, while you may pay lip-service to 
simplifying the form, the manner in which you and yours and 
other Conservative governments in this country proceeds, in fact 
makes the form more complex, not less complex. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, we agree with the issue of complexity, 
but we can attempt to stimulate the economic activity in one of 
two ways, either directly or indirectly. And we could debate that 
for a great deal of time. 
 
I can think of initiatives where they've done it directly — the 
former federal government's initiatives in the oil industry with 
grants for oil well drilling and development. And let me assure the 
hon. member, if you've seen any of those forms, that was not an 
exercise in simplicity. 
 
So we have two choices. The question of the particular Bill before 
us and the argument of complexity, I believe virtually all of those 
complex amendments are at the request of the federal government 
bringing it in line with the existing Act, the one exception being 
the provisions that we are bringing in with the two-year corporate 
tax holiday. There is a degree of complexity because we want to 
eliminate from that provision things like the holding companies, 
the service companies, so that there is a degree of complexity as a 
result of that initiative. 
 
The other ones are responses and requests by the Government of 
Canada to bring the Act in compliance with the federal Income 
Tax Act. 
 
I wonder if I may respond to the Leader of the Opposition. We've 
debated, over the last couple of minutes, the question of 
complexity. If I can respond on the capital  

gains rebate issue that you raise, and perhaps answer the concerns 
that you've raised — we were obviously aware, in bringing this 
back and making it retroactive, to the effect of the federal 500,000 
capital gains rebate, that some taxpayers are not eligible for the 
full $500,000 capital gains rebate in the first year. Only farmers 
and fishermen were eligible for the first year. 
 
When we went back and calculated the number who would be 
taking advantage — there are approximately 800 in a year — 
taxpayers who are applying for the provincial capital gains rebate. 
Three per cent, I believe — 97 per cent were farmers, so they are 
covered off. It would have meant maintaining the Bill for 
approximately 3 per cent. 
 
It comes out to about 20 small business in a year, with an average 
of approximately slightly under $3,000. What we would propose 
to do is use the remission to deal with that very few number. But 
rather than maintain the other system for that very few, this is the 
direction we chose, but those people will not be penalized as a 
result of that change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank 
you for that information. With respect to basically small-business 
people who may have sold their businesses in the expectation of 
having the right to apply for a rebate of taxes on capital gains and 
who will have observed this legislation and noting that it is made 
retroactive, my question, or my suggestion to you would be to be 
sure that this information, that the rebate in effect is still available 
through the remission procedures; that this information is made 
available to lawyers and chartered accountants. 
 
And I know it's early and the Bill isn't passed, but I have been 
approached by at least one chartered accountant who is 
inordinately well-informed, ordinarily, because it's a company 
which is the largest company and specializes in these areas, and he 
was able to tell me how these things would work. And he was not 
aware of your proposed policy with respect to remissions. And I 
would urge — what I suspect you will do in any case — but I 
would urge that care be taken to see that that gets out there among 
the professions who may be called upon to advise with respect to 
this matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly. As I say, the numbers, when we 
looked at those affected, of less than 3 per cent, and some 
probably less than $60,000 in a year, as I indicated, rather than 
maintain the existing process and structure, we felt that this was a 
more expeditious way of dealing with it. But I accept your 
suggestion, and we will certainly communicate with those who 
would advise the public so that they are aware of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to raise with you the 
question of the repeal of the flat tax. I was reading the other day, 
Cardinal Richelieu once said the art of taxation is to get the 
maximum amount of feather from the goose with the least amount 
of squawk; you seem to have maximized the squawk and 
minimized the feather that you're getting. 
 
Mr. Minister, your tax is both unpopular and it . . . And I 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1666 
 
 

wonder if it's raising as much revenue as you had anticipated it 
might, Mr. Minister. It's unfair, it's unpopular, and I wonder why 
you feel it necessary to perpetuate the mistakes of your 
predecessors. This, as we will remember, Mr. Minister, was part of 
the most intelligent budget ever, which was a good many things, 
but it wasn't the most intelligent budget this government, or any 
government, ever brought in. 
 
Mr. Minister, the tax is unpopular; it's unfair; it is likely, I think, to 
be adopted by no one. You add again a complexity to the 
Saskatchewan forms, because you persist with this tax which 
grates on Saskatchewan people, and it sticks out. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, why you just don't admit the obvious, repeal this 
unpopular and unfair tax and, at the same time, not coincidentally, 
simplify the form. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we will be in the public debate on the 
flat tax for some time. I view the flat tax and the concept of the flat 
tax as a way to do two things: begin to start the process of 
simplification; and secondly, to tax those who would normally 
avoid the payment of tax. 
 
And I think we're starting to see the thrust and the success of a 
movement to a simplified system in the United States. I don't for a 
moment suggest that we will see it immediately in Canada, but I 
do believe that there is some public sentiment in favour of a 
simplified tax form. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now I don't know how much the hon. member wants to debate the 
budget of a year ago. I mean, we can continue that for some time 
— that, you know, many people, over some 220,000, pay less tax. 
 
If I do the comparison of the 1981 income tax guide for 
Saskatchewan for 1985, I note that those with a taxable income of 
5,000 are paying $34.60 less tax, including the flat tax, than they 
did in 1981. That's about a 9 per cent decrease. I note that those 
paying . . . with a taxable income of 10,000 are paying $60.20 less, 
with the flat tax. That's 7 per cent reduction over 1981. Fifteen 
thousand taxable income were paying $127.50 less. That's 9 per 
cent less than they did in 1981. Those with a taxable income of 
$20,000 are paying $214.50 less. That's 11 per cent. Those paying 
. . . with a taxable income of 25,000 are paying $316 — a 12 per 
cent decrease. Now admittedly not 10 per cent across the board, 
but we're getting very, very close to that. 
 
We note the numbers, with the adjustments in the flat tax last year, 
of the increase in the tax reductions for low income from 160 to 
$260; the decrease in the personal income tax rate, from 51 per 
cent down to 50 per cent. Obviously we can debate taxes, the 
calculation, whatever, for some time. And we will get an 
opportunity at some time in the not-too-distant future to debate it 
even more vigorously. 
 
Having said that, the flat tax as a concept does have the advantage 
of simplicity, and it does have the advantage of fairness. And I 
would hope that the hon. members would look at it in that light 
and endorse the concept. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Fat chance of that! If you want to make 
yourselves unpopular with the Saskatchewan public over a tax that 
doesn't raise much revenue, that's your choice. Don't expect us to 
follow you over the cliff. One group of lemmings in this province 
is quite enough. Both major parties needn't adopt those ways. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you know of any other jurisdiction that is 
seriously considering repeating this blunder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, first of all, not many consider it a 
blunder. Certainly we are advised — not for any public discussion 
— we are advised that other jurisdictions are actively considering 
it, but they will obviously make their own decisions at the 
appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple 
of comments on the unfairness of the tax system and ask the 
minister a question or two about something that, I guess, one could 
define as being relatively new, as it will affect certain categories of 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was particularly interested in listening to the discussion about the 
complexity of the tax form, and I am led to believe, after taking a 
look at it over a number of years, and this has been happening for 
more then just four years, I will have to admit to that. But the tax 
regime in this country, and indeed in the province, has become so 
confused that it almost seems as if it's geared to benefit those who 
can hire lawyers and accountants to look after their tax dodges and 
tax loopholes; but ordinary people, wage earners, and people who 
have a home and go to work every day and come home every day 
from an eight-hour job, don't have those kinds of tax loopholes 
and don't have those kinds of privileges. 
 
And so what has really happened is those who are really well off 
are getting more well off, because over time, as this confused 
income tax form and the confused tax regime, as it's developed, 
has been such that those who can afford to pay some money to 
save some money benefit a great deal, whereas ordinary don't 
benefit at all. 
 
Other things . . . and the minister made some suggestions about 
how certain people have had their income taxes reduced over the 
period of years since 1981. I want to refer to those people in my 
particular comment here who carry the highest tax burden in the 
country, that's the middle-income earners. And a typical 
middle-income earner — and I will use that figure because it's 
both in the Finance Minister's budget of this year and in the 
Finance minister's budget of 1981. 
 
So let's take the case of the family of four, with a wage earner of 
$30,000 a year. In today's terms not a . . This is total income of 
$30,000. In today's terms, not considered a very excessive amount 
of income. If you have someone who is making $30,000 a year, 
probably paying on a mortgage, with taxes, between six and $700 
a month, what's left to pay utilities, what's left to pay for the needs 
of the family is not a great deal. 
 
Well in 1982, that $30,000 earner paid the fourth lowest tax in 
Canada, income tax . . I'm sorry, provincial income tax in Canada. 
The provinces of Quebec, New  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1667 
 

Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, 
all paid a higher provincial income tax on a $30,000 income than 
did the citizen of Saskatchewan. So the Saskatchewan 
wage-earner of $30,000 paid the fourth lowest. 
 
In the present budget it is proposed from the tables that are here on 
page 56, that that same wage-earner, with all his or her increased 
costs because of inflation and other things — increased utility 
costs — is now going to pay the third-highest provincial income 
tax in Canada — from the fourth lowest to the third highest in a 
space of four years. That's what's happened. 
 
And in many of the provinces where income taxes, provincially, 
were higher in 1982, are lower now for this particular income 
bracket — are higher now for this particular income bracket in 
Saskatchewan. And I say that that certainly is not my definition of 
making the tax system more fair. It's no wonder that people who 
sort of are in this range of income earners, the people who are still 
at the family-raising stage, are concerned about the fairness of our 
tax system. It is not fair. 
 
Governments of all levels are to blame that it's not fair. And I've 
heard the minister say about what's happening in the United States, 
and also that hopefully, before too long — although at the rate 
we're proceeding now I think it will be a long time — some of 
those steps might be considered in Canada. I hope they are. I hope 
they are because the people of Canada and the people of 
Saskatchewan, I think, are being unfairly treated, and it shouldn't 
continue for too long. 
 
In 1982 - 83 the total revenues projected from income taxes in 
Saskatchewan to the Saskatchewan treasury was 596 million. In 
1987 the total income tax revenue in Saskatchewan is said to be 
projected for 698 million. That's an increase of $100 million that 
people will pay in income tax in Saskatchewan in total. And those 
are just the figures from the budget documents of 1982 and the 
budget documents that we have before us in this session. 
 
If you compare that to oil revenues, in 1982 oil revenues were 
projected to provide to the provincial treasury $603 million. In 
1987 they 're projected to provide only $510 million, almost $100 
million increase — decrease, pardon me. 
 
From income taxes, an increase of revenues to the provincial 
treasury of $100 million; from the oil industry and the oil 
corporations, a decrease projected of revenues of $100 million, in 
spite of the fact that apparently there has been a lot of activity in 
the oilfields. And so one has to wonder, once again, what is the 
fairness in that? There are just too many loopholes, too many 
loopholes that benefit people who have a great deal, that benefit 
people who are powerful, but actually then turn around and take it 
out of those who do not have the power or do not have a great 
deal. 
 
If you refer to . . . a provincial government gets portions of 
revenues from certain corporations and so on. But just the question 
of tax deferrals at the federal government level — it amounts to 
$30 billion, a loan, in corporate tax deferrals, because they've got 
these loopholes and can  

defer their taxes, which the wage earner doesn't have and cannot 
do. 
 
Bell Canada owes the federal government $1.5 billion. Imperial 
Oil owes the people of Canada $1.4 billion in deferred taxes. 
Canadian Pacific, that great builder of this nation from sea to sea 
with its railway, has deferred $1.7 billion in taxes. Shell Canada, 
$817 million deferred in taxes; Inco, $241.4 million deferred in 
taxes; Noranda, $175.9 million deferred in taxes — it goes on and 
on. 
 
And I know that that's not specifically having anything to do with 
this Bill. But it's the whole principle of what's been happening to 
our taxation system in this country, where middle income people 
are paying more and more, and lower-income people as well, in 
total; but those who are wealthy and can set their own rates are 
paying less because of this kind of an operation. 
 
And so that leads to the whole issue of the flat tax. It is just 
another addition to this process, or to this unfairness, where certain 
people are able to have tax deductions, and so they don't have to 
pay this flat tax; but average, ordinary people, working people, do 
not have the luxury of those deductions and so they pay the full 
shot; they pay the full amount. And that's what makes that 
provision so unfair. And that's why, in my opinion, it ought to be 
removed because it only adds to the unfairness of the tax system 
which has become more and more unfair over the last many years. 
 
Now if you take that flat tax and apply it to this one group of 
people that I said I would ask the minister about, and that is senior 
citizens, I think it becomes extremely more unfair. 
 
We have provided, or the government has provided to senior 
citizens, something called a senior citizens' heritage grant. I am led 
to understand — and I hope the minister will correct me if I'm 
wrong— but I am led to understand that that senior citizens' 
heritage grant will be considered net income when senior citizens 
have to pay their income tax and calculate the flat tax. And the 
only reason I assume that is because I have not been able to get 
from other ministers an indication, or the letter that has been sent 
from the federal government, saying it will not be considered 
income. 
 
And so I want to ask the minister: can he clarify that for the 
committee here today? Will the senior citizens' heritage grant be 
considered income for the purposes of calculating income tax? 
And if not, then will you please provide us with the confirmation 
from the federal government which confirms that they will make 
provisions in the income tax to make sure that it does not happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I'll take the arguments in some order. I note, 
when you referred to the 1986 budget address for the fiscal year 
'86-87, you dealt with the provincial income tax, and you did not 
follow the column down. There are other sources of taxation in 
other provinces. There are retail sales taxes. They're as high as 11 
per cent in some provinces. They're 6 per cent in NDP Manitoba. 
There are gasoline taxes, which have various ranges, which are 
paid in provinces like Manitoba. I could go on. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1668 
 
 

This province has reduced retail sales taxes, eliminated the 
gasoline tax. We have amongst the lowest car insurance rates, 
lowest telephone, home heating, electrical charges amongst the 
lowest in Canada. 
 
(1600) 
 
So that a person with a total income of $30,000 is paying less to 
government in Saskatchewan than any other province in Canada 
except the province of Alberta; that a taxpayer with a total income 
of $20,000 is paying less to government in Saskatchewan than any 
other province in Canada. When a taxpayer has a total income of 
40,000 the taxpayer in Saskatchewan is paying less to government 
than any other province in Canada, except for the province of 
Alberta. 
 
So I know your argument isn't washing out there, because people 
realize that they are looking taxes from all sources and are 
responding and recognizing that the flat tax is the only way to tax 
those who are avoiding paying tax. And if we look at those — the 
effect of the flat tax — we look at those earning $100,000 a year 
paying nearly $1,000 more in tax; those earning 75,000 paying 
$625 more in tax; those earning 50,000, by way of example, $430 
more in tax as a result of that initiative. 
 
Given the effect of the flat tax and the fact that 220,000 taxpayers 
are paying less as a result of the flat tax, I really thought that the 
hon. member would be supporting the government's initiatives and 
would be supporting the flat tax. I get surprised, and I know many 
taxpayers do, when they find out that the members opposite, when 
they are critical of loopholes, are critical of the child tax credit, 
which is a tax saving — and if you called it a loophole, I didn't — 
for low-income earners; that the Saskatchewan tax reduction for 
low income, which last year went from $160 to $260, applicable 
to low-income people in Saskatchewan — lower-income people 
— you call it a loophole. I say it's fairness. 
 
An Hon. Member: I wasn't referring to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I mean, do you want the blanket 
statement? You said all of these things were bad; I don't suggest 
they are. So I make reference to a couple that come to mind. I get 
surprised when I hear that, you know, the rich should pay more, 
and large corporations should pay more. Let's keep in mind that it 
was this government that increased the corporate capital tax, so 
that our large corporations and the banks are paying nearly 
$20-some million in additional tax this year. 
 
I remind the hon. member, when you talk about CPR, which I 
think you wanted to buy at one time, that we're the ones that 
increased the fuel tax on interprovincial transportation, the 
railways and the airlines, to the highest in Canada. So that we are 
attempting to recover some of that tax and some of that revenue 
from the large corporations. 
 
When we increased the corporate income tax for large 
corporations to the highest in Canada, an attempt to tax the large 
corporations, I would have thought that you would have supported 
that initiative. I note that subsequent to our budget that the NDP in 
Manitoba did a  

"me too" approach and raised it to the same level. 
 
So as I say, we can debate. We do have common agreement on the 
difficulties of the complexity of the system and recognizing 
alternative ways of doing it. As I say, when we are tacking on to a 
national tax program and tax form, the reform has to come at that 
jurisdiction, the other alternative being Saskatchewan to collect its 
own income tax. 
 
Conceptually I personally don't have difficulty with Saskatchewan 
collecting its own income tax, but the cost is some 30 — I believe 
in the range between 20 and $30 million, and I have difficulty 
justifying that expenditure. But it would allow us to simplify; it 
would allow us to target much more finely the economic 
incentives that perhaps we agree or disagree on from time to time. 
 
So having said all of that and gone through the actual real position 
of the Saskatchewan taxpayers, I get frankly disappointed when 
there are initiatives with the corporate capital tax, there are 
initiatives to the higher corporate income tax, that there are 
initiatives on the flat tax which impact heavily on high income 
taxpayers, and other initiatives to reduce tax, that the hon. member 
wouldn't have been more supportive of those initiatives to be 
consistent in his argument. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Well, Mr. Minister, you forgot to 
answer the question, but I will re-ask it after I correct some errors, 
which you have just made. 
 
Indeed there are some people disappointed, and I suggest to you 
that it's the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are disappointed, and 
gravely so. Having been promised an income tax cut of 10 per 
cent, they have seen an income tax increase of a considerable 
amount. 
 
I find it rather interesting, your use of selective figures at different 
points in the debate. A few moments ago you just supplied some 
figures which showed how much the $20,000 income earner had a 
reduction in his taxes, or her taxes. You said there was several 
hundred dollars in which a $20,000 income earner pays less in 
income tax. Now when I outlined for you what I think are some 
serious problems in the tax system, you stand up and you use a 
different set of figures. You talk about total taxes. Well let me talk 
about total taxes. Let's take that $20,000 income earner — once 
again not an income of considerable amount — and let's see what's 
happened to that $20,000 income earner in the last four, now 
going on to five years. 
 
This individual supporting a family of four has had in just taxes 
alone — that's provincial income tax, tax credits and rebates, 
health premiums, retail sales tax, and gasoline tax . . . And I will 
concede some of those don't exist in Saskatchewan. Premiums 
don't exist in Saskatchewan for health care; the gasoline tax no 
longer exists. But how has this $20,000 income earner been 
affected since 1982? 
 
Well he or she has had the property improvement grant 
eliminated; they've lost $230. So that's a tax increase of $230. No 
one can argue that. They probably had their property tax increased 
by about $200 since that time. And  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1669 
 

it's probably more than that, but I'll use — and I apologize for 
using the word, but I'll use some "conservative" figures when I say 
a $200 increase since 1982 on his property. 
 
A person earning $20,000 a year supporting a family of four, 
including that person, is going to pay in 1986 at least $761 more in 
taxes and other charges . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I didn't talk 
about all this whole other list — the minister did, and I'm 
responding to what he said — of $761 more. 
 
Mr. Minister, now if you want to talk about only taxes that they 
pay to the provincial government — forget about the other charges 
— that individual is going to pay in 1986 in provincial taxes, 
$909. In 1982, that individual paid $865. It's not a terrifically great 
increase, but it contradicts what you said a little while ago in 
which you said that a $20,000 income earner was going to pay less 
taxes in Saskatchewan than he did four or five years ago. So I 
simply want to point that out so that it's clear for the record and 
that there is no confusion. 
 
Now if you take the increase in total taxes and charges — and in 
charges I will include car insurance, telephone, home heating and 
electricity, because they pay that to the government, to monopoly 
services corporations. I don't object to that. I happen to favour that 
approach for utilities. If you add that increase of $761 that a 
$20,000 income earner is going to pay, if you add to that the $500 
a year in additional taxes that person is going to pay to the federal 
government under this unfair tax system, that individual's taxation 
and charges are going to increase by $1,261. That's what they're 
going to pay this year more than they did in 1982. 
 
Surely anyone earning $20,000 a year shouldn't have to pay this 
kind of increase in taxation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, the member from Weyburn keeps nattering away 
consistently from his seat and wonders how we're going to pay for 
the deficit. Well he's obviously not understanding what's 
happening here. Here we have a government that's taxing people 
more and more and more, but in spite of that has increased their 
deficit from a surplus situation in 1982 to a deficit of over $2 
billion. Now that can only add up to one conclusion — gross 
mismanagement. 
 
How can you increase your revenues by huge amounts by taxing 
people more and still end up having a deficit of over $2 billion? I 
suggest to the member for Weyburn it doesn't take very fancy 
mathematics to figure that out. It only takes the ability to 
understand and to read. And I would suggest that he do that; pick 
up the budgets from 1982 or back further, and pick up this present 
budget and do your sums, and you will see what's been happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I didn't mean to make a long speech on this because 
I wanted to ask you . . . but the member from Weyburn seemed to 
want to learn what the problem is. I simply wanted to ask you: are 
senior citizens' heritage grants going to be taxable, income taxable, 
and therefore will the flat tax apply as well? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We look forward to the debate on the 
so-called surplus that you alluded to of some 139 million. We've 
done some calculations that even if that were there, based on your 
budget of 1982, and you were expending somewhere on the 
average in 1982 about $8.5 million a day, the surplus would last 
you some, what? — about 17 days. So we thank you for that great 
kitty that was left . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And as a matter 
of fact, to the hon. member, I think it's one debate the public will 
enjoy. 
 
Again we can go back over the debate as to the amounts. I've 
given the tax guides, which compared 1981 and 1985, and it's 
getting pretty close to that 10 per cent reduction. We've talked 
about the total tax paid. And when I talked about that, I didn't talk 
about the reduction in the gasoline tax in SGI, the reduction of the 
sales tax on power utilities, and some of those other initiatives that 
were taken. But again we could come on and debate that for some 
time. 
 
I do leave with the hon. member an answer to an earlier question, 
which is dealing with the seniors' heritage program. That is not 
taxable income. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I've heard that 
said and I really don't want to question that. But can you table for 
us or can you undertake to send me the confirmation that you have 
received from the — I guess, it would be the revenue department 
of the federal government, or from the federal government itself at 
the political level — the letter of the memo or whatever it is that 
they have provided you assuring that that will not be taxable, 
because you will agree that whether it's taxable or not will depend 
on the income tax form. Have you that assurance, and can you 
provide it to us? 
 
(1615) 
 
And I ask you . . . One of the reasons I was reminded to ask you is 
because I was this weekend at a senior citizens' annual convention 
in North Battleford — Action Now — and they were extremely 
concerned because they have not been able to get that assurance 
other than somebody saying it's not taxable. So are you able to 
provide us with that information? And if you are, can you do that 
today, or another day soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we don't have the information. It's not a 
political response that's required; it's an interpretation of the 
interpretative bulletin by the federal tax officials that it's not 
taxable, which is the traditional way of responding to tax 
measures. 
 
I know the hon. member is disappointed in the response that he got 
at the senior citizens' Action Now to the particular initiative, or to 
his talk to the senior citizens' Action Now. But it's no need, you 
can carry out the assurance that it's not taxable and maybe talk to 
any of those who would raise some concerns with seniors. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Mr. Minister, I hear you say . . . If it's 
this bulletin, can you provide it to us so that we can have it? 
There's nothing confidential about it, certainly not. It's a document 
that is easily made public. Will you provide it to us? 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1670 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will get it. We don't have it handy. Again, 
it's not the minister to the minister — nor I don't think the hon. 
member expected — it's the officials to officials, indicating it's not 
taxable. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Can your officials get it for me 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We'll supply it to you. We don't have it handy 
now. We'll get it over to you as soon as we can. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to clause 9, 
what is the effect of the provision which itemizes The Livestock 
Facilities Tax Credit and The Stock Savings Tax Credit Act; what 
is the effect of that provision which mentions those two Acts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It simply makes provision that the credit 
earned is applicable as a deduction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in the 
original section is there a reference to the venture tax credit Act? 
Does the livestock facilities tax credit and the stock savings tax 
credit operate the same way as the venture tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, it's identical. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, there is 
a reference to already, as I understand it, to the venture tax credit 
and the livestock investment tax credit, and you're adding the 
livestock facilities tax credit and the stock savings tax credit. Why 
are you not adding the labour-sponsored venture capital tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It will come in the legislation establishing the 
labour-sponsored tax credit . . . labour venture capital tax credit. 
That particular legislation will make reference to The Income Tax 
Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, why would you put 
income tax legislation in a particular Act like the labour-sponsored 
venture capital tax credit and not put it in the stock savings tax 
credit? They're the same sort of provisions, and I think you'll 
acknowledge that the right place for them is in The Income Tax 
Act. Is not the more likely explanation that you intend to introduce 
and have passed the stock savings tax credit and you have no 
intention of introducing and getting passed the labour-sponsored 
venture capital tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That's totally incorrect. We've had some 
extensive discussions with officials and those who've implemented 
legislation — Quebec — and we've also had discussions with 
representatives of the trade union movement, and we've proceeded 
cautiously to keep them informed as much as possible, and we 
have full intention of introducing it and passing it this session. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Minister, can you offer any 
explanation as to why The Income Tax Act will include references 
to The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act and The Livestock 
Investment Tax Credit Act and now The Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit Act and The Stock Savings Tax Credit Act but no reference 
to the labour-sponsored Venture Capital Tax Credit Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will be bringing forward the amendment 
to deal with the labour-sponsored venture capital tax credit — an 
amendment to The Income Tax Act when that Bill comes forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, 
is that this Act, an Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2), is 
going to be followed by an Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
(No. 3) before this session is out; and that for some strange reason 
you don't want to put it in now, even though you assure us it's 
going to be introduced when the — and there's no point in saying, 
that the other Acts are passed, because The Stock Savings Tax 
Credit Act is still going through the mill. For some strange reason 
you are going to make reference to four Acts and not the fifth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I mean, if you want to proceed to the other 
ones, we'll draft up a House amendment now and solve the issue 
and bring it in now if that's your wish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that 
would certainly be my preference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I wonder if we can just proceed to the other 
sections, and we will have a motion if we can get the paper sent 
over. If I may, Mr. Chairman, it will simply amend clause 
8.3(1)(c) by striking out "and" after subclause (iii), and by adding 
the following subclause after subclause (iv): "subclause (v) section 
12 of the labour-sponsored venture capital corporation Act." 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Will we do the amendment first? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can stand it. Stand 9, and go on. 
They'll write it out while we're talking. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — All right, it's agreed then. We'll stand 9 and 
carry on. 
 
Clauses 10 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don't have a copy for the hon. member. I can 
read it into the record: 
 

That section 8.3 is amended. Clause 8.3(1)(c) is amended by 
striking out "and" after subclause (iii); and (b) by adding the 
following subclause after subclause (iv): "subclause (v) section 
12 of the labour-sponsored venture capital corporation Act" and 

 
I have seconded by the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have an amendment before the House, 
moved by the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1671 
 

Clause 9 of the printed Bill, section 8.3 amended: 
 

Clause 8.3(1)(c) is amended (a) by striking out "and" after 
subclause (iii); and (b) by adding the following subclause after 
subclause (iv): "(v) section 12 of the labour-sponsored venture 
capital corporation Act" and 

 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank my 
officials, Mr. Vicq and Mr. McGregor, as well as many others. 
They've done a great deal of work over the last few months, both 
getting the legislation, but also bringing several new concepts into 
play, and I thank them for their efforts. 
 
If I may once more, with leave, send a copy to the hon. member. 
It's a copy of a letter we have received from the director of 
provincial and international relations division. I will explain it 
because there is a follow-up one which we will be forwarding. 
 
(1630) 
 

This will confirm our telephone conversation wherein I 
indicated we did not regard the payments made under this 
program (this is senior citizens' heritage program) to be taxable. 
This is based on the information which we have. 

 
Does not include the legislation. Subsequent to that, they've got 
the legislation. We've been advised that it is not taxable. 
 
There's a further aspect as well, for clarification. Whether it might 
be an item that would fall within the meaning of social assistance 
in the Act, it is the department's view that this is not the case, 
which further lessens the problems which recipients might have. It 
should not have any impact on the incomes of senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. I 
appreciate it. As the property improvement grant was not taxable, I 
have always been of the opinion that neither should this be 
taxable. And I will be able to, and so will other members, after we 
take a look at this, assure people when they contact us so that there 
is no confusion. 
 
Quite frankly, my biggest concern has been that people would get 
caught in the confusion and not put money aside to pay the tax, 
and then when they fill out their income tax forms in 1987 for 
1986, lo and behold they have to find the money to pay it. And I 
really think that we have to guard against that. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax 
Credits 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendment be 
now read a first and second time. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Library 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 29 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The item of business before the House this 
afternoon is estimates for the Saskatchewan Library. Before we do 
that, I would request that the minister please introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to introduce to you today, as we go into estimates for the 
provincial library, to my immediate right, Ms. Karen Adams, the 
provincial librarian. On her right is Marcel de Laforest, director of 
administration. And immediately behind her is Mr. Ron 
McMahon, the director of the bureau of statistics. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — — Soon, but not quite this soon. Mr. 
Chairman, Madam Minister, I think we can start by my making a 
comment which I think we'll both agree to, and that is that the 
provincial library system that has developed in this province since 
its inception has been nothing short of outstanding. I think that 
probably not many would argue that it's one of the best, if not he 
best, library systems in Canada from the point of view of how its 
network of services serves most people in Saskatchewan. Not a 
simply feat when one recognizes that our population is dispersed 
as it is. 
 
I hope that we can continue to maintain that level of services in 
this province through our provincial library and our regional 
library system, and some of my questions which I have to ask of 
you today are geared to gain some assurance that in fact that will 
be happening. 
 
Madam Minister, you know, and I think it is well-known, and I 
know it was raised last year, that one of the ongoing difficulties 
that faces the regional libraries are that of municipalities deciding 
that they want to opt out or don't  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1672 
 
 

want to participate in the funding arrangements. And therefore it 
creates not only a problem for the regional library itself but also 
creates, in some cases, a problem for people who live in those 
municipalities and would like to have the services of the library 
itself. 
 
Can you tell me . . . I guess maybe I should say, can you give the 
committee a report on the status of this? Have you seen an 
improvement in that, or is the problem growing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the issue of the 
rural municipalities submitting their withdrawal notices had held 
relatively stable over the last few years. If I got back to, for 
instance, 1981, there were 47 withdrawal notices placed at that 
time. Up until March 31st of this year we have 17 notices. I 
believe last year the regional libraries were dealing with 
approximately 14 notices. So I would think, you know, it's rather 
stable. Most of them seem to be able to work it out with good 
communication and exchange of information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm glad to hear that, Madam Minister. Can 
you tell me whether you have the information as to the numbers of 
municipalities who have just recently — let's say in 1985 and now 
in 1986 — opted to join the network and start making financial 
contributions. Has there been any additions to the system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We have had three new additions: one in 
the Parkland region, one in the Lakeland, and the city of 
Lloydminster has elected to join us. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the event 
that an R.M. or a municipality chooses to serve notice that it will 
no longer be making a financial contribution and therefore will opt 
out of the regional library system, is there a policy that provides 
some ruling as to what is the status of individuals who are living in 
that municipality when it comes to having the library service? Do 
they automatically lose that service, or is there a user fee? Is there 
a standard user fee, if there is one, or is it something that is 
established by the regional library? How does this work? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — As the member may well know, Mr. 
Chairman, if an R.M. is contemplating withdrawal from the 
system, there is a requirement of two years notice. When an R.M. 
would withdraw, then they would have to pay a non-resident fee 
as established by the board, that you might be going in to use if 
your area has opted out of the system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So the board in each region establishes that 
fee then? I think that's what I heard you say. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The increase in the funding this year, as I 
calculate it, is about 3.7 per cent — not a great increase; that's 
lower than the increase in the rate of inflation. Last year, if I 
understand, there was no increase. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That's right, Mr. Chairman. Last year  

we were at zero. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You indicated in the committee last year,  
Madam Minister, that the reason you could get away without 
providing an increase last year was because regional libraries had 
reserves in which they could dip into and therefore make up the 
difference. Can you tell me whether that in fact happened and 
whether all of those reserves are now used up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I believe also there were other 
indications that went with the rationale of the zero per cent 
increase on library grants last year. Reserves certainly was a 
consideration when we took a look at where the library system 
was sitting. And I'm pleased to say, Mr. Chairman, that after one 
year and into 1986, they have not been particularly affected, the 
surpluses, from the zero base last year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What's the accumulated surplus that now 
exists? I'm not asking for each regional library, but you will have 
the numbers for the system I'm sure, in order to be able to support 
your argument that there are reserves for them to be able to dip 
into. You must have known how much it was. What are the 
accumulated reserves that are in existence now in the provincial 
library system, and the regional library system? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I do not have a list of those with me. We 
based that statement on the 1985 audits, but I could certainly 
endeavour to compile the total for the accumulated surplus if you 
so wish. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Up to which period of time? Can you give 
me that figure for 1985? Okay, thank you very much. 
 
One of the ways in which the library system is able to maintain 
itself financially is provincial grants, and then the levies that are 
made locally. Can you tell me in 1985, what the increase in those 
levies were? I'm not sure that it's referred to specifically as the mill 
rate, but how much was the increase in those levies in 1985, and 
what are the indications for the increase in those levies for 1986? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the levies as it is by region, 
if I can so go through the list, would be — for the Chinook region, 
approximately 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Which year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — 1986 proposed. Lakeland, 3 per cent; the 
Palliser, I believe, is around 4 per cent; the Parkland area, we 
estimate is going to range from 4.8 to 9.2, and of course that's 
dependent on rural municipalities, the towns and villages, and 
villages under 800. 
 
The south-east also has a wide variance in there, and they are 
looking at 9 per cent up to 30 per cent on the cities. Wapiti is 
looking from about 7.6 to 9.5; and Wheatland is looking at 3.6 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Those are some rather dramatic  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1673 
 

increases that are happening in some of the municipalities. I 
understand how the system works, why at some places there 
would be 4.8, another at 9.2 in one particular region. But a 9 per 
cent increase in today's terms when you're having a grant increase 
of 3.7 per cent is really a very dramatic increase. Thirty per cent in 
the cities in the south-east is also even a more dramatic increase. 
And when you consider all of this in total, Madam Minister, I 
think probably it indicates the error of your government's ways.  
 
Last year no increase in grants to the regional library system. You 
froze it at zero. This year an increase of 3.7 per cent over two 
years. That's an average increase of 1.8 per cent. Inflation has been 
running around 5 per cent over that period of time. That's why 
those increases are as they are. And I said earlier I would be 
wanting to ask questions which would assure me that the regional 
and provincial library system would be able to function in the 
proud tradition that it has since its beginning. 
 
I'm rather concerned when I see this information which you have 
given me that maybe there are going to be some stresses out there 
that should not be, because obviously the priority in the provincial 
library system has not been as high as it has been in some other 
sectors. And you can tie this right into education. We want our 
population and our students to read. 
 
Some places in rural Saskatchewan where people live, there are 
not book stores where they can go and purchase a book. In fact in 
some cases some people cannot afford to purchase books on a 
regular basis. The library system provides that opportunity and the 
only opportunity to be able to read in an extensive way. So I 
would say that that needs a lot more priority than we're seeing you 
give it here. 
 
Madam Minister, has there been a change, because there is a 
difference between the funding to regional library systems and 
then to Saskatoon and Regina. I think in Saskatoon and Regina the 
province provides only 7 per cent of the money that's part of the 
budget of those two cities. Is it still at 7 per cent, or am I wrong in 
my percentage figure? Can you tell me what the percentage is? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, there has been no 
change. It is still at approximately 7 per cent. For the member's 
benefit, if he's wondering about the 30 per cent increase . . . and 
he's quite correct that that is a substantial increase in the south-east 
corner of the province. But you also have to go back and look at 
what the per capita levies were and compare those from region to 
region. 
 
And for example, I would bring to his attention in the Lakeland 
region cities, 1984 and '85, were at $7. In the Palliser region, the 
cities were in $10. Parkland — Yorkton, for example, was at 6.72. 
And in the South-east, you were looking at $5. If you want to go 
to the north-east corner of the province in, for example, the city of 
P.A., the charge was $14. And the city of Melfort was $7.80. So 
perhaps, you know, the argument could be made that they maybe 
had some catching up to do in terms of what other city residents 
around the province were looking at contributing to the library 
system. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Minister, last year there was a discussion 
about Saskatoon and Regina and the role that they play in the 
provincial library system. It's getting more and more integrated; I 
appreciate that. And some of the services that are available in the 
cities are now shared with the provincial system. And you 
indicated that you had written to the library boards of Regina and 
Saskatoon to see if they would consider a provincially funded 
contract to assist with the costs of circulating films outside the 
cities and that Regina had resounded and it had indicated a 
willingness to have a look at that, which would alleviate some 
costs in the area of helping out other boards. 
 
Has there been any further progress on this consultation that you 
have been undertaking and that you issued over a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. We have completed 
those discussions, and an agreement has been signed with the 
boards, and as of January 1, 1986, there is provisions for free 
films. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Indeed, I'm glad that there has been some 
action taken because, in my view, I think there has been some 
need to rectify the unfairness of burden-bearing, if I may call it 
that. And any step that leads to that, I think, is a step that one 
would say is a positive step, and I hope that you will continue in 
that process because I suggest that probably more can be done. 
 
If you will just bear with me for a minute. 
 
One of the things that I have noted is that some regional libraries 
get up to 70 per cent of their budget covered by the province, and 
some get as little as 48 per cent and I think Wapiti probably is the 
example. Can you tell me the reason for that great variation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I hesitate to get into talking 
about formulas when the member from Quill Lake isn't here, but I 
will do it for the benefit of the member from Regina North East. 
The amount of money . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. The 
amount of money determined is based on, first of all, population 
per square mile, the moneys that are being contributed at the local 
level, and the number of branches and bookmobiles, more 
commonly within the library system referred to as service points, 
that a region may be into. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Those are the reasons for the differences in 
the amount of grant? There are no other reasons? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, can you tell me — and if 
you don't have it, just have your people send it over to me — but 
I'd like to know whether there is an increase in the usage of the 
library system. I think those statistics may be available, and I don't 
need to have them now, but if you will give me the undertaking 
and have your staff send me a little envelope at some time with the 
information in it, that would be quite sufficient. Can you  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1674 
 
 

do that for me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I can do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I have one other question. One 
of the areas of the province in which there has been a great 
shortcoming, I guess, when you talk about libraries, is in the 
North. Is there now established in the North a regional library 
system, or if not, are there plans in place to do that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, many discussions have 
taken place over the years as library services relate to the North. 
The discussions — I know at one point in time a request had been 
put in for a northern regional library and was turned down. I 
believe that was about 1980 or 1981 when that happened. 
 
We have had several discussions over the last few years, and 
there's no doubt of the need for it in the North. And we have a 
review that is in the preliminary stage on library services to the 
North. We have some people that have been in discussion. We've 
been trying to co-ordinate the various services that are up north. 
But I guess to make the answer short, no, there is not a specific 
north regional library. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, there was at one time 
through the provincial library a system called a "book box" system 
which sent books to remote communities. Is that still in place, or 
can you tell me if that's still operational? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that's still in place. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just one question. There's a reduction of 
two staff here. Can you tell me what that reduction is? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, two of the positions that the 
member is referring to are clerical, and because of the capabilities 
through word processing we felt we could do with two less. And 
we also feel over the next year that we perhaps will be able to 
identify one position to be removed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I assume that no one will be out of a job 
because of this. Can you assure the committee that it will be done 
because of people retiring or transferred to somewhere else? There 
will be actually nobody who will be given the pink slip. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have a couple of 
vacant positions, and of course we will always look at natural 
attrition as opposed to the other. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 

Item 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I just ask: why is it thought that the 
Bureau of Statistics should be placed in the provincial library? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's fairly easy 
to understand if you consider that both bodies are the collection 
and giving out of information, and we felt that it fitted very nicely 
together. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Vote 29 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Library 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 29 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 29 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: This concludes the estimates for Saskatchewan 
Library. Does the minister have any concluding remarks? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I would like to . . . First 
of all let me thank the opposition for being so speedy on these 
estimates today, and I particularly want to thank the officials who 
have had a great deal of patience in waiting to get in here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me join with the minister in thanking 
the officials as well. They were quick with the answers, and 
therefore it expedited the proceedings. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


