













































April 1, 1986 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 1, 1986 

 

287 
 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 

the committee of finance. 

 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying prior to the supper break, I want to commend my 

colleague, the Minister of Finance, the member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, for a most excellent presentation of the 

budget address last Wednesday evening and the formation of a 

most realistic and common-sense budget. 

 

As I was saying also, I had spent four days in my constituency of 

Yorkton over the Easter weekend, and I can honestly say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I did not run into one constituent that had any 

criticism of our budget whatsoever. They felt it was realistic — 

it was fitting for the times that we are in. They did not see a lot 

of goodies, that they thought they were going to see, just to buy 

votes. 

 

It was a budget that we could live with and still provide the 

incentives to create the economic growth that we need. And 

nobody has any argument, Mr. Speaker, about economic growth 

being the stimulus to provide jobs and prosperity to support the 

social institutions necessary for a forward-looking and caring 

society. We must encourage and assist wherever possible our 

small-business community, our farmers, and the development of 

a rich, natural resources. And in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, this 

budget does just that. 

 

Creating a positive climate towards business is a must if we are 

to promote and encourage the economic development of our 

business community, Mr. Speaker, and our budget confirms our 

commitment to create a positive climate. An 8 per cent maximum 

interest protection rate for small businesses, up to the maximum 

loan rate of $100,000; a two-year corporate tax holiday for new 

small businesses; a stock savings plan to encourage equity 

investment by Saskatchewan residents. This plan is part of our 

continuing emphasis to encourage public participation in the 

Saskatchewan economy. And this desire to invest in 

Saskatchewan by our residents was made loud and clear by the 

participation rate and the excitement in the purchase of 

Saskatchewan bonds, power bonds, and the Saskatchewan oil 

shares. 

 

A one year extension to the industrial incentive program where 

businesses, for each new permanent job created in the 

manufacturing and processing sectors, would receive a $7,500 

tax credit. 

 

I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, last November, December, that 

I was appalled and embarrassed to be sitting in this Assembly 

when the announcement was made of the bacon plant and the 

pork cut and kill plant that was coming to Saskatchewan by 

Gainers Incorporated. And ever since then I’ve been just 

wondering what really makes the NDP tick as far as business is 

concerned in this province. 

 

You can’t believe them any more. They don’t want jobs in the 

province. They don’t want to see industry come into this 

province. They don’t want to see Weyerhaeuser’s power, or the 

plant in Prince Albert, PAPCO, and the paper plant to be 

expanded. They don’t want to see the Rafferty dam. They didn’t 

even want to see the natural gas program because they said it 

wasn’t affordable. And we’ve proved that it was affordable, and 

within eight years 10,000 farms and 25,000 urban people will 

have natural gas at a much cheaper rate than electricity. 

 

And with the hand-outs . . . I can’t understand this rhetoric from 

the people opposite. Pocklington is getting this $21 million worth 

of hand-outs. It’s no different that you . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . He’s not getting anything. He can get a loan from Sedco, 

which he’s going to get. He’s going to pay it back at the interest 

rate that is in place for anybody borrowing money from Sedco. 

And on the other part of it, he doesn’t get a penny unless he 

performs. And the only way he can perform and get the $75,000 

tax credit is if he performs and creates jobs. 

 

But, no, the members opposite are saying that there’s this great 

big hand-out to the Gainers Incorporated. He’s got to earn it — 

he’s got to earn it. 

 

You, the member from Quill Lake, or the member from 

Shaunavon, or the member from Regina North East, could go out 

and start a glue factory tomorrow from the hooves of the pigs that 

Pocklington is going kill, and get your loan from Sedco and get 

your $7,500 tax credit the same as anybody else in this province 

can get. It’s not a hand-out to Pocklington. 

 

So creating a positive climate in the province is a thing of the 

past, as far as the NDP is concerned. Nobody is going to believe 

you any more. What you want to see, and the Leader of the 

Opposition is coming out and saying, we need more militant 

labour in our province. So you want the Nadine Hunts and the 

Larry Browns to be out demonstrating up and down the streets 

out here, tapping the Prime Minister of Canada on the head with 

their placards. And that’s exactly what you want to see. And you 

think that’s going to create a positive climate in our province? 

I’ve got news for the members opposite. I’ve had people tell me 

they left this province because of that kind of climate. 

 

The other important indicator of our Progressive Conservative 

government’s commitment to provide a positive climate here in 

this province was our open-for-business theme which was a 

visible demonstration of our plan, Mr. Speaker. And I know the 

NDP members opposite have constantly laughed and made fun 

of our conference, but let’s look at the record. Thirty thousand 

more people working since 1982 to 1986 — 30,000 more people 

working. Seventeen thousand more working in last year alone. 

 

And the member from Regina North East stands at his seat this 

afternoon and said that there are 40,000 more people unemployed 

in this province. But what he is not telling  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

288 

 

the people of the province, that you people had 28,000 people 

unemployed when we took over. So 12,000 more people 

unemployed, yet the population has increased by 50 to 60,000 

people. When you start working out percentages, that’s why 

we’ve got the lowest unemployment record in the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLaren: — You don’t tell the whole story. Forty thousand 

people unemployed, but make it sound like you only had zero 

unemployment, when you actually had 28,000 people 

unemployed. 

 

I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, to have been part of the decision making 

process while being minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, to commence the $100 million Buy 

Saskatchewan plans, another clear indication of our desire to 

work with the business community, to encourage participation in 

supplying the goods and services required by Saskatchewan 

Power. 

 

And I’d like to just briefly mention a few of the items of what 

has taken place since we’ve put that program into action. The 

total Saskatchewan purchases of commodities and supplies, year 

to day to 1985, December 31st, were $111.2 million — an 

increase of 110 per cent over 1984. Sask Power buying goods 

and services from Saskatchewan people, creating jobs which 

hardly have been looked at or done before. 

 

Purchases of commodities and supplies from outside 

Saskatchewan decreased for 61.8 million in 1984 to 58.7 million 

in 1985 — a decrease of 5.3 per cent. Total Saskatchewan 

purchases and services, including contracts year to date to 1985, 

December 31st, were 97.8 million — an increase of 20 per cent 

over 1984. Services purchased outside Saskatchewan decreased 

from 11.2 million in 1984 to 7.5 million in 1985 for 51 per cent. 

Total Saskatchewan purchases in commodities, supplies and 

services, year to date to 1985, December 31, were $209 million 

— an increase of 55.8 per cent. 

 

That just didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan Power we 

hired two men to come on staff to travel around the province of 

Saskatchewan to visit with the small-business community, or 

manufacturers, and to encourage them to bid on the contracts of 

goods and services that Saskatchewan Power was wanting. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that program has worked to the tune of $209 

million. 

 

Our budget and Progressive Conservative government also 

recognizes that it is important to build on our natural strengths. 

And without a doubt, agriculture has been and will continue to 

be the mainstay of our provincial economy. And we have seen 

the impact of the $25 an acre loan that was provided our 

agricultural people the last few weeks. And I can honestly say 

that our business community in Yorkton has noticed a dramatic 

increase in sales over the last few months, and they do attribute 

it to our programs to the agricultural area. 

 

We are also blessed with a rich resource base and a highly skilled 

and motivated work-force. We must develop policies and 

programs to build on these and other  

strengths. The recent programs to assist the cash flows of 

agricultural base has had a profound impact. I am delighted, Mr. 

Speaker, with the Minister of Finance’s announcement of the 

construction of the $78 million agricultural college at the 

University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. Not only will 

construction jobs be created, but the addition of an agricultural 

emphasis on our number one industry for research and education 

has to be a deal plus for our farmers to cope with the 

technological changes that are required to compete in today’s 

competitive world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expansion of our venture capital corporation 

program to include agricultural firms and the eligibility of 

communities up to 20,000 people will now put my constituency 

of Yorkton into the program. I look forward to working with 

interested groups to encourage their participation in such 

projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Progressive Conservative government is 

committed to encouraging opportunity and protecting our 

families when all we have to do is look at the protection that we 

have provided over the last four years: the mortgage rebate 

program on people that were afraid of losing their homes back in 

1982; the removal of the gas tax which is putting millions of 

dollars into the pockets of Saskatchewan people. Where was the 

NDP when interest rates were climbing to 18, 19, 20 per cent? 

Nowhere to be seen, Mr. Speaker. They had no idea other than to 

buy up the industries and businesses that were going broke, the 

land bank land, and putting that into their power struggle or 

whatever you want to call it. That’s where the taxation dollars 

were going. 

 

(1915) 

 

Our economic development initiatives over the past four years 

and job creation record is proof positive that our effort plan is 

working and creating opportunities and jobs for people of this 

province. We recognize that we must provide our citizens with 

protection against sickness, natural disasters, unemployment, and 

hardship. This budget does all that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The number one item that is being well received in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan pension plan. It 

was unbelievable last weekend the amount of folks that came up 

to me and asked for more details on it. And for the first time in 

their lives, for the first time in their lives, farmers’ wives, 

home-makers, small-business men, and businesses with a few 

employees can now participate in a pension plan. 

 

For the last two years, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of 

being on a national committee of our various labour ministers 

and people involved with the private pension plans to look at 

pension reform. And it was interesting to see that the number one 

issue that came forward in those meetings over that two year 

period, was the desire and the lack of support that the older 

people had when they reached their 65th birthday and had never 

participated in a pension plan. 

 

It was devastating, the numbers of folks that we found out that 

lost their spouse — were 60 to 65 years of age or 55 years of age, 

and no income until they hit 65 years of age,  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

289 

 

and the Canada Pension Plan would kick in. We feel that this is 

going to be very, very well received and I can assure the members 

opposite that this is something that is really being looked forward 

to for many, many years, and that the women especially are now 

going to have that opportunity. And they’re coming with this 60 

to 65 payment which is nothing more than a welfare payment. 

What better than people starving to put a few dollars aside in their 

working years for when they are on their farms to provide a 

pension for people such as the home-maker and the wives of the 

farmers and so on. 

 

Another very popular item is the tax exemption of clothing of up 

to $300 per item, Mr. Speaker. In our city of Yorkton, just as the 

reduction of the gas tax brought car after car after car from 

western Manitoba just because of the cheap gas, we have been 

experiencing many people coming in and purchasing in our 

stores in the malls of Yorkton. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this reduction of the education tax on 

clothing is just going to cause another wave coming into the 

province and all the department stores and malls up and down the 

eastern side of our province are going to see a dramatic increase 

in the purchases of people coming in from Manitoba. 

 

Home owners on the $3,000 grant for their first-time home, home 

owners, another very popular item. It was popular in 1983 when 

we had our program before — a lot of houses built in my 

constituency of Yorkton, and we had questions on the weekend 

of this same program, wanting more details and we will see a 

boom in our housing industry. 

 

And the agricultural and commercial equity corporation where 

the residents of our province can invest in our province and give 

us the opportunity to create plans and industrial growth and 

economic growth without having to go outside our boundaries 

and borrow money from Wall Street or the United States at a cost 

that is really hurting us now, when you look at the exchange rate 

on the borrowings that were made many years ago. 

 

The largest increase in history for agricultural and health 

expenditures in our province. We wondered why a moratorium 

was put on nursing homes back in 1976, and I heard the member 

from Shaunavon on the hot line this morning and he couldn’t 

remember that there was a moratorium on nursing homes. I was 

wondering where he was at that time. 

 

A major increase in spending in education. And to cope with the 

industrial growth and the new skills of our work-force that are 

going to be needed, education is very, very important. I can say 

about our community colleges in Yorkton that the demand for 

spaces has climbed very, very high in the last couple of years 

with adult people coming to upgrade their skills, to give them 

better opportunities to find jobs in that work-force. 

 

A new approach to funding by day care centres — the first time 

that this has gone to them directly. And the efficiency by the 

formation of a property management corporation so that we can 

rent our facilities out and have it all under one body to manage 

for us. 

And another very popular item back in Yorkton was the 6 per 

cent money for students. We had a number of people in the last 

few days wanting to get more details on that, and were very, very 

pleased that they could get their student loans at a rate that was 

reasonable and not at the 16 and 17 per cent that they were having 

to face back in the late ’70s and early ’80s. 

 

The other thing that they didn’t believe about our budget, Mr. 

Speaker — that there wasn’t any major tax increases. The item 

on cigarettes is an optional thing, that if people don’t want to 

smoke they won’t have to pay the tax. And they were pleased to 

see that the larger corporations and the banks were going to have 

to pay an extra amount of tax in this coming budget. 

 

The rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve heard over the number of 

weeks coming from the members opposite, about the biggest tax 

increase in the history of Saskatchewan — and I wonder where 

the members opposite get that kind of information. I think they 

make it up. I did a little checking the last few days, and I looked 

back at taxation in 1972 where the provincial tax was 34 per cent. 

By 1978, six years later, the tax was 53 per cent. Now, in the 

NDP minds those must not be tax increases, but a provincial tax 

from 34 per cent to 53 per cent, in my mind, is a fairly massive 

tax increase in six years for the people of our province. 

 

They don’t talk about the gas tax, a sliding tax on gasoline. But 

every time the federal government raised the price of gasoline, 

they gloated because it meant some more money on their taxation 

formula coming into their coffers. But no, that’s evidently no tax 

either. 

 

Taxing the oil industry, giving this massive taxes to the oil 

industry. They were paying royalties or incentives to people in 

the oil industry to drill dry holes. They weren’t giving the 

incentives to people that had success, and to me that’s where it 

should go. 

 

Then let’s look at Saskatchewan Power rates. And the member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was saying, I wish we could have 

the power rates that we had back in 1981. 

 

Let’s look at gas, for example. In 1975, under the NDP, in one 

year they raised gas prices by 66 per cent; in 1976, seven twenty-

seven per cent; 1977, 19 per cent; 1978, 10 per cent. And what 

has happened since we have taken power? We’ve had decreases 

in gas price increases instead of the increases themselves. But no, 

that’s not taxation. That’s not taking money from the people of 

the province.  

Let’s look at electricity: 1975, 27 per cent; 1976, 12.8 per cent; 

1977, 17.3 per cent. And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, that those 

price increases, some of them were within two or three months 

of increasing, when I was at Morris Rod-Weeder in Yorkton; the 

power rates increases every two or three months. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the succession 

duty tax. But that was no tax; that’s not taxation in the NDP 

minds. But I’ll bet you, if you add that up, it’s considerably more 

than the average that we have 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

290 

 

taxed in the last few years, which has probably gone the other 

way. 

 

I can remember when that succession duty tax came on, and we 

were concerned as a company, where we had 400 employees, that 

this succession duty tax imposed by the NDP in 1972 could 

destroy our company, with it being a family-owned corporation. 

 

A lot of heat was put on that government of the day by our Prairie 

Implement Manufacturers Association, that this very thing could 

happen. So what do they do? They form a committee. And the 

chairman of the committee was the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And I can remember sitting down with 

that committee in our offices in Yorkton, complaining that the 

$250,000 exemption on tax was good for our corporation. The 

fact of the matter was, Mr. Speaker, that out of a payroll of $10 

million a year, you can imagine where $250,000 would go. It 

wouldn’t even pay the salaries for a quarter of the staff for one 

month. And what would be left for us to do would be to sell off 

part of the corporation to pay the duty tax. 

 

And do you know what the answer was from the member 

opposite, the chairman of that committee? You could sell out to 

John Deere. That was the answer that we got from that 

gentleman. Pull up stakes at that plant in Yorkton, move us to 

Des Moines or Moline or wherever the John Deere plant was, in 

the United States, and that’s the kind of sympathy that we had as 

far as succession duty is concerned, and business, in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And that’s exactly what you think of business 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have talked to other people, widows that lost their husbands. 

They had to sell land to pay that tax. And $26 million was 

collected in that tax from 1972 to ’75 or ’76, when it was taken 

off. And we listened to the member opposite about the used car 

tax. We should rebate $3 million. How about adding the 26 

million to that? And let’s go all the way, for the fellow that 

bought a suit 10 days ago. Maybe we should rebate the tax on 

that one. Where does it end? But you don’t set your sights. You 

play it on the items and mislead the people of this province with 

your rhetoric. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did they give it back? 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. McLaren: — They never gave it back. 

 

Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention one more 

item. And the member from Regina North East mentioned this 

also, that if they were government and the liability insurance had 

come the way it was, they would have done something about it 

years ago. 

 

Well I’ve got news for the member from Regina North East. We 

were in a lawsuit back in the late ’70s on that very item and we 

knew that the liability insurance problem was coming, and 

coming rapidly. So why didn’t you do something about it? This 

would be ’77 or ’78. We happened to win the lawsuit but there 

was millions of dollars at stake in that suit. But we never heard 

anything about that and the liability insurance was coming to the 

forefront back in those days. It just didn’t happen in the last three 

years. 

 

And somebody mentioned the employee tax and I wouldn’t be a 

bit surprised either if that tax would come on. I’m paying it in 

Manitoba on a business that we have in Dauphin. One and a half 

per cent on every dollar of payroll that is earned by your 

employees. We’ve got to send one and a half per cent to the 

Government of Manitoba, and that will probably be along the 

way, also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no trouble whatsoever supporting a realistic 

and common-sense budget that was presented by the Minister of 

Finance last Wednesday evening and I shall do so in due course 

and look forward to voting on that budget. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 

recognizing me tonight and this important debate we’re facing 

here. I think tonight we’re faced with a decision that is very major 

and likely the last budget speech for many of the members here, 

and maybe that’s why they’re so anxious to get into it. 

 

The question I’d like to raise tonight is: what effect is this budget 

having on the people of Saskatchewan? What do we hear about 

the government, say, from the media? What is the general tone 

out in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

I photocopied some pages out of the Saturday Night, the little 

paper that comes out on the weeklies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Commonwealth? 

 

Mr. Engel: — Members opposite call the Saturday Night the 

Commonwealth. When papers like that and papers that represent 

the oil patch and different people like that, are being called the 

Commonwealth, this government should quit accusing papers for 

their unbiased opinions, and start looking in a mirror and saying, 

why are people writing like this? Why would you have an article 

in the Saturday Night entitled “Hard Times” by Robert Bott in 

the “Politics” section? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Because you wrote it and he signed it. 

 

Mr. Engel: — I think I couldn’t have done this good a job, I’d 

like to say to the member of Last Mountain-Touchwood. I don’t 

think I could do a good job as this, writing it. But I just want to 

read a couple of quotes from this little paper into the record 

tonight, Mr. Speaker. The headline under the picture — and it 

shows our Premier smiling away while ignores the issues that are 

confronting him. “Like Brian Mulroney . . . 

 

And now I’m having problems. When I read from a paper, can I 

read the words that are here or do I have to refer to him as a 

member? Because, I’d be reading it out of context. So: 

 

Like Brian Mulroney, Grant Devine was elected in a Tory 

landslide. But his term has been plagued by bad 

management . . . 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

291 

 

And the writer here was quite good to you, because he goes on to 

say in his headline: 

 

. . . but his term has been plagued by bad management and 

(he calls it) bad luck. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Table it. 

 

Mr. Engel: — I will table one. In fact, if I had another copy I’d 

send you one so you could look at while we’re doing it. But as 

soon as I’m done I’ll pass this over. 

 

. . . and Saskatchewan voters may be ready (the headline 

says under the picture here) to restore the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — I think, as I point out to a few lines in this article 

. . . And the editor writes, and you can tell that . . . 

 

After eleven years of Allan Blakeney and the New 

Democrats, it was too shockingly pink (is what this editor 

says about the NDP). Lately though, NDP pink has begun 

to seem an attractive alternative to the red ink that’s been 

flooding Saskatchewan. 

 

The pink has been an attractive alternative. He talks a little bit 

about a pink Cadillac that was sold before this, but I won’t get 

into that. 

 

In January, Standard and Poors cited “deteriorating trends 

in the province’s budgetary position and its debt burden” 

and downgraded the province’s bond rating. 

 

I wonder what the people of Canada think when they read this 

about Saskatchewan. I wonder what they really think. This is 

Saturday Night, April 1986. It just came out. In fact it will hit the 

news-stands today or tomorrow. I got it through a subscription if 

you would like to know. 

 

The question now is whether Grant Devine is a harbinger or 

an aberration. (Would you believe that?) If, like Tommy 

Douglas four decades ago, he is a sign of things to come in 

Canada, then he signals a shift from cooperation to 

competition, from nationalism to continentalism, from 

idealistic management to government by opinion poll — 

and curiously, from fiscal prudence to escalating deficits. 

 

And here we have a Premier that wants to emulate and be like 

Tommy Douglas and be a forerunner for all of Canada. But the 

opposite is likely true. 

 

Another paragraph — just a short sentence or two here, Mr. 

Speaker, from the bottom of page 10: 

 

Devine sounds almost petulant about his misfortune in 

taking office just in time for a recession, drought, and 

grasshoppers plagues and bitterly blames the NDP for his 

fiscal difficulties. 

 

As I get into my speech later, I will talk a little bit about  

why he feels that way. 

 

While Alberta was building its $14-billion Heritage Fund, 

says Devine, the NDP squandered Saskatchewan’s riches. 

In fact, the NDP left them (here’s what the real truth is 

though) a $139.3 million surplus and a $1 billion Heritage 

Fund. The Tories have since run up . . . 

 

I’m not saying what I think, Mr. Speaker. Members opposite are 

laughing. I’m quoting from one of Canada’s best weekly papers. 

 

The Tories have since run up a cumulated deficit (and this 

person isn’t given to exaggeration, because he said the a 

cumulated deficit) of $1.3-billion (and it’s actually $2 

billion) in a province that never had a budget shortfall of 

more than $10-million. 

 

Never, ever had a budget shortfall . . . 

 

Devine’s only major shift in agricultural policy has been to 

abolish the NDP’s widely criticized Land Bank, which he 

portrayed as an attempt to turn farmers into “sharecroppers” 

. . . the biggest help for farmers came from one of Tommy 

Douglas’s enduring creations, crop insurance . . . Devine’s 

image has not been helped by the spectacle of farmers 

signing up for welfare to put food on the table. (That’s your 

Premier’s image.) 

 

His reputation as an economic manager also suffered last 

spring when his government came hastily to the aid of 

Regina financier Wilmer Klein, a Tory supporter. With 

even less forethought than the federal Tories showed in 

propping up the Canadian Commercial Bank. 

 

This is from a paper that came out and gives a portrait of your 

government, Mr. Speaker. And the Saturday Night, April 1986, 

had two more quotes that I’d like to make from this paper. 

 

The NDP received the support of forty-six per cent of those 

polled, the Tories forty-four per cent, and the Liberals nine 

per cent. 

 

Since the poll, the Tories have been further undermined by 

a by-election defeat, an MLA’s defection to the Western 

Canada Concept Party, and an unflattering political memoir 

written in prison by Devine’s one-time energy minister, the 

convicted murderer Colin Thatcher. One minister quit the 

Cabinet last November after using government aircraft to 

ferry his family around the province, and Devine demoted 

seven others in December in a cabinet shuffle. More recent 

polls have confirmed the erosion of Conservative support, 

the modest upswing for the Liberals, and the 

majority-government potential of the Blakeney NDP. 

 

In reply to a question about his strong support of Ronald 

Reagan’s Star Wars programme . . . 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

292 

 

And I could on and on in this . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this paper clearly portrays . . . And the windup is 

very crucial to the comments of this paper. 

 

It was also a half-century ago that two Tories — J.T.M. 

Anderson in Regina and R.B. Bennett in Ottawa — both 

became one-term wonders after their pro-business remedies 

failed. The Anderson government’s notable achievements 

included the elimination of French as a language of 

instruction in schools . . . 

 

Both leaders demonstrate an adulation, tinged with envy, of 

rich, powerful conservatives next door — in Alberta and the 

U.S. Both offer a conservativism more rhetorical than real, 

a sort of right-wing populism. Both have failed to clean out 

patronage . . . 

 

Saskatchewan has been “open for business” for almost four 

years now, and Devine has rung up record deficits . . . 

 

I think members opposite should see this article. And if you could 

send it to the member from Meadow Lake, I think he’d be happy 

to have a good look at what all the article is. Maybe the member 

from Morse could read it to him, but read the entire article, read 

the entire article. Make 55 copies for your colleagues so they can 

see what the people are really saying. 

 

The other media that is as popular — and I suppose they think 

we’ve got them as our Commonwealth as well — and that’s the 

CBC. And I was interested to know . . . And I came in time for 

the budget debate the other night, on Wednesday night, and we 

got here at 6:30 and somebody told me, the TV is on in one of 

our member’s rooms. So I went down to watch this TV, and I 

don’t know if the members opposite were busy getting ready to 

come here, or if their wives videoed it for them or not, but CBC 

had a TV special on, on budget night and it was called four years 

of Devine — four years of Devine. And if the members opposite 

didn’t watch that, I’d suggest you beg them for a video of it and 

play it, and have a good look at it, and then you’ll decide whether 

you’re going to call the election or not. 

 

But they showed a Premier being sworn in. They showed a 

good-looking chap in a white jacket being sworn in, and they said 

this member was named the minister of Energy. And they went 

down the line going through all the history of the government 

opposite. 

 

Those members have the audacity to stand up in this budget 

debate and say that my wife didn’t know one of the members 

sitting opposite. Well, if you’re sitting in the back row doing 

nothing, no wonder people in the country don’t know them — no 

wonder people in the country don’t know them. They should be 

lucky. They should be so lucky that they’re not known by their 

reputation that most of you people have. 

 

“Like Brian Mulroney, Grant Devine was elected in a Tory 

landslide. But his term has been plagued” with bad luck. Well I 

think it’s not bad luck, Mr. Speaker. I think it is  

Tory mismanagement like the CBC portrayed. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are sick of this government, and I think 

that’s why your leader is afraid to call the election. That’s why 

he’s afraid to call an election. Farmers and workers all over 

Saskatchewan are telling me how tough times are. 

 

When I meet a farmer from northern Saskatchewan and he’s 

complaining how tough times are and how tough a time he has, I 

look him straight in the eye and I say, I have trouble feeling sorry 

for you. My bins are empty. My bins are empty. 

 

(1945) 

 

Here’s a farmer that has his bins full of wheat and telling me how 

tough times are. What should the farmers do who has his bins 

empty? I question farmers with full bins. And they tell me that 

under the conditions this government has created — and several 

speakers across the way have mentioned that, we’ve had some 

bad luck; we had grasshoppers — while this same farmer, this 

same farmer told me that grasshoppers aren’t his biggest problem 

— grasshoppers aren’t his biggest problem. He says the hoppers 

in the pin-striped suits are his biggest problem. 

 

Four years ago, four years ago this farmer said that, I had $2 

million worth of assets. My land . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell me, was he from my riding? 

 

Mr. Engel: — Up in Meadow Lake is where I met him. 

 

My land was worth $100,000 a quarter. I had 20 quarters of land, 

I had some equipment, I had some debts — but he figured he was 

worth about two million bucks. What is he worth today? Go up 

and ask your neighbour what he’s worth today, to the member of 

Meadow Lake, I’d say. 

 

He has lost, because of the pin-striped suit hoppers sitting across 

the way, has found his land devaluated to less than 50,000 a 

quarter. He has bills piled up all over the place. He has incurred 

additional debts, and today he said if I try and liquidate, I 

wouldn’t be worth anything. Grasshoppers aren’t bad luck, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re a part of management. 

 

And I would like to tell you a little bit about what management’s 

all about, and this is printed way back, Mr. Speaker, way back 

Tuesday, April 21, 1959, the Saskatchewan News, volume 14, 

number 13. And it says here: “Million Dollar War Launched 

Against ’Hoppers.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who did that? 

 

Mr. Engel: — My seat-mate asks, who did that? Toby Nollet 

was the minister of Agriculture; E.I. Wood was the minister of 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Beefed and buttressed by more than $1 million worth of 

potent ’hopper killing chemicals, personnel of the 

Saskatchewan department of agriculture are set to provide 

farmers in southern areas of the province with plenty of 

liquid muscle to deal quickly with an expected major 

outbreak   



 

April 1, 1986 

293 

 

of the pests this year. 

 

The other section says, “Farmers Alerted.” 

 

Another preparatory step in the ’hopper war was taken 

March the 13 when most Saskatchewan municipalities sent 

delegates to a conference in Regina to consider all aspects 

of the problem. 

 

They heard five speakers, including Agriculture Minister 

I.C. Nollet, tell the story of how the ’hoppers could be 

beaten. 

 

“Assistance Outlined”: 

 

V.B. Holmes (and many of you will remember him) 

assistant director of the plant industry branch, provincial 

department of agriculture, outlined ’hopper assistance 

policies to aid in the anti-hopper fight . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the entire article and see that 

million dollar war they did in 1959 on hoppers, you’ll know why 

there is only hoppers when there’s Tories, because the Tory 

government refuse to tackle the problem. 

 

Our Premier went down to the SARM convention. Instead of 

calling a special session on how to deal with and have a war on 

hoppers, he said we’re going to go half the cost of hoppers for 

the road allowance. So they go 50 per cent on 2 per cent of the 

land. Now that’s a big deal. But the hoppers in the pin-striped 

suits, running around the province with a message saying that 

they’re going to reduce farm costs, that’s the biggest 

disappointment farmers face in this budget. Because they thought 

after your committee was out there — and I see members of the 

committee sitting here — after your committee was out there 

running around listening to farmers, why didn’t they come out 

with something in this budget debate that would declare war on 

hoppers? Why didn’t they say we’re going to deal with it? Mr. 

Speaker, the Tories are saying we can’t afford to help and support 

farmers, or we can’t support them on grain prices. 

 

The other issue that is of great concern to me, and that’s the 

prospects for this year. I’m planning . . . I have pre-worked some 

of my land. It’s getting very dry down south. I was travelling on 

one of the roads in the Morse constituency. The sand was coming 

across the road that I thought it would pit my windshield, it was 

so bad. A repeat of the Dirty Thirties. I was on a brand-new road 

that was finished last fall. Mr. Speaker, if that member wants to 

take credit for that road, I hope every constituent travels the 43 

Highway from 19 going west, because that’s a brand-new road, 

and that road is full of pot-holes and holes like I’ve never seen a 

road in southern Saskatchewan. One year old and this 

government, this government . . . I should get on roads for a 

while. But I was travelling that road and the dust was coming up 

over the side of the road, that I thought it would pit my window. 

And I thought to myself, what are these poor farmers going to do 

this coming year. And then I hear Tories say, well with the deficit 

the federal government has and the provincial government has, 

we can’t afford to do anything about grain prices. 

The grain commissioner, on March 31, 1986 — yesterday’s 

paper — “Grain commissioner says farmers are strangely quiet 

(on the) coming disaster.” 

 

Prairie farmers face the prospect of deep cuts in wheat and 

other grain prices because of plunging world markets, a 

commissioner of the Canadian Wheat Board said. 

 

Larry Kristjanson said that farmers would receive their lowest 

price in eight years. This could cost Canadian grain growers a 

total of $1 billion in lost income. And he’s talking about the 

apathy. He says: 

 

“That’s what I’ve been trying to figure out: why there hasn’t 

been an uproar,” Kristjanson said in a recent interview in 

his Winnipeg office. 

 

Earlier this year, the United States passed a new farm bill 

slashing price supports for grain which establish the 

minimum price American farmers receive for their crops. 

 

For wheat, the floor price has been cut by a whopping 27 

per cent. 

 

The Europeans have been dumping the surpluses on world 

markets, driving down prices and forcing the American 

retaliation. 

 

Certainly, in our case, (says Mr. Kristjanson) we are caught 

in the cross-fire between the two of them. 

 

That’s bad news for Canadian farmers . . . 

 

Currently, the board is paying (Canadian) farmers $160 a 

tonne for top grade wheat when delivered to country grain 

elevators. 

 

Wheat Board minister Charlie Mayer is currently 

considering where to peg the initial price for the 1986-87 

crop year, which begins on August 1. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, usually by this time, when we’re 

getting ready to plant, we know what the initial price is going to 

be. And farmers are very frustrated and concerned, what they’re 

going to plant. Conditions look as though they’re going to be 

tough in the South, and you don’t want to make a wrong 

managerial decisions — but according to this article here: 

 

A 27 per cent drop would push the initial price for top grade 

spring wheat down to $117 a tonne from the current price 

of $160. 

 

Mayer said we have a number of options: 

 

He could set the initial price higher than the wheat board 

recommended price, say $140 a tonne. 

 

Which would be 20 bucks less than we’re getting this year. 

 

(He could) set the initial price at the world level 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

294 

 

and offer a deficiency payment to farmers (is what we’ve 

been asking for). 

 

Neither of these options — which would cost the federal 

treasury hundreds of millions of dollars — will likely be 

popular in a federal cabinet that is struggling to trim the 

national deficit. 

 

A third option would be to let farmers fend for themselves. 

 

And I ask the members opposite, particularly those of you that 

are from farm communities: what is it going to be? What is it 

going to be? What message are you going to send to Ottawa, and 

what are you going to tell your counterparts in Ottawa? What can 

farmers expect? How long are you going to make us wait till we 

know what the initial price is going to be? Are you afraid it’s 

going to interfere with your election strategy and your election 

plans? 

 

It’s going to cost the farmers a bundle — one billion bucks. Do 

we have to absorb it or are you going to pass it on to all of the 

Canadian people? That’s the question people are asking me right 

across the country. And I think it’s time . . . It’s time this 

government gets off their butts and decides what they’re going to 

do. 

 

Another article that’s really frustrating — and it says statistics 

show that farm livestock are on the decline. And instead of 

diversifying and spreading out, farmers are planning on going 

away down and cutting back on their production. 

 

We have grasshoppers in pin-striped suits. We’ve got expected 

cuts in our grain price and our income. Cattle numbers are going 

down because cattle prices are on a big slump. And what do 

friends of the government do? What do friends of the government 

do? 

 

We got a little book in the mail called Economic Growth: 

Agriculture Section — Study Team Report to the Task Force on 

Program Review. Not one member opposite in their speeches to 

date, either in the budget or in the throne speech, have referred to 

the Nielsen report. Why the silence? Why the silence, Mr. 

Speaker? Why is nobody from the Tory side speaking out on the 

Nielsen report? 

 

Earlier today members opposite were saying how that some of us 

weren’t in our seat to hear the response. I suppose part of the 

reason why nobody’s responding there, there’s nobody sitting 

there. Well I wish we could get a panoramic view of the 

legislature sometimes. 

 

But I would like to raise the issue of the Nielsen report, and I 

would like to urge members opposite — maybe they’re listening 

on their TV sets — but I would like to urge members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, to get involved in the Nielsen report and familiarize 

themselves on what the Nielsen report concerns. 

 

And I want to ask the PC members sitting opposite: do you 

support the move? And I see the member from Morse is listening. 

At least I have one person across the way there that is taking note 

of what I’m saying. And I’d like to ask the member from Morse, 

as a farmer . . . The member from  

Regina North or South is not a farmer, so I’m not directing my 

remark to you. But I’d like to direct my remark to the member 

from Morse, and I would like to say to him, do you support the 

move that this report recommends, that you would file your 

income tax or support an accounting on an accrual basis? I would 

like to know just what your point of view is. 

 

Any farmers I’ve ever talked to likes to be able to manage his 

affairs, especially when the years of good crops and good times, 

like when the NDP were in power, and they had some room to 

manoeuvre and manage. They could withhold some grain or 

cattle and sell them on December the 31st or on January the 1st. 

We had that kind of decisions to make. 

 

This report recommends that every animal that you raise this 

year, you will be accounted for this year. Every bushel of grain 

you grow in the year you grow it, will be taxed accordingly. 

 

This method of accounting will cost farmers across Canada, 

according to this report, $1 billion a year in income tax on an 

average year. The writers and the authors of this report say they 

will be able to derive, as a source of income from farmers, an 

additional billion dollars. Do you support it? And if you don’t, 

why haven’t you condemned this report or this idea publicly? 

 

Do you endorse the scrapping of PFRA and the farm 

improvement loans? If you don’t, why don’t you sat that why 

don’t you oppose that publicly? 

 

Do you support the attack on the Canadian Wheat Board? Do you 

support cancelling the cash advances? Or maybe you’ve never 

needed to take cash advances. But I think the cash advance 

program in grain and so on is an important part of managing our 

farm accounting. Do you support it? If you don’t, why didn’t you 

speak up on it? Do you support scrapping farm fuel rebates and 

dairy subsidies? If you don’t, why don’t you stand up and say so? 

 

Not one person sitting opposite has spoken out against the 

Nielsen report. Not the member for Kelvington-Wadena who’s a 

farm spokesman, has his roots planted firmly in agrarian-type 

socialism — and he’s grown out of that. His grand-dad, he was 

telling me one day, was an author of the original Regina 

Manifesto. And where is that member? Is he manifesting any 

reservations about the Nielsen report? 

 

(2000) 

 

I’m looking at the member, Mr. Speaker, that took Edgar 

Kaeding’s place. If Edgar Kaeding were sitting in this House, I 

can assure you he’d be speaking up on this report and I know that 

there’s going to be a new member from that constituency. He’s 

going to come in from Saltcoats and he’s going to stand up 

four-square against the Mulroney government and the Nielsen 

report. 

 

You members are going to lose your seats. By your silence, 

you’re being condemned. By your silence on the Nielsen report, 

you’re being condemned by the voters of Saskatchewan. 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

295 

 

Do you want to see rail line rehabilitation stopped and do you 

agree with the Nielsen report when it says branch line retention 

is the single biggest impediment to increased grain handling 

efficiency? If you do, be quiet. Support it like you have been 

doing. If you don’t, stand up and be counted. If you disagree with 

these recommendations in the Nielsen report, you should stand 

up in this House and you should stand up publicly on the side of 

Saskatchewan farmers and condemn the federal PCs for even 

imposing or proposing such cuts. 

 

Stand up and say no to the high costs of crop insurance. This 

report recommends a 20 per cent increase in crop insurance 

premiums. I don’t believe we should have them. I’m saying so 

and I expect some of the farm people that are representing 

farmers to stand up and say that these right-wing, reactionary 

policies in the Nielsen report should be condemned. They should 

be fought hard by all people interested in the well-being of prairie 

agriculture. And you should be leading that fight like we will in 

another month’s time. 

 

The next section that I want to address, Mr. Speaker . . . And this 

is going to be a major one down south because as I drive in and I 

look at last year’s stubble crop, it’s very, very thin. The stubble 

that we’re going to leave there for summerfallow is very sparse. 

One pass over it and it will be blacker than what I’ve got my 

seed-bed prepared right now. 

 

So farmers are going to be using an awful lot of chemical this 

spring. I’m planning on putting 5 ounces of 2,4-D on. In fact, 

we’ve got our sprayer ready to go right now because the tansy 

mustard’s about an inch high. And if you let it go much higher 

you can’t get it with a mild application of 2,4-D. 

 

Last year, Saskatchewan farmers spent $230 million on 

chemicals. Mr. Speaker, that’s a big amount of money. That’s a 

big erosion into the farmer’s income. A large part of the $230 

million is mark-up and profits by the chemical industry. Those 

mark-ups and profits are not fair, Mr. Speaker. I maintain that 

they’re getting too much money. 

 

Take Monsanto alone. They sell enough Roundup every 24 days 

to pay their cost of production and their development costs 

around them. And yet they can afford to charge those kind of 

prices. Prices for farm chemicals are sky high because the 

manufacturers are granted 17 years to compete — are granted 17 

years to avoid competition. Excuse me, I want to reword that. I 

said to compete — but to avoid competition because of the patent 

protection that they have for pesticides. We’ve been fighting that. 

 

My colleague in Ottawa, Lorne Nystrom, has introduced a Bill to 

shorten the life of farm chemicals. And what do we hear the 

federal government saying? We’re not only going to leave the 

chemical patent on for 17 years but we’re going to introduce a 

new Bill that pharmaceutical companies can again get that 

17-year patent life like they used to have. When the patent life of 

pharmaceutical chemicals was reduced for 17 years to four years, 

Mr. Speaker, the price of pharmaceutical chemicals dropped by 

over 50 per cent. I feel positive and confident that if the  

same thing would happen in farm chemicals, we could have 

brought those chemicals for less than $100 million, not $230 

million. 

 

And that little article I referred to earlier, that “Million dollar war 

launched against hoppers,” by the government getting involved 

in buying them, Mr. Nollett noted that the cost of control 

chemicals had been reduced from a 1948 $1.48 an acre — can 

you believe that? — to 15 cents an acre in 1959 because of 

government involvement. Those governments cared what it cost 

farmers. They could control grasshoppers for 15 cents an acre 

because of the chemical they bought. And I think that that kind 

of an action on behalf of the government, not one of protecting 

farm chemical companies, but one of having the interests of 

farmers at heart, will bring down the price. 

 

Ninety sixty-nine legislation greatly reduced the price, and I’m 

sure we can do the same thing again this year. With similar 

savings in the pesticide market, Saskatchewan farmers can 

expect to save an average of $1,000 each on their chemical bill if 

this NDP Bill is passed Ottawa. But the federal PCs have already 

indicated that they will oppose a generic pesticide Bill that’s 

being introduced. 

 

I want to turn now for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to commodity 

prices. Everyone knows that grain prices are going to go down as 

already mentioned. Beef and pork prices are at an all-time low. 

Where do we go? Where do we go from here and what should we 

do? Well, I’ve been . . . received some indication that the Bill on 

parity pricing has received approval to go out and have public 

hearings and I think when the committee later this month is going 

to be in Saskatoon for public hearings that our Minister of 

Agriculture should be there himself pressuring the committee 

that is made up of members from right across Canada — they’re 

not just western members — and pressure those members saying 

that this is what farmers need to survive. If you get on side and 

you make your case, and if the Premier makes his case loud and 

clear and strong, we can have parity pricing. Sask Wheat Pool 

recommends that the first 2,000 bushels should be worth about 

$10 apiece. I think that a formula set out where we have parity 

pricing for the . . . a decent two-price system for the products that 

are consumed in Canada, be they wheat, oats, barley, beef, or 

pork — everything that’s used for human consumption should be 

based to cover the cost of production. 

 

And then, if the federal government in its wisdom would accept 

that billion dollars that they’re expecting the farmers to bear, with 

the shored-up price then we could survive. Then farmers could 

survive, and we would have a chance to operate and make a living 

like the farmers were used to doing. 

 

Now the next question I’d like to ask: what really was in this 

budget for agriculture? I’ve listened to some of the rural 

members, and none of them have really spelled out what they saw 

in the budget. Let me just list a few of the areas that are going to 

receive less funding. 

 

Administrative services lost $180,000 and one full-time staff 

member. The extension branch, agricultural   



 

April 1, 1986 

296 

 

extension branch, $310,000 reduction; 10 positions cut from the 

agricultural extension branch — one of the key areas. Here’s a 

government says they want to keep farmers informed. 

 

The livestock branch lost six staff members and $186,000; the 

veterinary branch, two people cut, $20,000. One person goes 

from the economics branch, and $275,000 will be cut from the 

branch’s budget. The Agricultural Implements Board — look for 

it in your Estimates, Mr. Speaker — it’s gone completely. They 

wiped it out. Grants to control pollution from intensive livestock 

operations cut in half — cut in half. 

 

And here’s a government that says they’re going to support 

programs that are going to put special pressure on that 

department by encouraging more livestock intensified 

operations. 

 

Grants under the homestead rebate program cut by $70,000. 

Crown land improvements budget reduced by $184,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the budget, and I look at what they’re 

trying to do to agriculture, I say to myself, it didn’t help. It didn’t 

help to have the Premier as Agriculture minister. 

 

A little magazine that I recommend for your perusal . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Commonwealth? 

 

Mr. Engel: — No, to my neighbour to the east, 

Bengough-Milestone, it’s not the Commonwealth, but it’s as 

good a paper. It’s called the Agrimart. They’re doing an excellent 

job. 

 

There’s a nice story on the front page on “Profiles.” I’m not going 

to go into that one because . . . There’s a saying in German about 

that. Eigener lob stinkt. I used German words before. I’m not 

going to translate that for you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So 

you’ve never heard me do that, Mr. Member from Morse. But 

page 3 . . . The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was on page 

1, but page 3 we had the Minister of Agriculture, a profile, “A 

day with Devine: following the leader.” 

 

And I just want to read into the record why I feel so strongly 

about what’s happening in agriculture, and the kinds of cuts we 

got in agriculture. 

 

Assuming the agriculture portfolio has added to his 

workload. Mr. Devine says that the amount of time he 

spends on agricultural issues varies . . . “I’d say it takes 35 

to 40 percent of my time.” But as Premier he is responsible 

for his party and for the Province. There are seventy (listen 

to this) there are seventy negotiations with the federal 

government now taking place and he is involved in every 

one of them at some time. He notes that his duties are varied 

and says, “You have your constituency work (here’s an 

interesting one, as Premier) your industrial work, the 

ministerial portfolios that you’re tied to. Plus, as Premier, I 

have final decisions on budgets, legislation, and the Speech 

from the Throne to make. 

I think our little cheer-leader messed up when he was looking 

after his own department. These kind of cuts are inexcusable in 

agriculture when a Premier who brags about having a quota book 

and having the interests of farmers at hearts cuts all these 

departments by this kind of money. 

 

This, I think, is the biggest sham. The people are really saying, 

we’ve got to get rid of those guys opposite. Because he has not 

only taken on as part-time role as being Minister of Agriculture 

but he has neglected his cuties. Seventy negotiations going on 

scare me, Mr. Speaker, because I’m fearful that 20 of them are 

out of this book — 20 of them are likely out of this book. And if 

he is giving as much attention to those negotiations as he did to 

the agricultural extension department and some of the other areas 

where we lost the staff that we lost and the funding that we lost 

in agriculture, then I think we’re in for some sorry tough times 

between now and the next election. If he’s reading the polls on a 

daily basis he’s likely going to delay calling the election for 

another year or more. 

 

Today in question period my colleagues raised the issue of the 

Rafferty dam. And I listened to the member for Regina Rosemont 

stand up and lecture away how we’re against some of these major 

projects. And I have before me here a March 29th issue of the 

Saskatchewan Star-Phoenix. The first paragraph, my colleague 

tells me, is the best one. 

 

Politics dictated that Saskatchewan Power consider an 

Estevan location for its proposed new $500-million power 

plant, a high-ranking Conservative official admits. 

 

Who is this high-ranking Conservative official? Well I’ll tell you, 

the next line goes on to say: 

 

George Hill of Estevan, former PC provincial president, 

former Saskatchewan Power Corporation vice-chairman, 

and now chairman of the Souris Basin Development 

Authority, candidly admits he instructed SPC officials to 

look at Estevan, after the Conservative swept to power in 

1982 and he was named a director of the power corporation. 

 

(2015) 

 

Members opposite say he’s a smart guy. Well I want to tell you, 

people in Saskatchewan don’t think it’s so smart. And when 

people in Saskatchewan realize that every time they switch their 

light on since they’ve got this smart guy involved in running Sask 

Power and making the decisions and our electrical rates have 

gone up, two major increases. 

 

And now they look at this, and say that, we used political 

pressure, and “Politics dictated that Saskatchewan Power 

consider an Estevan location for its new proposed $500-million 

power plant.” I say that’s a sham, Mr. Speaker. That’s a sham. 

 

And “The Shand project, an outgrowth of PC victory”; 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

297 

 

“Location born of politics,” says the headline on Rafferty dam in 

the Saturday Star-Phoenix issue. 

 

Three months later a prominent Conservative — George 

Hill of Estevan — was appointed to the board of directors 

(of Saskatchewan Power Corporation) . . . and at just his 

second meeting with SPC management they had been told 

to investigate the possibility of building the next major 

power plant in Devine’s constituency . . . 

 

That’s what they were told at his second meeting he went to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you’re wondering why we’re 

complaining, why we’re complaining about, like my farmer 

friend called then, the hoppers in pin-striped suits running this 

country, those are some of the reasons. 

 

I don’t like what George Hill personally has to gain managing 

this project. I don’t like what Peter Pocklington has to line his 

pocket with, doing the meat packing plant in North Battleford. I 

don’t like giving away the pulp-mill with nothing down, using 

my money to buy it, and not having to pay for it if it doesn’t make 

a profit. Those kind of deals are a scam. 

 

Those kind of deals should be investigated, and the perpetrators 

of those deals should be behind bars. Those kind of deals, the 

people that made it shouldn’t be allowed to walk freely in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. I think we’ve had enough of this kind of 

government. I think we’ve had enough deals like Pioneer Trust, 

deals like the three I just mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after our next nominating meeting tomorrow night 

we have a full slate of candidates in the field. Forty of them are 

brand-new members — enthused and ready to go to war with this 

government that so blatantly uses their power. 

 

Our candidates are out there. The Premier has his reputation out 

there. The CBC broadcast, the Saturday post, have indicted what 

he’s like. We have our team. We are ready. We will not support 

a budget that drives up the deficit. 

 

We’re saying to you, Mr. Speaker: get your Premier to call an 

election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly 

an honour and a privilege to rise this evening to join in this debate 

on the budget. 

 

And I would like to compliment my colleague, the Minister of 

Finance, on an excellent job. I think the word used by my 

colleague from Yorkton was “responsible.” I think it is indeed a 

responsible budget that was brought down last week, and it’s 

certainly my pleasure to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, before I get into  

my remarks on that, I would like to take the opportunity, since 

it’s the first I’ve had, to congratulate some of the members of my 

caucus on the rather eloquent addresses that they’ve presented in 

their throne speech debate in this legislature recently. I think that 

many members did an exceptional job. I think of the present 

member from Regina North, the future member from Regina 

South in his movement of the throne speech, an excellent job. 

And I think as well, and I’d like to join with many others who 

have congratulated my colleague from Rosthern on the excellent 

speech that he gave during that debate. I think in terms of content, 

delivery, and I think most importantly, sincerity, Mr. Speaker, it 

was a model that many of us when speaking in this Assembly 

could use. 

 

And I think that when we compare that the low-level mud raking 

that we’ve just heard from the squealing member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and when you compare the two, I think 

there is certainly no comparison. And I would commend the style 

of my friend from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s rather ironic 

that neither of these two members will be returning. My friend 

from Rosthern has chosen to retire after a very distinguished 

career and the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and one Mr. 

Bill Fancourt will see to it that we don’t have to listen to much 

more of that that we just were embarrassed with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, during the course of the 

talk, I’d like to make a few remarks that relate to my portfolios 

in the provincial cabinet and as well, some general remarks about 

my constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Since being appointed the Minister of Tourism and Small 

Business in December, I’ve spent a great deal of time becoming 

familiar with the many issues and concerns of Saskatchewan 

business people and, in fact, we have held meetings with 30 

different business groups across this province over the past few 

weeks. And I would like to once again compliment and thank my 

predecessor, the member from Regina North and future member 

from Regina South, for the help he has given me in the time that 

I’ve come to this portfolio. I think the work that he did in the time 

that he had the portfolio in laying the groundwork for this 

department has clearly been something that I certainly appreciate 

and I think the business community do. 

 

Keeping in close touch with small-business concerns in 

Saskatchewan through the use of a consultation process is a 

concept that we on this side of the floor firmly believe in and, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that it has served us well. Since 1982, we 

have made great strides in developing a rapport between small 

business and government, and I think that the budget that we 

heard last week clearly builds on these strengths. 

 

Prior to 1982, Mr. Speaker, such a working relationship simply 

did not exist and small-business operators were understandably 

disenchanted with the attitude of the NDP government toward 

private enterprise. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

previous administration’s inability to deal with the issues facing 

the  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

298 

 

business community was and in fact continues to be rooted in a 

narrow ideological attitude that discourages individual initiative 

and in fact discourages the pursuit of profit. 

 

What we had, Mr. Speaker, was one of the most important sectors 

of the Saskatchewan economy without — absolutely without — 

any real representation in government, certainly at the cabinet 

table. And it was this grave deficiency that led to the creation of 

the Department of Tourism and Small Business in 1983. 

 

One of the first things that my colleague in that department did 

when the department was created was to meet and consult with 

business people from all across Saskatchewan. And I know that 

many of the suggestions that were received in those early 

meetings have since become part of the programming that is 

offered by the department today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the positive reaction that we have heard 

across the province to the budget from small-business people 

speaks for itself, and I’d like to spend just a few moments 

discussing some of the initiatives that were taken in the budget, 

recognizing that small business, that the small-business sector is 

our most valuable source in terms of job creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should emphasize here that it is estimated that in 

the next decade, 80 per cent of the new jobs in Canada will be 

created by small business. When you consider that the significant 

element of our job creation package has to do with small 

business, many of the initiatives can be clearly understood. 

 

In the budget, we introduced a two-year corporate tax holiday for 

new small businesses. Clearly this program is designed to 

improve the financial stability and the cash flow position of new 

ventures during that critical start-up period. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, one of the major issues facing the 

small-business community today is the tax burden, and in 

particular, the municipal business tax. As was mentioned in the 

budget, the town of Lafleche has taken a major initiative by 

removing the business tax. And we know that several other 

communities are looking at that concept. 

 

This tax has proven to be an onerous and in some cases disastrous 

burden for many small firms. And I think it’s worthwhile to 

investigate how this tax has emerged in this province as an issue. 

Through a province-wide reassessment that was introduced by 

the previous New Democratic government, a strategy was put in 

place that was clearly there to shift an ever-increasing tax load to 

the business community. There is absolutely no question that the 

reassessment proposals that they put in place was to move the tax 

burden to the business sector. That was their intent, Mr. Speaker, 

and I know that the business community finds it somewhat 

contradictory now to hear that the opposition has suddenly 

discovered that this particular tax has some element of inequality 

in it and is prepared to take steps. 

 

It’s unfortunate that we haven’t had sufficient time to correct all 

the mistakes of the previous administration,  

but in the coming months we will continue to work towards a 

resolution of the business tax issue. This, Mr. Speaker, could only 

be done in full consultation with the various groups that have a 

vested interest. In these I would include the business community, 

the municipalities, organizations such as SUMA, and others. 

 

I will assure the members of this Assembly and the business 

community of Saskatchewan that this government is committed 

to finding a fair and equitable solution that will penalize either 

certain communities or the business group, and we will work 

with the communities and the business sector towards that 

resolution. 

 

One of the most popular components of our small-business 

strategy has been the concept of interest rate relief. Since the 

introduction of the small business interest reduction program last 

year, over 5,000 firms have been registered and these firms have 

realized a savings in the range of $1 million. 

 

The budget builds on the success of the program by lowering the 

interest rate ceiling to 8 per cent and by doubling the maximum 

loan to $100,000. As well we have expanded the eligibility 

requirements to include automobile and farm implement dealers 

and all of those particular items were things that were raised in 

discussion with business people on our 30 community tour that 

we just completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 there was no interest rate relief for small 

business and there was no help for small-home owners who were 

facing sky-rocketing mortgages. In fact, Mr. Speaker, according 

to the government of the day, the government that was manned 

by the members opposite, ideas such as interest rate protection 

were irresponsible. Suddenly these concepts have become sound 

policies, and I note their prominence in the platform that is being 

developed by the opposition. 

 

As other members have said, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the NDP 

party is a party that lacks direction. It’s clearly a party without 

ideas, and they think they can fool the public by adopting 

Progressive Conservative policies. I know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

public will see through this sudden repentance and will judge the 

NDP on their inaction and disregard for the ordinary people of 

this province while they were in government. 

 

I think it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to share with the Assembly 

a couple reactions I have had to the proposals put forward by the 

members of the opposition. One of my constituents phoned and 

reminded me of the popular Sherlock Holmes movie which 

played a number of years ago, referred to as The 

Seven-Per-Cent-Solution. He indicated that in his mind the new 

NDP proposal was very much like The Seven-Per-Cent-Solution. 

In fact, he called it cocaine-based fiscal policy. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest that that might be where that policy will 

take them. 

 

However, an even more interesting comment was a comment I 

received from a female constituent who phoned me and 

expressed some distrust of the proposals put forward. She said 

whenever the NDP government 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

299 

 

introduced a program that was designed to help home owners or 

anyone else, by the time you sorted through all the regulations 

and the criteria, you found that very few people were eligible. 

And she was concerned that that would happen as well. 

 

(2030) 

 

But I thought the most telling comment she made had to do with 

her concept of the Leader of the Opposition at the time that he 

made his announcement in Saskatoon. She indicated that no one 

in this province ever suggested that the Leader of the Opposition 

was a man of vision. He never demonstrated any great vision for 

the future of this province. However she indicated that he had 

managed to maintain a certain air of statesmanship that set him 

apart, and she said she was surprised to see him, I think her word 

was, “the pathetic shell he had become,” basically a common 

huckster trying to convince people that this program they had 

introduced would not cost anything. A fact that he, himself 

clearly didn’t believe that any thinking person wasn’t prepared to 

believe, and she felt that it was rather deplorable that he had sunk 

to that level since he had been, at one time, somebody out of a 

certain degree of respect in this province. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that the program has been discussed by the members of the 

media. I think most people, who think about it, understand 

exactly where this has come from. 

 

Getting back to the budget, Mr. Speaker, since 1982 our 

Progressive Conservative government has introduced many 

initiatives that are designed to encouraged growth and 

diversification of the Saskatchewan economy, and in all these 

things the emphasis has been on small business. The venture 

capital program is one very clear example of such a program. By 

using a tax credit, we have encourage the creation of 52 venture 

capital corporations in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, a brand-new 

concept and 52 brand-new corporations have strung up. We have 

an investment pool of over $32 million that is available to be 

invested as equity in eligible firms. 

 

The budget more actively encourages agricultural enterprises and 

removes restrictions on investments in retail and service related 

companies in communities of up to 20,000 population. The 

restrictions previously applied to centres of over 5,000, so that 

these changes will encourage new ventures in many large towns 

and in smaller cities in the province of Saskatchewan. And once 

again, this was a message that came through very clearly from 

the people who we visited on our tour around the province 

meeting with chambers of commerce and boards of trades and 

business groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could cite one example of the impact of venture 

capital on smaller communities. The town of Watrous has formed 

a venture capital corporation for the purpose of constructing a 

new mineral pool at Manitou Beach. We see this as an important 

tourist project for both the community of Watrous and for the 

province as a whole, and I think it points out how venture capital 

is clearly able to assist, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, in the 

promotion of economic development. 

 

We also believe, Mr. Speaker, that labour organizations have a 

vital role to play in Saskatchewan’s economic  

development and that union members can do much to help 

Saskatchewan grow. The budget proposes the establishment of 

labour venture capital corporations to encourage trade unions to 

create jobs by channelling investment to small- and 

medium-sized business. Individual union members will receive 

provincial tax credits equal to 20 per cent of the cost of their 

investment, and when you couple that with the federal programs, 

the result will be a 40 per cent tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have noted and I’ll use the term “luke warm” 

response to this concept from some union leaders, and I question 

whether this is an accurate reading of the views of the rank and 

file union members. I would urge the members opposite to 

exercise their considerable influence on such individuals as 

Nadine Hunt and Larry Brown, and encourage them to really 

access the merits of this very worthwhile venture, because I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a suggestion, a concept, and a 

proposal brought forward from this budget that can have 

significant impact on economic development in this province, 

and it can be a very worthwhile return to the labour members who 

would choose to take part in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have time in this forum to list all of our 

initiatives in support of small business over the past four years, 

but clearly we have had a great deal of success. For example, 

we’ve established a network of business resource centres across 

the province, because small-business operators told us that they 

needed access to valuable and relevant information and advice. 

Since these centres have been established, Mr. Speaker, inquiries 

have more than doubled to the point where now we are running 

at around 20,000 business inquiries annually at these business 

resource centres. 

 

And I’m proud to indicate, as my colleague indicated in the 

budget speech, that we will shortly be releasing details on an 

entrepreneurial training program. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

that spirit of entrepreneurship is out there — that the desire to 

own your own business, to get into business on your own, is, in 

fact, very strong in this province as it is across North America. 

And it’s something that we believe our department should be 

providing some information, and we will be establishing that 

program and making the details known very shortly. 

 

I could make many comments and provide you with many 

statistics about the effect that our programs have had on business 

women. Mr. Speaker, I will give you only one statistic, however. 

It’s interesting to note that since this government came to power 

in Saskatchewan, we have had a 30 per cent increase — 30 per 

cent increase — in the number of self-employed women in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I think that demonstrates very 

clearly that women are anxious to get into business. Statistics 

prove that they are very competent business people, and we will 

continue to work with women who are interested in getting into 

the business world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also encouraged economic growth in 

smaller centres throughout the province through the community 

economic development program. Presently there are 53 

communities enrolled in this program. And this program is 

helping to attract new businesses; it’s helping to attract a variety 

of professional services to  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

300 

 

these communities and to participating towns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list of programs goes on. And at this time I’d 

like to turn my attention for a few moments to the tourism sector, 

where again we have made tremendous strides since the election 

of 1982. 

 

It’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that predictions indicate that 

by the year 2000 tourism will be the world’s number one 

industry, and it will be the largest single employer on the North 

American continent. Those are not new indications; this has been 

well-known for quite some time. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, despite the rapid growth in this sector, 

there was virtually no emphasis on tourism when this 

government came to office in 1982. The previous government 

had built the walls around this province so high that they simply 

refused to consider the benefits that tourism could have in this 

province. Despite the fact that this industry is going to be the 

largest single industry in the world in a matter of 14 short years, 

there was no emphasis whatsoever. 

 

By incorporating the components of tourism and small business 

into one department, we took the first step towards capturing 

Saskatchewan’s share of those tourist dollars. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, tourism is a billion dollar industry in this 

province, and most certainly it is one that cannot be overlooked. 

It has created over 2,000 jobs a year over the last half decade. It 

is currently providing direct and indirect employment for about 

32,000 people. And, Mr. Speaker, in the words of the Premier, 

when you look at tourism there is certainly so much more we can 

be. 

 

To stimulate the growth of this industry, the Department of 

Tourism and Small Business has stepped up its support for 

tourism in three primary areas: tourism marketing, tourism 

development, and travel information services. To improve the 

level of travel information we provide, attractive new visitor 

information centres are being constructed in key locations in the 

province. This spring new centres will open at Fleming, 

Langenburg, and Maple Creek. 

 

And I see the member from Regina Centre is now with us this 

evening. Last year in the House he had some trouble wondering 

why we would have information centres at Langenburg and 

Fleming, and I could reiterate the geography lesson my friend 

from Meadow Lake gave him, but I won’t bother at this time. 

 

Tourism and Small Business has also expanded its toll free, travel 

inquiry telephone service from across Saskatchewan through all 

of Canada and to the continental U.S.A. The result has been a 

dramatic increase in telephone inquiries to the toll free number. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, to stimulate tourism development within 

the province, the Department provides technical advice to 

developers and helps them through the sometimes complicated 

development process. 

 

Financial assistance is also available through the  

Canada-Saskatchewan Tourism Agreement, which was signed 

by my colleague, the member from Regina North, in November 

of 1984. To date under this program, Mr. Speaker, 16 projects 

have been approved for assistance through the agreement, 

totalling approximately $2.7 million. A further 15 projects, 

representing potential incentive contributions of over $4 million, 

are now under review. 

 

To promote Saskatchewan as a tourist destination, the 

department produced a new tourism film entitled Sun Spirit 

Saskatchewan. This was the first film that had been produced in 

this province in over 12 years, Mr. Speaker, a need that simply 

had to be filled, and again something that was completely 

overlooked by the previous government. 

 

Since this film’s premiere in Regina last July, Sun Spirit has won 

awards at major film festivals here in Saskatchewan and in 

competitions in Michigan and in California. What these honours 

tell us is that we in this province can compete with the best in the 

world, and it’s about time that we began using these talents for 

our own benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year from February to May, the Department 

implemented Saskatchewan’s first extensive out-of-province 

advertising campaigns. They were centred in Ontario and 

Alberta, and in Montana, North Dakota and Minnesota. As a 

result of advertising in these markets, we estimate a net benefit 

of $2.9 million was realized last year for the province through 

increased tourism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my office today I just received two magazines 

that I think they contain in them ads that will make, I think, most 

people in Saskatchewan extremely proud. In the Reader’s Digest 

we see a full page ad emphasizing Saskatchewan, “We’d love to 

have you.” It’s directed at people all across the province. It shows 

some of the scenery we have. And as well, Mr. Speaker, in 

Maclean’s we have a two page, half across the bottom with some 

scenes of the province, and again the basic information with 

some toll free number. And, Mr. Speaker, this type of 

advertising, which had been completely overlooked, is paying 

tremendous dividends for the province. And as I indicated, 

almost $3 million flowed into this province last year directly 

because of this expenditure of a few thousand dollars of 

advertising outside our borders. 

 

Now this year from January through May, the department is 

attending nine U.S. and seven Canadian sport and travel shows. 

And the department is also attending market-places to promote 

group touring and business travel and will continue to advertise 

our tourist attractions in major markets for this province. In 

addition we are gearing up for a major tourist year in 

Saskatchewan resulting from Expo ’86 traffic and have 

developed our promotional strategies accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that bears a little further comment. It is 

estimated that in 1986 as a result of families and individuals 

travelling to and from Expo, we will see probably in the area of 

a quarter of a million, 240 or 250,000 trips across this province, 

and we see that as a  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

301 

 

tremendous opportunity, a tremendous challenge. 

 

We believe our role as a department is to present information, to 

do things to encourage these people to extend their stay in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we have challenged the private 

sector, the tourism industry to provide the friendly service, the 

inviting facilities, and the many attractions that we have here, so 

that when people leave our province, they will return home and 

talk about Saskatchewan and will encourage their friends to come 

and will be, in fact, interested in coming back. And I think 1986 

is going to be a tremendously exciting year, and is a basic 

opportunity that we have to access, as far as tourism is concerned. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, with the things we are doing, we are 

reaching more potential visitors than ever before, and I think 

again it’s safe to say that these efforts are paying dividends. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to my small-business portfolio, I am 

pleased to serve as minister responsible for the Employment 

Development Agency, and I think it’s safe to say that I’m also 

very proud of the results that we have achieved in tackling the 

jobs issues. 

 

In the past year alone, Mr. Speaker, in the past year, 17,0000 new 

jobs were created in Saskatchewan. Seventeen thousand new jobs 

in the province. This was accomplished in spite of poor resource 

markets, in spite of a crisis in agriculture, and I believe that it 

speaks well of our efforts to diversify the Saskatchewan 

economy. Furthermore, our performance stacks up extremely 

well against the results achieved by the NDP administration in its 

last term in office. For example, Mr. Speaker, if we take a few 

comparative numbers, in the last 44 months of the NDP 

government — which would be October 1978 to May of 1982 — 

19,000 new jobs were created in the province. By comparison, in 

the first 44 months of a Progressive Conservative government, 

Mr. Speaker — which would be May of ’82 to January of ’86 — 

35,000 new jobs were created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, a 

comparable amount of time — our first 44 months in office, their 

last 44 months in office — under their administration 19,000 new 

jobs created, under ours 35,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker, I think clearly 

indicating which party has the capacity to work with the private 

sector, to work with other governments, particularly the federal 

government, and to increase the jobs that are available for the 

people here in the province. 

 

If you take these same time periods, we find that in those periods, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan under the NDP recorded the lowest 

jobless rate of the provinces in Canada in only 12 of those 44 

months, while we have led the nation with the lowest 

unemployment rate in 36 of the 44 months. And again I think that 

statistic clearly indicates which party is capable of working in a 

co-operative manner with the groups that are in fact going to 

create the jobs in this province. 

Recognizing the importance of co-ordinating our approach to the 

jobs issue, we created the five-year $600 million employment 

development fund in 1985. Approximately $125 million will be 

provided through the fund for job creation and training programs 

this year. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure recently of 

announcing the details of two programs that are administered by 

the employment development fund which place particular 

emphasis on the youth of Saskatchewan. 

 

In mid-Marc, I announced the details of the Opportunities ’86 

program which is our summer employment program for students 

who attend universities, technical schools, or high schools. 

We’ve committed $8.5 million to the program which is now in 

its fourth year. Since its inception, Mr. Speaker, the 

Opportunities program has helped to facilitate 17,500 summer 

jobs for summer students. And we estimate that this year this job 

program will create about 8,500 jobs for the students of our 

province. 

 

Another employment development fund that is administered by 

our department, which commences today, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Saskatchewan Access youth employment program; $3.25 million 

dollars has been earmarked under Access youth for the coming 

fiscal year. It’s aimed at creating employment opportunities for 

those in the age category of 16 to 24 years old. And I think there 

is no doubt that in Saskatchewan, all across Canada, probably 

North America, this age group is the one group that we have to 

direct our attentions to in order to solve the long-term job 

problems that these people will face. 

 

To date, Mr. Speaker, Access youth has created some 2,300 jobs 

for young people. And the important statistics that we’re finding 

is that approximately 75 per cent of the employers who access 

this program intend to keep the employee on after the wage 

subsidy ends. And Mr. Speaker, I think, when we take a look at 

the employment development program of this government, at the 

things that we have been able to accomplish and compare them 

to what has happened in the past, it becomes clear that this party 

has the capacity to provide the opportunities that the people of 

this province need in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of creating opportunities, many of my 

colleagues have indicated the positions that have been taken by 

the members opposite. And I think the member of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, in his address, again reiterated their 

position on many of the major projects that have recently been 

announced in this province and which will have such significant 

— first of all construction employment, and secondly permanent 

employment. 

 

The opposition have stated that they are clearly against the 

Rafferty dam and power station near Estevan. They have 

indicated their opposition to the Gainers plant at North 

Battleford. They’ve also indicated that they’re against the sale of 

PAPCO, and the construction of the paper plant in Prince Albert. 

 

And I think it’s fair that we, and everyone else in this province, 

can only conclude that if they ever became government, that they 

would obviously halt these very worthwhile ventures. And while 

I don’t have all the  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

302 

 

numbers at my disposal, we’re obviously talking about thousands 

of jobs, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP is prepared to pass up and 

seem to think that we don’t need. And I think the key word with 

those jobs is opportunities, and that’s what the people of this 

province are looking for. 

 

At the same time, the Leader of the Opposition claims that he’s 

in favour of the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader, and I don’t 

know who could disagree with that particular statement. 

However, then, in the next breath, he will state that it’s his 

intention to turn up the taxes on the oil industry — this during an 

international oil crisis. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Leader of the 

Opposition is prepared to explain how the upgrader could 

possibly come to pass under the circumstances that he proposes 

to put in place. And I would challenge him to state his position 

on oil royalties and on the upgrader to the people of Lloydminster 

who are very anxious to hear what the position is. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also said that 

he will get more revenue from the potash industry. He knows that 

this industry is facing major difficulties, and I believe that kind 

of attitude does not bode well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 

thousands of potash workers who work in that important industry 

in this province. 

 

Furthermore, I would point to the policy of the opposition that 

they would dismantle or, as the Leader of the Opposition would 

put it, “phase out” the uranium industry. So we could again forget 

the thousands of jobs that are there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these important projects are in fact 

cancelled, are in fact shut down, and our resource enterprises are 

shut down, I have to ask, where will the jobs, where will the 

opportunities in this province come from? I don’t believe that the 

people of this province want to return to opportunities only 

through Crown corporations, and I believe, as I’ve indicated, that 

we have clearly indicated we have the capacity to work with the 

private sector, with other governments, to create the jobs in this 

province that are needed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I’d like to turn my attention to 

some of the issues and some of the initiatives that we have taken 

in respect to the city of Saskatoon, and more precisely, my 

constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. The Sutherland riding, 

both in terms of residential growth and in terms of new 

businesses, is one of the most dynamic areas in that city today. 

I’ve been pleased over the past four years to welcome a great 

number of new constituents to the Forest Grove subdivision, and 

I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they’re optimistic about the 

future, given Saskatchewan’s buoyant economy. 

 

Such optimism was not evident when I first began visiting with 

people in Saskatoon Sutherland in 1982. At that time, many home 

owners in Sutherland, in fact all across Saskatchewan, were in 

real danger of losing their homes. But the NDP government of 

the day said families would simply have to live with mortgage 

rates of 20 per cent, that there was literally nothing that they 

could do. We, as Progressive Conservatives, offered a solution, 

and thousands of home owners were helped through very  

difficult times and with a very real problem. 

 

The NDP also said that we would have to live with steadily 

increasing gasoline prices, and also a hefty —and I say hefty — 

provincial gasoline tax. Again we offered a solution and, as the 

budget points out, the average family in Saskatchewan has saved 

over $1,000 since we removed the gas tax in this province. 

 

And I know that many of my constituents are pleased at the 

healthy, overall growth that has taken place in Saskatoon in 

recent years and with some of the new projects that have been 

launched. For example, Mr. Speaker, I know that the people in 

Sutherland, and in fact all of Saskatoon, are excited about the 

new $78 million college of agriculture building that is to be 

constructed on the university campus. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, they are excited about the new 

nursing home construction that is going on in the city — 

construction that is ending the seven-year moratorium that was 

placed on nursing home construction in this province by the 

NDP. They are also excited about the construction that is going 

on at St. Paul’s, at University Hospital, the cancer clinic that is 

being constructed, as well as the plans for a new City Hospital. 

 

Having said that, I’m sure that we will hear the opposition rail on 

about how they would have done the same thing. Mr. Speaker, I 

think we’ve established a definite “me too” pattern as far as the 

opposition is concerned. And it says that if Progressive 

Conservative initiatives prove popular, they’ll be among the first 

ones to jump on the bandwagon and try to indicate that they 

would carry out the same thing. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I think people will look at their record 

over that 11 or 12 years that they were in government, when the 

majority of the members from Saskatoon in fact sat on their 

benches, and the only thing we have in the city to show for it is 

the Sturdy Stone building in downtown Saskatoon. But, Mr. 

Speaker, where does the opposition really stand on major projects 

that will benefit Saskatchewan now and in the future? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will know that I have been a strong 

advocate of the need for a new multi-purpose facility to replace 

the existing Saskatoon arena. Notwithstanding the substantial 

delays that have confronted this project, I am confident that the 

concept is indeed supported by a vast majority of Saskatoon 

residents. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has been fascinating to watch 

members of the NDP teeter back and forth on this issue and then 

manage to come down squarely on the fence. I believe that the 

need for such a facility was evident throughout the 11 years that 

the previous administration was in office, and as my colleague, 

the Minister of Finance, indicated, it’s a need that’s probably 

equivalent to the need for decent drinking water in Regina. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this government will deal with both of those crying 

needs. And even today, even today the NDP, through their 

representatives in the city of Saskatoon have taken what I will 

call a “wait and see” attitude. We believe that we have offered a 

solution through a major funding commitment for the project, 

and I am confident that Saskatoon will indeed take up the  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

303 

 

challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to very briefly mention a few of the positive 

indicators that point to the strength of the Saskatoon economy. 

The city is gearing up for what will undoubtedly be its greatest 

year in terms of construction. I indicate it’s going to be a record 

year in construction in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Saskatoon is home to 30 of Saskatchewan’s 52 venture capital 

corporations, and an investment pool in excess of $25 million 

exists in Saskatoon for an equity investment in the province’s 

small businesses. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon, as you are well aware, is the 

centre of advanced technology in Saskatchewan, with 49 per cent 

of the province’s high-tech companies. To help meet the needs 

of this rapidly growing sector, the Department of Science and 

Technology will be relocating the majority of its operations to 

Saskatoon in the coming months. The high-tech community in 

Saskatoon has been further enhanced by the recent 

announcement that Sed Systems will construct a new $11 million 

head office and facility in Saskatoon near the university. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as an aside, I take a certain amount of pride in 

the fact that I was the minister responsible at the time that the 

water Crown decided to move to Moose Jaw. And I certainly 

commend my friend and colleague, the member from Melville, 

on the fact that crop insurance will be moving to Melville, 

something that is long overdue in this province in terms of some 

decentralization of government. As well, my colleague from 

Swift Current, on the fact that the Ag Credit Corporation will be 

moving to Swift Current. And I believe that the majority of the 

people in this province clearly support those initiatives, and I 

think they’re long, long overdue. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve indicated just a few examples, and I 

think one needs only to look around in Saskatoon to see the rapid 

growth that has taken place in the last four years in new 

businesses. I think of the north end of Saskatoon and the southern 

business district as clear examples; many expansions in the retail 

sector. All of these things are signs of a healthy economy. And 

I’m sure that the city is very excited about the fact that in 1989 

we’ll be hosting the Canada Summer Games. And I know that, 

as usual, the entire community will get behind that tremendous 

endeavour in the spirit that they have undertaken so many others. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe that my constituents in 

Sutherland and College Park and Forest Grove are pleased with 

the record of this government and the major points that we 

addressed in the provincial budget. They are certainly pleased 

that the sales tax has been removed from clothing. And they’re 

supportive of the responsible measures, and I emphasize the word 

responsible measures, that we’ve introduced to stimulate new 

housing construction. The measures that we’ve indicated, again 

very responsible measures to encourage small business because 

we clearly believe that small  

business is the mechanism that has to be used to create jobs and 

opportunity in this province. I believe that all things, Mr. 

Speaker, will help the Saskatchewan economy to grow and to 

flourish and continue into the future. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously I am very proud to support 

this budget that was presented last week by my colleague, the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy, Deputy Speaker, it always seems that 

the opposition has something to say about my physical size when 

I rise in my chair, at least — rise from my chair — at least I’m 

not compared as being a mental midget, like some of my 

colleagues across — opposite. 

 

But I am extremely proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to rise in this 

Assembly tonight to join in the debate on the dynamic budget 

that was presented in this House last week by the Minister of 

Finance, and I’m particularly delighted to reinforce the remarks 

of our Minister of Tourism and Small Business. 

 

Opportunity and protection; those are the keywords that the 

budget brings to the people of Saskatchewan. Opportunity, by 

providing further stimulation for business and industry to create 

new economic opportunities and even more jobs for our citizens. 

Protection, by providing additional protection for individuals, 

families, and our social institutions. This budget of your 

Progressive Conservative Government recognizes, as we have 

since we assumed office in 1982, the importance of protecting 

Saskatchewan residents and enhancing the quality of life in our 

province. 

 

Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to lead off by 

commenting on the opportunities provided in the budget, the 

opportunities for business and industry to stimulate our economy 

and thereby create those more needed jobs for our people. 

 

But first, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give you some factual 

information on the Saskatchewan flat tax rate income tax and also 

explain the truth to the members opposite. The flat rate tax is an 

attempt by Saskatchewan to return to an income tax system that, 

number one, is simple to understand and to comply with; and 

secondly, is fair to the people of all income groups; and third, 

ensures that no one escapes paying his fair share. And that’s true, 

and you know it. The flat rate tax is being levied at a rate of 1 per 

cent on an individual’s net income. This net income is defined 

under the Canadian Income Tax Act. It is total income from all 

sources, but total income minus the following deductions: CPP 

contributions, UIC premiums, RPP contributions, RRSP 

contributions, RHOSP contributions; union dues are deductible, 

tuition fees, child care expenses, allowable business investment 

expenses, index security investment plan losses. Alimony 

payments are deducted. Moving expenses and other items are 

also deductible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a means to protect low and middle income 

earners from a possible tax increase resulting from the flat tax, 

the basic low income reduction has been  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

304 

 

increased to $260 for 1986, and the result has been almost a total 

elimination of any tax increase resulting from the flat tax for tax 

filers earning up to $10,000 annually. 

 

For example, approximately 216,000 taxpayers — about 

one-third — have an income under $10,000. Their income tax 

actually decreased $3. When you add approximately another 

89,000 taxpayers, which now, totally combined, represents over 

one-half of the taxpayers, and include from $10,000 to $14,999, 

their income tax for the year goes up approximately $8 for the 

year. Now we hear the opposition crying that we don’t get the big 

people, the high earners from this. That is not true. Taxpayers 

having an income of between 50 and $100,000, as a result of this 

flat tax, will now be obligated to pay an additional $505. So the 

low income earner, in fact, minus $3; the middle one, 

approximately an $8 increase annually, while the high taxpayer, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, pays an additional $505. And that’s the 

truth, for the members opposite. 

 

Meanwhile, let’s not forget the personal income tax rate 

reduction. Effective July 1, 1985, the Saskatchewan personal 

income tax rate was reduced by 1 per cent, and this reduction is 

intended to partially offset the impact of the flat tax. And I could 

supply further information to enlighten the members opposite 

and the people, but I would like to return, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to the budget. 

 

The initiatives to support small business contained in this budget 

are the strongest evidence yet of this government’s commitment 

to the private sector of this province as the engine of economic 

development. These measures include: a two-year corporate tax 

holiday for new small businesses; major changes to the small 

business interest reduction program, including the writing down 

of interest to 8 per cent from nine and five-eighths; expansion of 

the venture capital program; extension of the industrial incentive 

program for an additional year. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know when one speaks of jobs, the 

only kind of jobs that the members opposite are familiar with 

creating are those of the public payroll of provincial government 

departments and Crown corporations. That’s the only way they 

know to create jobs, and they sure put their methods into practice 

as they padded the employee lists of government departments 

and Crowns during their 11 years in office. That’s not the 

philosophy of those of us on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and indeed of most of the people of this province. 

 

Since we assumed office four years ago, we have worked — and 

with some success, I might add — to restrain the size of 

government and the number of employees on the public payroll. 

And I can assure the members opposite there is overwhelming 

support from the public right across the province for our efforts 

in this regard. 

 

The new measures that I mentioned, along with others, will help 

to stimulate the economy and create many, many more jobs for 

our citizens. On this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

look upon small business as the driving force that stimulates our 

economy. Most of the new jobs in this province are created by 

small  

business enterprises; that’s why we’re introducing yet more 

initiatives to help small businesses grow and to help small 

business prosper. 

 

In June of 1984 a survey showed that over 50 per cent of those 

employed in the commercial sector worked in businesses with 49 

employees or less — small businesses. Also there were 98,000 

people employed in firms with 49 employees or less, representing 

almost a quarter of the total employed labour force. Almost 

one-third of the total commercial jobs in 1984 came from firms 

that did not exist in 1976. Of these new jobs in the province 

nearly 60 per cent were with firms of 49 employees or less, and 

almost one-half were with firms of 19 employees or less. That’s 

where the new jobs are, in small business. And that’s why this 

budget has provided even more initiatives to stimulate small 

business. 

 

The record of this government in job creation and employment is 

one of the best in all of Canada. Since 1982 Saskatchewan has 

had the lowest or second lowest average annual unemployment 

rate in the country, well below the national average. This summer 

60,000 more people will be working in Saskatchewan than were 

working when we took office — 60,000 more. A total of 17,000 

jobs were created during the last year alone, and we expect to 

create another 20,000 jobs in the coming year. 

 

The opposition benches and their socialist friends want to call 

this only a budget for business and industry. Sure, we know these 

measures will help business and industry in Saskatchewan to 

grow and expand, but that’s what we want for the business 

community of our province. But in the process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they’ll be providing more jobs for our citizens, and 

that’s the point that the opposition misses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The opposition doesn’t appear bright enough to realize that the 

more we can stimulate business, the more we stimulate industry, 

the more opportunities we can provide that sector with to grow 

and to expand, the more employment that can be generated for 

the people of our province. 

 

Let’s review briefly some of the new initiatives supporting small 

business. The small business interest reduction program. Interest 

rates on loans will now be written down to 8 per cent from nine 

and five-eighths. And car and farm equipment dealerships have 

also been added as businesses eligible for benefits. Also, the limit 

on loan amounts — that has been increased to $100,000 from 

$50,000. 

 

The expanded venture capital program. That program introduced 

a redirect savings of Saskatchewan residents into equity capital 

for small businesses has really taken off. We now have 52 

venture capital corporations with a combined investment of $32 

million, providing funding for new and for expanding businesses. 

 

In the new budget, the venture capital program has been 

expanded. It will now include retail and service industries in 

communities up to 20,000 people, from the original limit of 5,000 

in population, and it will be made more accessible to agricultural 

enterprises. In other words, it  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

305 

 

will now be able to provide funding for even more Saskatchewan 

businesses. 

 

(2115) 

 

The two-year corporate tax holiday for new small businesses 

gives much needed assistance to new enterprises during their 

critical start-up times. For the information of the opposition 

benches, there’s been an increase of approximately 4,000 small 

businesses since we assumed office. 

 

The new budget will extend the industrial incentive program for 

another year. Under this program, one-time payments of $7,500 

are made for each new permanent job created by manufacturing 

or processing firms. For the information of the members 

opposite, this is the incentive Gainers qualified under — that 

program, and no other. To date, this program has encouraged 

more than 300 firms to expand, creating 3,500 new permanent 

jobs. 

 

For the rural areas, financial assistance will be given to 

municipalities to establish community economic development 

corporations to stimulate economic development and jobs in the 

rural area. Unlike the prior administration, which was letting our 

rural communities slowly become ghost towns, this government 

is working to ensure that the smaller communities benefit from 

increased economic growth. 

 

These are just some of the new measures introduced in the budget 

to help stimulate business and industry, and generate 

employment in our province. These measures will add to our 

accomplishments since 1982 to help businesses grow and to help 

businesses prosper. 

 

We helped reduce the tax burden on small businesses, too, by 

eliminating the provincial corporate income tax on small 

manufacturing and processing firms, saving businesses million 

of dollars annually. 

 

We eliminated the sales tax on research and development 

prototypes. And don’t forget — and again, I remind the 

opposition benches — the elimination of the provincial gas tax, 

which has not only reduced input costs for virtually all 

businesses, but has provided residents with over $120 million 

each and every year to spend on other goods and services. 

 

Since 1982 we have wiped out 1,300 obsolete regulations which 

the NDP were continually bringing in to choke and strangle the 

daily operations of business right across our province. Our 

northern revolving loan fund has expanded northern economic 

activity by providing over $6 million in loans to 179 northern 

businesses since 1983, creating or maintaining almost 1,000 jobs 

in the North. 

 

And we’re making good progress in helping local businesses 

capture a larger share of the almost $7 billion in purchases made 

outside of our province. For example, the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation has taken the lead role in supporting local suppliers, 

purchasing $209 million in commodities, supplies, and services. 

That was in 1985 — an increase of 55 per cent over 1984. SPC 

now makes 76 per cent of its purchases from Saskatchewan  

firms. 

 

When you compare our record of economic development and job 

creation in four years with that of the previous 11 years of the 

prior administration, all I can say is: what a waste of 

opportunities we passed up. During that period the Canadian 

economy was in good shape. But all the NDP could do in their 

economic and business development programs during those 11 

years was to introduce a series of do-nothing grants, do-nothing 

grant programs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, business expects more from its provincial 

government in its economic and business programs than a series 

of grant programs. Business and industry isn’t interested in 

give-aways. Business and industry want and need a positive 

business climate in which they can function. And that is what we 

have given them. 

 

The previous administration never understood the real needs of 

business and industry; and what was even worse, they made no 

effort to try and understand business. That’s one of the many 

reasons that the people of this province don’t want to see them in 

office again. 

 

The NDP made little or no effort to meet with business during 

their 11 years in office. All they had to do was attend a few 

meeting — just a few — of business groups like the chamber of 

commerce. They would have found it enlightening, new — a new 

experience of meeting with the business people which they have 

never done. 

 

How different it has been since our government has been in 

office. We meet regularly with all business groups. I probably 

meet with more business people in one week than you have met 

in the last 11 years. For the last two months — quietly and with 

little fanfare, but very, very effectively — the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business has been meeting with business 

groups in all parts of the province, obtaining their ideas, their 

recommendations on programs and activities which can help to 

stimulate our economy. And these meetings will continue. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks with a few 

comments about my home city and the capital city of our 

province, Regina. Unlike some of the members opposite, the 

members from Regina on this side of the House are pretty proud 

of our city and the contributions made by our government to 

building a better Regina. We think Regina is looking pretty good. 

 

For the information of the members opposite, I have lived in 

Regina almost my entire lifetime. I grew up as a young boy on 

the east side of this city. I spent my teenage youth on the west 

side. I raised my family and enjoyed my business career in the 

south end. I proudly represent my constituents of Regina North. 

I dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could seek election in any area 

of this city with any degree of credibility; and it’s a far cry — it’s 

a far cry — moving from Humboldt to Regina North East and 

being parachuted in there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Klein: — Let’s take a quick look at some of the  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

306 

 

benefits the government of Grant Devine has brought to the 

people of Regina. First of all, our water. Matter of fact, I’ll have 

a sip right now. What can I say? We acted on the water in one 

term. You couldn’t do that in three terms. 

 

The heavy oil upgrader. The largest single project in 

Saskatchewan’s history. It will create 3,000 new jobs in the 

construction phase alone and bring untold spin-off benefits to all 

sections of our economy, and particularly to the small-business 

sector. 

 

New construction at our hospitals, the General, the Pasqua; the 

construction of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre: all part of 

your government’s plan to make Saskatchewan’s health care 

system the very best in Canada.  

 

Nearly $40 million spent in new school construction and 

renovations in Regina since we took office; the new Winnipeg 

North campus of the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and 

Sciences to bring improved technical training to the people of 

Regina. 

 

More units of senior citizen accommodations with the Trianon 

and St. Basil’s projects; with these projects we will have more 

than 1,600 units of subsidized living for seniors in Regina. Over 

2,000 Regina senior citizens received grants under the senior 

citizens’ home repair program; bringing the 1987 Western 

Canada Games to Regina, and with it a new all-purpose field 

house for our athletes, young and old. 

 

Increased funding for the University of Regina and renovations 

to Darke Hall; a new provincial Court House in the 1800 block 

Smith Street, built at a cost of $4.5 million; Regina’s expanding 

skyline, with the Continental Bank Building, the Canada Trust 

Building — private sector development stimulated by confidence 

in your government; Lewvan Drive expanded from Regina 

Avenue to No. 1 Highway, 100 per cent financed by the 

provincial government. These and many other accomplishments 

of our provincial government have helped make Regina look 

good, and a better place in which to live. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record of this provincial government is 

something to be proud of and certainly unmatched by anything 

done by the prior administration in their 11 years of office. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, from my remarks I’m sure that it’s obvious to 

all that I will gladly support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you very kindly, Mr. Deputy, 

Deputy, Deputy Speaker. This is a very pleasant surprise, to be 

able to jump in at this stage of the debate and take part, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Pardon me for being out of breath. As you know 

I was not in my seat ,and I had to hustle across here to reach the 

seat. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have sat here tonight with a great 

deal of patience and an equal amount of scepticism, having 

listened to some of the balderdash being perpetrated not only 

upon the members of this House — not only upon the members 

of this House — but on the  

poor people of Saskatchewan who are unfortunate enough to 

have tuned in tonight to have witnessed a dismal performance 

from the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I listened to the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg pick up a fairly reputable magazine — 

or at least, should I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a part of a fairly 

reputable magazine — and quote from it extensively. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps I misunderstood the hon. 

member’s intentions. Perhaps I misunderstood them. But I took 

it that he purported to read this article as if it were an editorial 

from the Saturday Night magazine of April 1, 1986. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when I picked it up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

the member from Regina Centre is chirping through the seat of 

his pants again that in fact this is an editorial. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at it, it is an article called “Hard 

Times,” not an editorial, written by one Robert Bott, B-o-t-t — a 

couple of letters missing there. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find 

this article not only to be something less than objective but 

actually derogative to the family of our Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is not in his seat tonight. 

He’s on an engagement. But I for one am one member in this 

Assembly who will not sit here, who certainly will not stand here, 

and allow the Premier’s family to come under any scurrilous 

attacks from some mud-raking sleaze buckets in the opposition. 

 

Welcome back, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to see you in the chair, sir. 

Mr. Speaker, I was pointing out earlier — and you were in the 

chair, sir — that one of the members had been quoting from a 

magazine as if it were an editorial. He neglected to point out that 

it was in fact merely an article, merely an opinionated article, a 

somewhat misleadingly opinionated article from one member 

only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were several comments made by the member 

for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I cannot in all conscience, sir, 

allow them to go without some comment. I heard him quoting 

about chemicals. Now I don’t know why he got into the subject 

of chemicals on this particular debate, but he went on at some 

length. He expanded on the use of chemicals, he expanded on the 

use of chemicals all across southern Saskatchewan. And in fact 

this isn’t the first time he’s done that. 

 

I can turn back to Hansard of June the 11th, 1985, when the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on page 3243 of Hansard 

says, and I quote, sir: 

 

Now there’s another point, there’s another point that needs 

to be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is on the chemical 

that we use. Back in the time of the wheat midge and in the 

time of the Bertha army worm, a decisive government (I 

repeat, a decisive government) made some decisions and 

allowed some chemicals to be used that weren’t licensed, 

(he repeats it) that weren’t licensed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member from  



 

April 1, 1986 

307 

 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who had the courage, I should say 

probably temerity to visit my seat some time ago . . . I wish he’d 

come back. You did me nothing but good, sir. I got all kinds of 

votes because of your visit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Perhaps the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the member from Quill Lakes, who 

is not in his seat, who said something even worse in Hansard, 

perhaps they should have a chat with my opponent in this 

upcoming election who represents the negative disappearing 

party. What does he say? He’s travelling farm to farm, Mr. 

Speaker, and he’s telling people he’s absolutely opposed to the 

use of chemicals. He’s completely organic. He’s been going to 

the villages . . . He’s organic from — no I won’t be rude. He’s 

going around villages, Mr. Speaker, querying secretary treasurers 

and saying, what are you putting for dust control on the streets? 

Don’t put anything on those streets because, Mr. Speaker, he’s 

saying after he’s elected — and he’s a supreme optimist, I tell 

you — after he’s elected he’s saying, we’re not going to allow 

any chemicals of any kind in Saskatchewan. Now you guys get 

your act together and tell this fellow . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . No, he doesn’t have a pony tail any longer. He cut it off before 

his nomination. You get out there and get your act straight and 

decide who’s right, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or 

the hypothetical dream merchant who purports to represent your 

party in the constituency of Turtleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now as long as I’m on the subject of 

disputing comments that have been made, Mr. Speaker, as long 

as I’m taking issue, there is another issue that I have absolutely 

no choice, this has been forced upon me, and it deals with the 

moratorium the former administration placed on the construction 

of nursing homes. 

 

Now I believe this morning the member from Shaunavon was on 

an open-line show on CFQC and between 11:10 and 11:20 a.m. 

this morning he did not remember any moratorium. I’m sorry I 

cannot quote the gentleman word for word but it was, to 

paraphrase, it was to the extent, the member from Shaunavon 

says, he does not remember any moratorium placed on the 

construction of nursing homes . . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well my colleague are asking me for the facts, Mr. Speaker, so 

I’m duty bound to show the facts. 

 

Here we have a memorandum from one Walter Smishek, 

chairman of the treasury board, to the Hon. Herman Rolfes, 

minister of Social Services, dated January the 4th of 1976, before 

the hon. member from Shaunavon, I believe, was elected. And he 

goes on to say: 

 

Until such time as a need for additional beds can be clearly 

identified and a suitable construction policy defined, a 

moratorium (m-o-r-a-t-o-r-i-u-m, a moratorium) on further 

commitments should be enforced. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as if this is not enough to vindicate the 

position that we have consistently taken since 1982, let me quote 

a little further. And this is a letter dated July 18, 1978, fully two 

and one-half years later, Mr. Speaker, fully two and one-half 

years later. 

 

An Hon. Member: — After he was elected. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — After the member . . . No, I believe it 

wasn’t. At this point, what’s the position? This is to a Mr. M. 

Bilokreli, secretary treasurer of the village of Theodore, in 

Theodore, Saskatchewan. And the village of Theodore, Mr. 

Speaker, had been attempting to obtain a nursing home, a much 

needed facility for that community, for some time. And here’s 

the response they received: 

 

Government has been prompted to place a moratorium 

(m-o-r-a-t-o-r-i-u-m, a moratorium) on the development of 

any additional special care beds and focus attention and 

priorities on the delivery of basic home care services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, further evidence, if the member has selective 

amnesia or just was not aware . . . Sir, you are now aware, you 

imposed a moratorium. We lifted it under the leadership of the 

Minister of Health, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s bring this up to 

1985-1986. Now we have the new NDP policy. Here we have the 

people who learned that you don’t have moratoriums on nursing 

homes because it’s not popular; because there is a chronic need 

in Saskatchewan. Despite the number of beds we have put into 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’re still fighting with a backlog 

and we’re trying to catch up; we’re doing our best, but what is 

the latest NDP policy? And I quote — it’s from a magazine called 

Hospital Products and Technology, August/September edition, 

1985. And the headline says, “Building more institutions for aged 

is road to disaster, says Romanow.” 

 

Complete with photograph. Mr. Speaker, I want that on the 

record and I’m going to say it again. “Building more institutions 

for aged is road to disaster, says Romanow.” 

 

Has their policy changed? Has their policy changed one bit, Mr. 

Speaker? Of course it hasn’t. They imposed a moratorium in 

1976. They maintained a moratorium until 1982. The member 

from Shaunavon will not remember this. I know a considerable 

amount of mail crosses the desk of a minister. When he was 

Minister of Social Services he received a letter from the town of 

Spiritwood. I had the honour of being mayor of Spiritwood at one 

time and also serving on the hospital board. I was also a member 

of what was called the level 3-4 committee. And we wrote and 

asked about the possibility of a nursing home for Spiritwood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we received a negative reply, accompanied with, 

accompanied with, no offer to meet, would not discuss it any 

further with us, and declared the issue  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

308 

 

closed. 

 

Let me get back to what is probably going to be policy for the 

NDP, unless this gentleman, who served with some distinction in 

the former administration is — and I freely say, served with some 

distinction. I didn’t say great distinction or continuous 

distinction, I said some distinction. He was not without 

blemishes. But who’s right? They had the moratorium. We have 

it in evidence they had the moratorium. 

 

And now we have this retread making a come-back, and this 

retread’s saying — what’s he saying? He’s saying the 

moratorium has to continue because building more institutions 

for the aged is a road to disaster. 

 

Let me go a little further with this man who would be leader of 

the NDP party. He says: 

 

Roy Romanow, a former Saskatchewan cabinet minister 

and co-chairman of the negotiations that brought home the 

country’s constitution, said that, if the politicians try to cope 

with the sickness problems of our aging populations by 

building more hospitals or similar facilities, the cost will be 

prohibitive and the results disastrous. 

 

That’s the opinion of one Roy Romanow, aspirant to the 

leadership of the New Democratic Party, which proves beyond 

any shadow of doubt, Mr. Speaker, they have not changed. They 

have not changed one bit. 

 

After the last election, Mr. Speaker, I remember sitting across on 

the other side in the Tory overflow, I believe we were called. And 

I remember chastising the members of the opposition. I 

remember saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I’m glad 

the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is leading into the next 

election, because I’m coming to that, too. 

 

I remember saying after the last election that what the Leader of 

the Opposition was left with was the B team. Remember that? I 

said he was left with the B team. Well where was the A team? 

Well the A team was a former member for Riversdale, a former 

member for Biggar. Well, they went down to defeat, the A team, 

and he was left with the B team, the would be’s and the has beens. 

That’s the B team. The would be’s — the member from 

Shaunavon; the has beens — member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. But what’s he going to have after the 

next election? We’ve had the A team, we’ve had the B team, now 

we’re going to have the C and the D team. And what’s that give 

us? The “seedy” team. That’s what we’re going to be left with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of the last couple of summers, the 

attempts the NDP caucus made to dump their leader. We’re all 

aware of some of the shenanigans that went on. I always 

sympathize with the leader, and I thought they’d have been a lot 

further ahead if the leader had dumped the caucus, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to make a comment or two about this, and I want to say it 

with sincerity. I have always felt, I have always felt that the 

Leader of the Opposition is a man of honesty, integrity. I think 

he has dignity, and I think he conducted his years as premier with 

class, Mr. Speaker. 

I realize that he and I share a different political philosophy, 

certainly a much different political ideology, but that doesn’t 

prevent me from showing respect to him — a respect, Mr. 

Speaker, which I’m afraid is totally denied to the rest of that 

caucus. And it’s too bad that the Leader of the Opposition is head 

and shoulders above the rest of his caucus when it comes to class, 

when it comes to dignity, when it comes to integrity. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Intellect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Intellect — I forgot. And I suppose we 

could roll off a whole lot of adjectives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t want to get into any exchange of insults. I’d rather stay 

on a much more positive note because we have a good news 

budget, and I’d like to dwell on the good points in the budget. 

But one thing I can say, Mr. Speaker, in this upcoming election, 

I certainly for one — I certainly for one will be making no 

personal attacks on the Leader of the Opposition. I respect him, I 

respect his reputation when he was the premier of this province, 

he served with distinction. As I say, we differ, but when we leave 

the Assembly I do believe the acrimony can stay in here and we 

can treat each other like gentlemen when we step outside the 

door. And I say, Mr. Speaker, from me there will be no personal 

attacks in the upcoming election campaign whenever it may 

come. 

 

I see the member, the member from Quill Lakes has joined us in 

the Assembly. Now here we have the very antithesis, the absolute 

antithesis of what I was describing just a moment ago. And if we 

ever need a contrast, thank you for coming in and providing it to 

us, member for Quill Lakes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a point I’m going to 

make — there’s a point I’m going to make — last week we had 

some members from the Weyerhaeuser corporation sitting in that 

gallery up there, and I remember sitting here embarrassed and 

ashamed at some of the comments coming from that side of the 

House when those gentlemen were being introduced. 

 

I particularly remember a comment coming from the member 

from Quill Lakes when Mr. Bill Gaynor was introduced, and the 

insult was hurled, “Ah, Gainer the gopher.” Mr. Speaker, for me, 

that was a personal low in term of decorum in behaviour in this 

House. I was embarrassed, I was ashamed, I was abhorred by 

what I heard. And I took it upon myself personally to apologize 

to those gentlemen afterwards. And, Mr. Speaker, I assured them 

that what they saw in here that day — the conduct, the behaviour 

which they witnessed, the derogatory remarks tossed towards 

them, were not indicative of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not us. That’s not Saskatchewan. That’s that happy little 

band of renegades sitting over there. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

they do not represent the vast majority of opinion of the people 

of this province. 

 

I also submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that come the next election, 

sir, the words I have said tonight will be  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

309 

 

thoroughly vindicated with the return of a Conservative 

government to office in this province under the leadership of our 

Premier, Grant Devine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to a few 

other things now. Yes, I would like to turn to the events in the 

House of the past couple of weeks. The residents of our province, 

Mr. Speaker, in the last few days have been presented with both 

a new Speech from the Throne and a new budget. Both unveil 

initiatives that reconfirm and continue the principles and 

priorities established by our government since 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that on this side of the House we are 

proud of the directions we’ve taken in the past four years. And 

we take tremendous pride in the accomplishments residents of 

Saskatchewan have achieved as they have grasped the new 

opportunities and challenges that have been offered to them by 

this Progressive Conservative government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our aims were simple. They were determined and 

visionary. We had to create opportunities for residents to enhance 

and enrich themselves in all endeavours and enterprises. We had 

to find ways to allow residents to have more say in the day-to-day 

running of government activities and to participate in a 

meaningful way in the development of our province. And we had 

to have vehicles through which good, decent, hard-working men 

and women and families could be protected against mishaps and 

misfortunes over which they, and we as government, have no 

control. 

 

I believe that both our recent Speech from the Throne and more 

recent budget, most ably presented by my colleague, the Minister 

of Finance, did the job. Many will remember 1980 and ’81, and 

how the Devine government came to power in 1982 and worked 

with the people to make our province a better place. 

 

When mortgage rates in the 18 to 22 per cent range were robbing 

families of their homes, it was a Progressive Conservative 

government who institute the first — the very first — home 

mortgage rebate program in North America. We protected the 

homes of Saskatchewan families because, Mr. Speaker, we cared. 

 

When young, starting-out farmers couldn’t afford to buy their 

own farms, and they faced the prospects of a lifetime as tenants 

on someone else’s land, it was a Devine government who 

established the farm purchase program with 8 per cent 

mortgages. 

 

When drought and grasshoppers devastated our farmers, we 

spearheaded programs that put $500 million back into farmers’ 

pockets. 

 

When inflation ravaged the pocketbooks of drivers, young and 

old, it was a Devine government who abolished the provincial 

tax on gasoline. That measure alone has saved our drivers $600 

million in taxes since  

1982. And they’re still saving dollars, Mr. Speaker, every time 

they fill their tanks. 

 

Progressive Conservatives believed then, as we believe now, that 

government has a responsibility to improve the quality of life for 

those whom it serves And despite some admittedly tough times, 

plummeting world prices for some of our goods, three straight 

drought years right there at home, we’ve tried hard to encourage 

opportunity in all parts of our province. 

 

Last year we introduced four major funds that in total committed 

$1.5 billion to improving opportunity in Saskatchewan. That 

represents $1,500 for every person in our province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we believe, as a government, our efforts are worth every 

penny. 

 

Number one, Mr. Speaker, a 600 million employment 

development fund to create and maintain jobs in an all-out 

co-operative effort, the like of which has never been seen in 

Canada before. Now that’s opportunity and participation. In the 

past year, working with the private sector, 17,000 new jobs have 

been created in Saskatchewan. 

 

Number two, Mr. Speaker, an educational endowment fund of 

$400 million to upgrade educational facilities across our 

province; it was introduced by the Devine government. Now 

that’s opportunity to participate in the future. 

 

In last week’s budget, we introduced other features including 6 

per cent student loans. We know the importance of quality 

education and the importance of our young people. 

 

Number three, Mr. Speaker, a health capital fund of $300 million 

on top of a budget of 1.2 nillion for health care to finance new 

health care facilities, and to renovate those which we have, was 

introduced. Now that’s protection against illness and protection 

for families. But there’s more. 

 

Our new budget provides approximately 700 new positions in 

hospitals and nursing homes this year. About 300 of these 

positions will be nurses. We have increased the number of health 

care positions in this province. 

 

And number four, Mr. Speaker, an agricultural development fund 

with $200 million for agricultural research, development, and 

marketing opportunities was introduced. That means building 

security and opportunity for our farmers in the future. And as you 

know, sir, the agriculture department’s budget for this year will 

more than double that of last year, the largest increase in the 

history of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough. The Devine government is 

continuing to do more, much more. The budget contained further 

initiatives to create jobs through small business investment. It 

also outlined programs to teach welfare recipients skills so that 

they can build opportunity and participate in our province’s 

success. Much of the budget, and before that, sir, the Speech from 

the Throne, was aimed specifically at making sure government 

responded to economic and social needs in 

  



 

April 1, 1986 

310 

 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have, for example, paved the way for a voluntary pension 

plan for Saskatchewan home-makers, the self-employed and 

small-business people, to give them an opportunity to feel 

contentment and financial security in their retirement years. This 

is both exciting and innovative. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, this 

is nothing short of visionary on the part of the Progressive 

Conservative government. 

 

We have kept our commitment to rural residents with plans to 

abolish party telephone lines, bring buried electrical cable service 

to 86,000 rural residents, and bring full television service to all. 

And the rural priorities of the Devine government include our 

intention to support rural economic development corporations, to 

bring new jobs and economic activity to rural areas. 

 

Our program for this year proposes new irrigation and water 

resource projects for farmers; campaigns for new international 

markets for agricultural produce and products at fair prices; tax 

credits for increased livestock production; and a farm chemical 

price information system. 

 

The Progressive Conservative budget abolishes the provincial 

sales tax on clothing and footwear valued at less than $300. This 

measure follows the abolition of the sales tax on children’s 

clothing and footwear. 

 

It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that virtually all essential 

goods are now sales tax free in the province of Saskatchewan 

under a Progressive Conservative government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, our budget also proposes 

direct operating grants for day care for the first time in our 

history, and the increasing of the day care commitment by almost 

10 per cent — 10 per cent in a single year. 

 

The budget offers a new, first-time home buyers’ grant of $3,000. 

And this, of course, follows on the success of similar home 

ownership programs. 

 

it also increases the Devine government’s commitment to senior 

citizens’ housing. 

 

The budget introduces a two-year tax holiday to make the 

establishment of small business by Saskatchewan residents 

easier. And it lowers to 8 per cent from nine and five-eighths the 

already immensely successful small business loan program 

brought in by the Devine government. 

 

Small businesses provide the bulk of jobs for Saskatchewan 

people. More small businesses mean more jobs, and it means 

more prosperity. 

 

The budget also expanded the venture capital program to include 

agricultural firms and it makes it more accessible to rural 

communities. 

The budget offers labour unions and union members substantial 

tax credits through the formation of their own venture capital 

corporations. Such corporations will create new jobs and provide 

increased security and prosperity for union leaders. 

 

The budget proposes a Saskatchewan agricultural and 

commercial equity corporation to allow residents to make 

diversified investments in our province’s future, and it sets out 

tax incentives for increased livestock production. It proposes a 

property management corporation to help restrain government 

expenditures and save taxpayers substantial amounts of money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we believe in bringing government closer to 

those whom it serves. In that light we intend to decentralize some 

of our operations. Our crop insurance corporation will be moving 

to Melville. The agricultural credit corporation is being 

transferred to Swift Current. 

 

Our budget increases taxes on large corporations and hikes the 

tax on a packet of cigarettes by 25 cents. Mr. Speaker, those are 

the only tax increases we are proposing. For other people in 

Saskatchewan, our plans for this year are either to hold taxes or 

to reduce them. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, our budget and the plans outlined in the 

Speech from the Throne continue the course we adopted in 1982, 

a course that is based on the basic values of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the objectives of our budget are simple. They’re 

very straightforward: to create good, secure, well-paying jobs by 

all means possible; to give Saskatchewan residents the best 

health care in Canada; to abolish taxes on gasoline, clothing, 

shoes, and other essential goods and services; to upgrade our 

schools and give our students the best educational opportunities 

in Canada; to encourage the establishment and growth of small 

business, which will both create jobs and brings residents 

prosperity. And, Mr. Speaker, lastly, and by no means least, to 

safeguard the farms of our province and ensure that 

Saskatchewan farmers are rewarded for their contributions to 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you would have gathered from my earlier 

remarks, I’m pleased to say that I whole-heartedly support the 

budget presented by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. And 

I thank you for the opportunity to participate in the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you. I see that the opposition wait 

in eager anticipation, Mr. Speaker, for my remarks. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a pleasure for me to 

speak tonight on the budget presented last week by the Minister 

of Finance, the member from Qu’Appelle. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

it is a great pleasure to think back on the events of last week 

because I believe it was a memorable week for not only our 

government but for the people of Saskatchewan . 

 

The budget presented before a full house in this Assembly  

  



 

April 1, 1986 

311 

 

has been referred to by the public — by the voting public I should 

say, and by the press — as one of the most outstanding budgets 

in this province’s history. 

 

One journalist wrote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The rookie Finance minister brought down a budget which 

promises to stimulate the economy, reduce taxes, and bring 

the deficit in line. 

 

That same journalist also said: 

 

This seemingly impossible feat required the cool hand of a 

brain surgeon. Fortunately (he wrote), Gary Lane does have 

that. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, as I found out over the weekend while 

I was home in my riding of Maple Creek, that the more the people 

find out about the budget the better they like it. 

 

The Finance minister stated at the very onset that when we took 

over government four years ago we made our purpose and our 

focus to build the opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan 

and to stimulate economic activity, while bringing in programs 

that focus on the need for protection; protection of the individuals 

in society, the family farm, small-businesses. That has been the 

focus in the last four years, and they have worked out very, very 

well, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance left no doubt that we 

are still committed to providing opportunity and protection for 

the people of Saskatchewan. It was spelled out in very simple 

terms when the Minister of Finance said: 

 

Our common sense approach to economic development, 

together with our firm commitment to protect families, the 

family farm and our social institutions, has guided this 

government’s actions during the last four years. It also has 

formed the basis of our budget for 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see it is near 10 o’clock, and I do have a rather 

lengthy speech . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And a good one. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — . . . and a good one, I must say. I would 

therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 


