













































April 9, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 9, 1986 

 

 

 

457 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It’s my pleasure to introduce to you today, 

Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the Assembly, a group of 26 

grade 8 students who are seated in the west gallery, attending 

here today from St. Francis Elementary School, located in the 

constituency of Regina Rosemont. They are accompanied by 

their chaperon and teacher, Mr. Small, and I will have the 

opportunity to meet with them for pictures and for some 

refreshments after question period. 

 

We’re delighted that you’ve taken time our from your school 

schedule to meet with us today. We hope it’s a profitable 

excursion, and I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to our Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

the member from Rosemont in welcoming the students from St. 

Francis. Mr. Small and I were involved in piloting the new 

social studies curriculum in division 3, and we had some 

interesting times in developing the curriculum which, I might 

add, and the Minister of Education will be interested, is a new 

and, I think, a very good innovation. 

 

My welcome to Mr. Small and his class, and I, too, wish them a 

prosperous and a rewarding stay here in the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

to welcome to you and to the Legislative Assembly, 17 students 

from an adult class at the Regina Plains Community College. I 

want to congratulate the college. I probably welcome as many 

students from this one institution as I do from all others in my 

riding. 

 

I look forward to meeting with the students are question period 

and sharing your observations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Impact of Lower Grain Prices 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier, and it has to do with yesterday’s announcement of 

initial grain prices for the coming year, initial prices which are 

down by 81 cents a bushel, or nearly 20 per cent from last year, 

and which are lower than the worst years of the ’30s when 

inflation is taken into account. 

 

My specific question is this, Mr. Premier: have your officials 

studied the impact of yesterday’s announcement, and have they 

indicated what the impact of this  

announcement will be on Saskatchewan’s farm income? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the impact of lower grain 

prices are somewhat similar to the impact of lower oil prices or 

lower any commodity prices — potash. People have less 

revenue and less profit. As a result of the decline of 17 or 18 per 

cent in the initial price of wheat, you will see farm incomes 

decline as a result of that reduction. I don’t have the precise 

number with me, but I can get it, the nearest estimates of what 

that might mean to western Canada, to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As a result of the decline, I can say that hundreds of millions of 

dollars are needed in the pockets of families here in 

Saskatchewan, farm families. And as result of the things that I 

have been doing with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that we can look forward to large infusions of cash into 

the pockets of farm families in Saskatchewan in the near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary 

question to the Premier. The question was: have your officials 

reviewed the specific impact this is going to have on our 65,000 

farmers? And can you confirm that this announcement will take 

a minimum, at 81 cents times the 20 million tonnes of grain 

approximately, of $500 million dollars out of the Saskatchewan 

economy; in particular, out of the farmers’ pockets? Can you 

confirm that that’s a minimum that will be lost to Saskatchewan 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 

there’s a combination of things that goes into the annual income 

for farmers: one is the initial price; secondly is the final price; 

and third is the production. 

 

Now if you can put a combination of packages together where 

you have a good production years so that you can have fairly 

good yields — if, throughout the period of time, Mr. Speaker, in 

the ’86-87 crop year you find that you have higher domestic 

prices for wheat, say, in excess of $10, so for ’86-87 you can 

look at an increase — you could find world markets improve 

over the next little while so that when you have your final 

payment, obviously, you’re going to have more money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other side of the equation is costs — the 

whole cost side of agriculture. Now if you look at the kinds of 

things that we can do, Mr. Speaker, you can protect farmers 

with respect to interest rates. We have reduced interest rates and 

provided interest rate protection for farmers, and that’s very 

important. The bank rate is continuing to fall and that’s 

significant. You can look at fuel prices, Mr. Speaker, and in this 

city obviously they’re the lowest there are in Canada. And you 

add our farm fuel rebate on top of it, you’re going to be looking 

at in the neighbourhood of 20-some cents a litre for farm fuel. 

 

If and when you provide protection to Saskatchewan farm input 

costs, then you can improve the situation. So it’s a combination 

of things, as the hon. member knows. It’s the initial price. It’s 

the final price. It is what price they’re going to provide for 

Canadian production, used and 

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

458 

 

 

consumed here in Canada, which could be 10, 11, or $12, or 

something in that neighbourhood, which could be significant, 

and the world markets, and the costs. So you put those together, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’ll see what the final outcome is with 

respect to agriculture. 

 

On top of that, if you have injections of cash of hundreds of 

millions of dollars, say, though a western grains stabilization 

program, or through various kinds of other mechanisms that 

people can design, obviously you can have a fairly positive 

impact on the situation. 

 

Mr. Engel: — One more question, Mr. Speaker. Most farmers 

and farm leaders agree that it’s time for both you and the 

Mulroney government to act in a significant way. By way of 

information, Mr. Speaker, just let me quote a little bit from 

what Lorne Hehn, the president of United Grain Growers, said: 

 

We now have a situation where our farmers are no longer 

competing with other farmers. They are competing with 

other government treasuries. The situation warrants federal 

government intervention. (The little if’s you were talking 

about are $500 million if’s, at a minimum.) 

 

Mr. Premier, during your trip to Ottawa did you get a 

commitment from your friend Brian to introduce a deficiency 

payment for all production of Canadian Wheat Board grains to 

protect Canadian farmers from the huge subsidies provided to 

American and European farmers by their national treasuries? 

Did you ask for a commitment for a deficiency payment? And if 

you did, how much of a commitment are you asking for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I asked and I received a 

commitment of a cash injection into western Canada and into 

Saskatchewan. And there are many ways to get that cash out. 

Deficiency payment is one; stabilization is another; higher 

domestic prices is there. There is a combination of things, Mr. 

Speaker, that the federal government is looking at, and I will be 

making a ministerial statement after question period outlining 

several of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I refer to 

the same issue that my colleague the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did, and I ask you, Mr. Premier: did 

you press the Mulroney government to agree to the introduction 

of parity pricing for wheat, oats, barley and other products? 

Parity pricing, as you know, would guarantee farmers their cost 

of production plus a fair return for their labour — that’s the 

definition I use — on all production sold in Canada. Now that 

would not put our farmers in anything like the same position as 

U.S. or European farmers, but it would help. Did you ask for 

such a commitment? Did you get such a commitment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I did ask for, and what 

I got a favourable response to, was a two-price system for 

grains in Canada and a higher price for domestic consumption. 

If, for example, wheat could be raised from $7 to $10 a bushel, 

on an annual basis of $3 a bushel increase means about $100 

million a year to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, if we can move towards a broader, two-price 

system — we have one now, but if we can expand it — then it 

moves along the lines of providing some assurance for the 

domestic consumption of grain, that it’s going to be priced 

fairly, and I don’t believe it would cost the consumer very 

much. I think . . . And you would see that it might be pennies — 

3 or 4, 5 cents a loaf at the outset, if you had domestic grain 

priced in the neighbourhood of $10 a bushel or $11 a bushel or 

something like that. 

 

So yes, Mr. Speaker, I talked to him about two-priced grain, 

specifically about $10 wheat or more, and yes, it would mean 

an infusion of cash, and yes, they’re looking at it very seriously. 

And they see it as one of the mechanisms they may be able to 

use to provide additional income to Saskatchewan farmers 

when there is, as the hon. member points, out, a world glut, and 

very, very strange policies in both the European Economic 

Community and the United States; very strange policies around 

the world with respect to oil pricing that don’t make much sense 

at all and that has Saskatchewan families pitted against 

international treasuries. And yes, Mr. Speaker, this government 

is going to do something about it, and the federal government is 

going to do something about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In 

reference to your earlier comment on input costs, you will be 

aware of the 1984 federal election campaign promise to 

eliminate all federal taxes from the price of farm fuel, and you 

will be aware, Mr. Speaker, that that has not happened. 

 

When you were in Ottawa, did you press the Primer Minister to 

honour the commitment made in the 1984 federal campaign to 

remove all federal taxes from the cost of farm fuel? Did you ask 

for that commitment, and did you get it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I asked them again to 

remove the taxes from farm fuel. But it’s a little strange for the 

member, the hon. member opposite, to be asking for tax 

reductions on farm fuel when he had the highest gasoline prices 

west of the Maritimes and supported a program that would tax 

farm fuel in Saskatchewan; had a rebate, and then took it off. 

It’s a little strange, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

would even ask for reduction in taxes on farm fuel when they 

had the highest prices west of the Maritimes when they were in 

power. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Premier. The 

promise was made in 1984, the commitment, to use your term: 

did you find out whether that commitment would be honoured? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it is a relatively new 

government. They are going to be in power for some time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When I said that I was going to take the tax off gasoline, Mr. 

Speaker, I took it off. And when I said I was going to protect 

interest rates because the NDP wouldn’t protect interest rates, I 

did. And when I said that I was going to  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

459 

 

 

build a rural gas distribution system, Mr. Speaker, I did, 

because they didn’t. So, Mr. Speaker, when I say I’m going to 

build something, or say I’m going to do it, it’ll get done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Premier’s Trip to Eastern Canada 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a 

question to the Premier, and it deals with his little trek to 

eastern Canada, I think which the rest of Saskatchewan would 

certainly agree was the biggest flop since Ford built the Edsel. 

 

But my question to you, Mr. Premier, is that, thanks to your 

trip, we have the news now that the initial price of grain is 

down 20 per cent. We have the news, because of your trip to 

eastern Canada, that Husky Oil upgrader is on hold for another 

year; that another $90 million is going to be poured out. 

 

My specific question to you, Mr. Premier, is: can you confirm 

that, along with this mission to eastern Canada to protect the 

farmers and the oil producers, did you have in your company 

down East working for Saskatchewan such notable people as 

the president of the Saskatchewan PC Party, Ron Barber? Did 

you have the former president of the PC Party, George Hill, in 

some of your meetings? Did you have the executive director of 

the Saskatchewan PC Party, Pringle? Did you have the election 

campaign director, Dave Tkachuk? And did you have your chief 

fund-raiser in your company, Staff Barootes? 

 

Is this the great group that are working to protect Saskatchewan 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — In all my meetings with government 

officials — either with the Premier of Ontario or with the 

federal cabinet or any other meetings with respect to agriculture 

and oil — none of those people were there at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it pretty interesting that they’re saying 

they’re concerned about agriculture and about the oil industry. 

They’re obviously against Husky, and they’re more interested 

in who’s travelling and going to Toronto than they are in the 

farmer. 

 

And they’ve changed their tune here right in the middle of 

question period because they don’t care at all, Mr. Speaker. 

They couldn’t give two cents about farmers, and when they 

were in government they didn’t care about farmers. They taxed 

them. They had a death tax. They provided a taxation on fuel. 

They had land bank. The solution to everything was: well, sell 

your farm to the government; we’ll look after you. 

 

They didn’t care, Mr. Speaker, and farmers turfed them out. 

And believe me, Mr. Speaker, farmers will turn them out again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Obviously the Premier’s not very proud of his 

little entourage that he took, because he didn’t answer  

the question. I’m asking you again, were any of these political 

hacks along? And I ask you, did the taxpayers pay any of their 

expense in getting these hacks to eastern Canada where you 

went on a fund-raising excursion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, none of the people from the 

PC party of Saskatchewan were at any of the meetings that I 

was at with respect to government, or premiers and others. 

Some of the people in the PC party of Saskatchewan went to 

Toronto to talk to business men, and they went there at their 

own expense. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — New question to the Premier. Can the Premier 

confirm that during his trip to Toronto he and various PC party 

officials held a private fund-raising dinner at an exclusive 

Toronto club, attended by Conrad Black amongst others, and 

that the key reason for going on this trek to eastern Canada was 

not to fight for farmers and the small oil producer, as you claim, 

but rather to get some fresh election contributions from Bay 

Street and to see if you can solicit some of the blue machine to 

come and bail you out in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members know that 

they can never accuse this administration and this government 

of not sticking up for farmers. And because they know that, 

they’ve got to change the topic and change the subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t know what farming is all about. Their 

leader doesn’t understand agriculture. Their policies obviously 

are evident. And any new ideas that they’re coming up with 

today on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, are the same as the 

Progressive Conservative government in power today. It’s me 

too, me too, me too, me too, because you haven’t had an 

original, good, solid solution in agriculture for the last 50 years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

People know that we understand agriculture, and we move. You 

can’t even talk about it without changing question period 

half-way through and talk about a finance meeting that’s going 

on in Toronto. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they should be 

ashamed of themselves when it comes to agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Expenses on Trip to Eastern Canada 

 

Mr. Koskie: — New question to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, when asked by the news media why so many PC 

officials had gone along with you, accompanied you to eastern 

Canada, you admitted that they were along for various meetings 

with Ontario and federal PC party election strategists. And you 

defended this kind of a political trip at taxpayers’ expense by 

saying, that’s how you build a big blue machine — you said to 

the press. Mr. Premier, when you claim that your trip was to 

fight for the farmers and for small oil producers, and when that 

turns out to be little more than a cover-up for a political trip at 

taxpayers’ expense, don’t you feel that you owe to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers an apology and at least give them back 

some of their money that you’re using, of their taxpayers’ 

money? 

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

460 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this has got to be a new low 

in the spring session of the legislature. The member opposite 

knows absolute that not one penny of taxpayers’ money went 

on . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 

not 1 cent of taxpayers’ money paid the transportation for any 

other individuals except me and my staff. I met with the 

Premier of Ontario on agriculture and on oil; I met with the 

cabinet ministers on agriculture and oil, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’re afraid to even ask questions about it because they don’t 

have any credibility in the oil patch; they don’t have any 

credibility in agriculture; they don’t have any credibility when it 

comes to health; they don’t have any credibility when it comes 

to paper mills; they don’t have any . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. If we’re going to have a question 

period, I’m going to ask the members to kind of hold their 

voices down and let us be able to hear what’s being said in the 

Chamber. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, I just want to be crystal clear 

about your answer to one of the questions. And I would ask you 

to save me the frantic ravings of a desperate Premier — just a 

simple, short answer to the question. Will you confirm that the 

expenses of Dave Tkachuk and George Hill and Ron Barber 

and Don Pringle, in each of those cases, or any one of them — 

will you confirm that in no case was the expenses of any one of 

those paid by the taxpayer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, people in the Progressive 

Conservative Party will travel to other parts of Canada on either 

their own expense or at the Progressive Conservative Party 

expense. They were not there with me on government . . . and in 

my discussions with anybody associated with the Premier’s 

office in Ontario, or with respect to discussions in Ottawa on oil 

or on agriculture or on anything else. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — One further supplementary. Mr. Premier, 

you refer to officials of the Conservative Party. Only one of the 

people I named is just an official of the Conservative Party — 

Ron Barber. The others all hold government positions, and 

that’s why I specifically asked: Tkachuk and George Hill and 

Staff Barootes, all . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I ask you to confirm, yes or no: were the 

expense of any of the people I named, namely Hill and Tkachuk 

and Barootes — did any of those people travel at taxpayers’ 

expense? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, Senator Barootes is 

obviously a senator. He may have travelled, because he’s got 

some sort of expense associated with being a senator. Anybody 

that travelled for the Progressive Conservative party paid it 

themselves or paid for by the by the party. Anybody  

that was down, associated with that, Mr. Speaker — I go right 

back, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I go right back to look at 

this pathetic bunch. They can’t talk about agriculture. They 

can’t talk about oil. They know they’re not credible at all, so 

they’ve got to talk about straw men that they want to create and 

say, well for heaven sakes, you’ve got a political party in the 

province of Saskatchewan, one, frankly, that just beat you all to 

pulp. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, we know you’re not credible in 

agriculture. We know that you’re not credible in oil or anything 

else, and you’ve got to come in and talk about this kind of 

thing, or straw men, or about political parties because you can’t 

do anything else. And the people of Saskatchewan know it. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — A further supplementary. Mr. Premier, I 

ask you to confirm that the expenses of Tkachuk and Hill were 

not paid for by the taxpayer. I ask you to confirm that. Yes or 

no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said several 

times that they were not paid for by anybody else except 

privately themselves or the PC party of Saskatchewan. 

 

Short-term Answers for Farm Problems 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the 

Premier, and I would like to say that the short-term answer for 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member from 

Regina North West has the floor. Give him the opportunity to 

ask a question. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to enunciate 

quickly that the answers, the short-term answers for farmers 

will not be found in the well-founded criticism of the NDP 

party. I would like to suggest that the U.S. farm Bill has been 

looming over the heads of farmers in this province for months. 

It hasn’t been news to the farmers of the province, but I believe 

it’s been news to the government. The U.S. farm Bill was not 

mentioned in the throne speech or in the budget. 

 

I ask the Premier. You left Ottawa Monday to get answers for 

farmers on a short-term basis for problems that have been 

created by the U.S. farm Bill, European Common Market. The 

price of wheat there has been there for a long time. Relating to 

that farm Bill and to the floor price of wheat that we can expect 

in Saskatchewan, which could range around $2 this summer, 

what are the short-term answers for farmers in this province? 

And have you any real answers coming out of Ottawa at this 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in the 

previous answers, I will be making a ministerial statement on 

agriculture and oil right after question period. But yes, we have 

obviously put a lot of money into agriculture, short run, right 

now about a billion dollars at 6 per cent money, and other 

programs that are providing  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

461 

 

 

some assistance to farmers. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, I will be announcing the kinds of things 

that I suggested to the federal minister and to the federal cabinet 

with respect to large infusions of capital and cash, thousands of 

dollars per family, into Saskatchewan in the very near future. 

 

Decline in Housing Starts in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — A new question to the minister of housing, 

Mr. Speaker. Saturday, April 5th it was mentioned in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix that new housing starts in 

Saskatchewan are down by 3 per cent in 1986. In Monday’s 

Globe and Mail, in statistical trends nationally, it indicates that 

the national housing trend for new housing starts is up 34 per 

cent. We trail the nation by 37 per cent, and I ask the minister 

why, and does he have any answers to this problem which 

includes a very broad base of employment if, in fact, it can be 

initiated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: —Mr. Speaker, housing starts fluctuate from 

month to month. I would mention to the member opposite that 

as a result of the $3,000 new home buyers grant which we 

initiated in the budget of a few days ago that we have already 

received literally hundreds of requests from people who are 

interested in that particular program. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — In your own budget you indicate that a 6,000 

infusion for new home starts in 1982 only started 1,200 starts 

between ’82 and ’83. In the budget you indicate that $3,000 

suddenly in ’86 is going to initiate 2,000 starts. Could you 

explain that to me, Mr. Minister, how less money is going to 

initiate more starts in 1986? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know, interest rates 

are tracking down and that’s a very favourable sign for this 

country and certainly for this province. As I indicated to the 

member opposite, we already have hundreds of indications of 

people that are most interested in seeing new houses started and 

taking advantage of the $3,000 grant that has been offered to 

new home buyers. Every indication that we have is that 

predictions are that there will be more housing starts in the 

province this year, all things being equal, than there were last 

year. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Your own bureaucrats in the Sask Housing 

department indicate that housing starts are going to be down 

over the next two years. Mr. Minister, I’m sure you realize that 

during an election year you were going to initiate some program 

to enhance housing starts. Are you saying your bureaucrats are 

wrong, and if so, why have you still got them employed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased with the 

quality of people that we have working in Sask Housing 

Corporation. I think if you compare . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . If the member opposite would be so courteous as to give me 

an opportunity to respond to the question, I’d be happy to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at the fiscal picture of Sask 

Housing today and compare it to what was happening under the 

former NDP administration, you will see that this corporation 

has come a long ways in providing the people of Saskatchewan 

with the kind of quality service that they deserved then but 

didn’t get then. They deserve  

it today and they are getting it today, whether it’s with regard to 

seniors’ programming, housing programs — wherever, across 

the province. And certainly the $3,000 grant for new home 

buyers is a good example of that particular kind of program. 

 

The member opposite would attempt to impugn the integrity 

and bring into question the professionalism of the people in the 

Sask Housing Corporation. I certainly have no indication, Mr. 

Speaker, no indication whatsoever other than that we have 

people of the highest calibre working for the province of 

Saskatchewan in that corporation. We can be proud of it. We 

can be proud of what it did yesterday, proud of what it’s doing 

today, and proud of what it’s going to do in the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Meetings with Federal Ministers Regarding Agriculture and 

Oil 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 

a statement on both agriculture and oil as a result of my 

meetings the last couple of days. With the decline, Mr. Speaker, 

in the world wheat prices it is imperative that Saskatchewan 

farmers receive short-and longer-run financial assistance to be 

successful. Hundreds of millions of dollars, amounting to 

thousands of dollars per farm family, are necessary to keep 

Saskatchewan agriculture viable. I am concerned about farm 

families, Mr. Speaker, and I’m particularly concerned about the 

communities in which rural people live in this province. 

 

In my meeting with the federal cabinet minister in Ottawa in the 

last two days, including Charlie Mayer, the minister responsible 

for the wheat board, I laid out a package of financial assistance 

for farmers in western Canada and Saskatchewan. 

 

The first thing I asked for, Mr. Speaker, was an early and an 

immediate payment of the western Canadian grain stabilization 

program of $500 million or more. This would provide 

approximately 5,000 cash per Saskatchewan farmer prior to 

seeding this spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Number two, Mr. Speaker, I asked for a significant increase in 

the domestic price of wheat to at least $10 a bushel. This could 

result in an additional 1 to $2,000 per family, and in the ’86-87 

crop year could have a significant impact on the final payment, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to grain prices. 

 

Three, I asked the minister, in cabinet, the Canadian grain 

commission freeze and put a limit on elevator handling charges 

across western Canada to help cut and control farm costs in the 

province. 

 

Four, Mr. Speaker, I asked that the Canadian Wheat Board 

increase the quota substantially on lower grade wheat to help 

markets and provide cash flow for farmers across Saskatchewan 

in the northern and north-eastern part of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve had a large crop, but they have been suffering 

because of the lack of  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

462 

 

 

markets and lack of cash. 

 

Five, Mr. Speaker, I asked that the federal and provincial 

governments and elevator companies complete their review of a 

stock-switching option to facilitate a $17 a tonne saving for the 

livestock industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I asked that the federal government 

aggressively — aggressively — pursue international grain 

pricing, trade, and aid policies to get common sense back in the 

world market. 

 

All of these, I asked, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government 

review, and any other forms of financial assistance that could be 

made possible to the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of 

western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from my discussions with the federal cabinet, I 

expect to see action on these items in the very near future. It 

will mean hundreds of millions of dollars to Saskatchewan 

communities, and they need it. 

 

I reported to the federal ministers that much was done to reduce 

farm costs in the province of Saskatchewan: interest rates 

lower, Mr. Speaker, from zero to 6 per cent; farm fuel 

protection, Mr. Speaker, and they’ll be able to buy it in the 

neighbourhood of 20-some cents a litre; the development of a 

fertilizer plant here to reduce those costs, Mr. Speaker, and 

other measures with respect to farm in put costs that the cabinet 

committee will be reporting on. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the oil industry, Mr. Speaker, the 

Canadian oil industry and the Saskatchewan oil industry is too 

important to Saskatchewan and to this country to let a 

manipulating cartel, such as OPEC, wreck our industries and 

our families and Saskatchewan communities. It is important, 

Mr. Speaker, that the province and the federal governments 

show that they strongly support the energy industry in Canada. 

 

I advised the federal cabinet, Mr. Speaker, that after the OPEC 

meetings of April 15th — after the OPEC meetings of April 15, 

next Tuesday, that the Saskatchewan government will be 

responding to keep people and families working in the energy 

industry and to ensure that the cartel does not beat our industry 

into the ground. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I completed significant negotiations with 

respect to the Husky upgrader, and I’ll briefly report on those. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the oil industry, 

Saskatchewan will respond, subsequent to April 5, to protect 

jobs in Saskatchewan, to encourage production, to protect the 

service industry and the exploration activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan and that will be announced, Mr. Speaker, 

subsequent to April 15th. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Energy, the Hon. Lorne 

Hepworth, and finance and energy officials are in Ottawa, as I 

speak, designing a complementary package with the federal 

government to ensure an overall program between the 

provincial government and the federal government, to provide 

immediate assistance to energy  

producers here. 

 

They are going to design a two-stage program, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to have a short-run program to provide 

immediate assistance to the industry, and longer-run program 

that will look at some sort of stabilization, or price stabilization, 

or various alternatives that both parties and other governments, 

including Alberta, are reviewing. 

 

I have requested that the federal government remove the PGRT 

tax (petroleum and gas revenue tax), Mr. Speaker. It’s a tax on 

excess profits, and obviously when oil prices are below $15 

there’s no profits. It’s designed to come off in any event, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1988 with the new Western Accord. We’ve asked 

the federal government to remove it faster. The industry can 

look forward to immediate and long-run action from the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 

meetings. 

 

Finally Mr. Speaker, with respect to Husky. I have three 

announcements to make, and I appreciate that some of the 

details — some — have been in the media. 

 

The first is, Mr. Speaker, we reached an agreement with the 

Minister of Finance, federally, the Minister of Energy, Alberta, 

and Saskatchewan, and Husky to put together a $90 million 

package and completely finish the engineering for the Husky 

upgrader in Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. Those expenditures 

will be shared 40 per cent by the federal government, 30 per 

cent by Husky and 15 per cent apiece by both the province of 

Alberta and the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a major 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, to finish the research and have the 

project design in place in the very, very near future. 

 

Secondly, we have a commitment by all parties, Mr. Speaker, to 

build on the 1984 MOU (memorandum of understanding): to 

make it a stronger financial package under the different 

economic conditions because of lower interest rates now, which 

help; lower oil prices, which make it more difficult; changing 

currencies; and others — a commitment by the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker, and all the parties, that we are going 

to design a financial package, and as soon as the engineering 

research is finished and is now paid for, that we will be able to 

put together a package and begin construction of brand-new 

upgrader. 

 

And third, Mr. Speaker, the $90 million that is there from the 

federal government and a combination of the provincial 

governments is tied to production incentives, Mr. Speaker, 

which will encourage activity and production and exploration in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s exactly 

the kinds of things that we want to see in terms of confidence in 

the industry. 

 

I summarize, Mr. Speaker, in two days of negotiations we’ve 

been able to come back with money for the province of 

Saskatchewan, projects continued for the province of 

Saskatchewan, new policies and added confidence for both 

agriculture and energy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

463 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will not try to comment 

on each item in the Premier’s ministerial statement, save only to 

say this: with respect to wheat, what was not said was a great 

deal more significant than what was said. 

 

With respect to grain, the Premier indicated that there would be 

a payment from the western grain stabilization plan. Everybody 

in western Canada knew that, and nothing that the Premier did 

or did not do would have affected it. 

 

With respect to the proposal to increase the domestic price of 

wheat from $7 to $10, that may amount to 10 per cent of the 

wheat produced in Canada. What he is talking about therefore is 

$3 on 10 per cent, or 30 cents a bushel — if that high. He goes 

down to Ottawa, comes back and says, yes, they have cut the 

initial price by 81 cents a bushel, but I am fighting hard to see if 

I can get 30 cents of it back. And I think that may overstate the 

effect of the proposal which he now put forward. 

 

He speaks of discussions about international grain marketing. 

And of course we and everybody else in Canada wants the 

federal government to hold discussions with respect to 

international grain marketing. 

 

What the Premier did not say, what he did not acknowledge, 

was that our current problems are due to the policies of the 

federal government of the United States and the policies of the 

European governments — paying major subsidies to their 

farmers — and he was unwilling to even ask the Mulroney 

government to step up in support of our farmers in the way that 

the federal government of the United States has stepped up for 

their farmers or the way that the European governments have 

stepped up for their farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — His statement makes very clear that he 

not only did not get that; he didn’t even ask for deficiency 

payments. And that, I think, indicates the level of his 

understanding of the problem and the source of the problem; 

and his unwillingness to cause any problems with his colleagues 

at Ottawa by asking for something desperately needed by 

Saskatchewan farmers — as acknowledged by the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pools’ request for deficiency payments, 

the request of the United Grain Growers for federal 

intervention, and the request of the advisory group to the 

Canadian Wheat Board for deficiency payments . . . Every 

reputable farm group says that’s the way to go. The Premier 

does not even ask for that. 

 

With respect to oil, the Premier indicates that there’s going to 

be a short-term strategy and a long-term strategy — remarkably 

few details. He suggested that the PGRT should be removed 

rather more rapidly than Mr. Wilson suggests. We would 

heartily endorse that. And we regretted that the two Wilson 

budgets neglected to remove the PGRT, the petroleum and gas 

revenue tax, which is being phased out over a period of some 

years and which we would like to see phased out now. 

 

(1445) 

With respect to the Husky upgrader . . . I don’t know what one 

can say about the proposals concerning the Husky upgrader 

except that, if one believes the statements, one is unusually 

naïve. It is suggested by the Premier that the $90 million is to 

pay for engineering studies. Well Mr. Price, the president of 

Husky, said last August, and I want to quote: 

 

The upgrader process has been selected. The engineering 

contracts on key high-technology components have been 

let. Other engineering packages will be let in the next 

couple of months. 

 

Now this is what Mr. Price is saying. 

 

We are now being asked to believe that engineering studies are 

going to be done after the high technology contracts have been 

let, and after the other engineering package contracts have been 

let (now I am quoting from Mr. Price), and we know that those 

contracts have been let. We don’t need any other studies, 

because the contracts have been let. 

 

I have no doubt that the proposal is to reimburse Husky for the 

work they have already done in order that Husky may continue 

their team. Obviously Husky want to keep together their 

engineering team. Obviously they want that — and we want 

that. 

 

We want an upgrader. We are against the delay which was 

bought at for $90 million. We favour commitments which were 

already made. Ottawa must honour the Husky deal. That is what 

we say; that is what the member for Saskatoon Sutherland said 

last November — I will refresh his memory on that — and we 

believe that the time has come to make commitments on the 

upgrader. We regret that the government at Ottawa would not 

agree. We regret that the government opposite has cold feet on 

this issue as well as so many other issues. We would have 

wished a commitment on the upgrader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Initial Grain Prices for the ’86-87 Crop Year 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, pursuant 

to rule 17 and pursuant to the letter I sent you this morning, I 

rise to ask leave that the Assembly give priority of debate to a 

definite matter of urgent public importance. The matter is this: 

the announcement of the initial grain prices for the ’86-87 crop 

year, which are the lowest grain prices in seven years and 

threaten the health of the entire provincial economy unless 

solutions are agree to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore seek leave to move a motion pursuant 

to rule 17, seconded by our leader; 

 

That this Assembly give priority of debate to a definite 

matter of urgent public importance, that being the 

announcement of initial grain prices for the 1986-87 crop 

year, which are the lowest grain prices in seven years, and 

threaten the health of  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

464 

 

 

the entire provincial economy unless solutions are agreed 

to. 

 

I so move, or seek to move. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 17, I did receive notice of the 

matter this morning at approximately 11:30. I find that the 

matter is of sufficient urgency to warrant priority of debate. So 

I’d ask the Assembly: does the member have leave to proceed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 

facing a very solemn time in the history of this province, and 

today I rise to move that this Assembly give priority of debate 

to a definite matter of urgent public importance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for farmers right across Saskatchewan yesterday 

was black Tuesday, if there ever was a black Tuesday for 

Saskatchewan farmers. They were hit with the lowest initial 

grain prices announcement — lower than anybody anticipated. 

 

The definite matter on which I seek priority of debate is this: 

the announcement of initial grain prices for the ’86-87 crop 

year, which are the lowest in seven years and which threaten the 

health of the entire provincial economy, unless solutions . . . 

and here’s the issue, Mr. Speaker, unless we, in this House, 

agree to solutions. 

 

At the end of my remarks I will be moving a motion along these 

lines, Mr. Speaker. And I know that all members will 

acknowledge the urgency of the matter before us, that initial 

grain prices were just announced yesterday, barely 24 hours 

ago, and farmers are still reeling from the shock. 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, I know that all members will 

acknowledge that this is clearly a matter of enormous public 

importance, for what could be more important to Saskatchewan 

than the future of our number one industry — agriculture? And 

that future, Mr. Speaker, I submit, is threatened — threatened 

by the disastrously low grain prices, and threatened by the 

weakness and indecision of the PC governments, both in Regina 

and Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time for Tory talk is over; it’s time to act. And 

farmers expect the same kind of treatment and the same kind of 

action as other members in other sectors of our society have 

been getting. It’s no use for our Premier to tell his friend, Brian 

Mulroney, keep up the good work, Brian. That isn’t good 

enough any more, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for our Premier to stop 

talking about how he’s exploiting his special relationship with 

the Mulroney Tories, for the ones being exploited are the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture — and this is not news to anybody — 

agriculture is the backbone of Saskatchewan. Agriculture is the 

number one industry. It’s important to the national economy of 

all Canada. Saskatchewan farmers need action now — need 

action now from both the governments of Ottawa and the 

governments of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they need concrete action and very specific  

action. I therefore urge all the members of this Assembly today 

to join with me and agree that this is a definite matter of urgent 

public importance and that priority of debate should be given. If 

this is agreed to by the PC members opposite, I will be moving 

a substantive motion proposing specific concrete actions to be 

taken at once by the Mulroney government. That motion will be 

along the following lines: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 

federal government to protect Canadian farmers from 

falling commodity prices and rising input costs by: 

 

1. Introduction of a deficiency payment from the federal 

treasury for all production of Canadian board grains, to 

protect Canadian farmers from the huge subsidies provided 

by American and European farmers by their national 

treasuries. 

 

2. Introduction of parity pricing for wheat, oats, barley and 

other products, to guarantee farmers their cost of 

production plus a fair return on their labour for all 

production sold within Canada; 

 

3. Elimination of all federal sales tax and excise tax from 

the price of farm fuel; 

 

4. Introduction of federal legislation to enable the early 

development of low-cost, generic farm chemicals (that Bill 

is before the House); 

 

5. Public repudiation and abandonment of the disastrous 

recommendations contained in the Nielsen task force 

report with respect to Canadian agriculture.  

 

Early payment of all funds due to Canadian farmers under 

the terms of the Western Grain Stabilization Act; 

reopening of international negotiations to bring an end to 

the current world grain price war. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are tired of a 

“paper-tiger” Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Members 

opposite think it’s funny. 

 

His politics by polling has led us into a situation that we just 

can’t afford to live with, Mr. Speaker. Politics by polling, Mr. 

Speaker, has now turned around to politics by panic. Farmers 

are sick of your indecision and your weak leadership. I think 

it’s time for this Premier to show some decisive action. I think 

it’s time to show some decisive action on the part of farmers on 

this serious matter, and also on the part of the Saskatchewan 

electorate to decide on whether we like what he’s doing. 

 

As has been mentioned by our leader and others on this side, the 

Premier can run away, but he can’t hide from the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the Premier’s panic over the past few 

years and see what it has gotten us in the past few days. On 

Sunday he backed away from an election call because he got 

cold feet, and he was afraid and disappointed because the 

people of Saskatchewan,  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

465 

 

 

through his polling, have indicated that his days are numbered. 

The Leader-Post editorial sums it up nicely when they said, 

“The province is ready for an election even though the Premier 

is not.” 

 

On Monday he flew off to Ontario with some of his friends. I’m 

not sure why he took the president and the past president and 

his financial minister and his executives along with him, from 

the Tory party. But he flew off to Ontario to meet with the 

Prime Ministers. They were going to get tough, Mr. Speaker. 

But his friend, Brian, wasn’t in Ottawa. He was on a holiday 

down in Florida. And what did he accomplish from his 

patched-together politics of panic? He got two things. He got 

one that he announced today: the hush-up for a Husky oil 

upgrader, the one-year delay for Husky; and a 20 per cent drop 

in the grain prices. And the former minister of Finance says the 

farmers are really interested. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the farmers in your country are 

interested because they’re watching very closely on how well 

you’re padding the pocket-books of your friends in the oil 

industry. And what have you got for the farmers? How much 

have you got for the farmers? 

 

Over the last four years we saw this province sink into a $2 

billion deficit, thanks to the money you’ve given to the oil 

companies. Now it’s your turn to cough up for the farmers. 

Now it’s your turn to cough up for the farmers. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Saskatchewan, simply can’t afford more years of this “paper 

tiger” Premier. Saskatchewan can’t afford four more years of 

this kind of administration. Saskatchewan farmers need action 

from you, and they need action from your colleagues in Ottawa. 

They need action now. 

 

That is why they expect this legislature, and all the members of 

this legislature, to call on our friend, Brian Mulroney, and the 

PC government in Ottawa to respond to the crisis facing 

Saskatchewan grain farmers. And let there be no mistake, Mr. 

Speaker, a crisis facing grain farmers is a crisis that’s facing all 

Saskatchewan people — a crisis that’s facing all of 

Saskatchewan people, I said. Their good friend, Brian, found a 

billion dollars to bail out the banks. Two banks got bailed out. 

A billion dollars was found for them. A billion dollars was 

found to bail out one oil company — Dome Petroleum. 

 

The question today is: what have you got for farmers? What 

have you got for farmers? When the farmers are competing, 

we’re saying to the Saskatchewan farmers, we’re saying to 

those in our caucus and all those people that are farmers here: 

you compete with the treasuries of the United States; you 

compete with the treasuries of the European Common Market. 

And we’re supposed to put it on the line to the tune of a billion 

dollars. And what does this government do? What does this 

man do? 

 

Saskatchewan farmers need help now. They are turning to their 

national government, to the Government of Canada. They’re 

turning to you, Mr. Premier, to convince Brian Mulroney and 

his government. And they need help, and we need action now. 

(1500) 

 

Let me turn to a few of the specific areas that I’ve mentioned in 

this resolution that we need help on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier made mention on how he got a 

commitment that there’s going to be a pay-out on the western 

grain stabilization plan. And that was some big accomplishment 

that you wanted us to cheer about. Well, Mr. Premier, the grain 

stabilization plan is in place; the grain stabilization plan is in 

place and it would have been paid out with your visit there or 

not. 

 

But there’s another little problem facing Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Premier. And I’ll show you a map and anywhere south of the 

No. 1, this shaded area, you must know this map and you’re 

aware of it And this is the map, the federal drought aid for 

R.M.s, and the average drought intensity was indicated on this 

map and what the pay-outs are. 

 

How much can I expect from the grain stabilization fund, Mr. 

Premier, when you arise in this debate? How much can we 

expect as farmers that delivered a one-bushel quota on a 

thousand acres? How much will that farmer expect from the 

grain stabilization pay-out? I’d like to know what the pay-out is 

going to be in a case like that. 

 

We’ve been paying in for years, and now all of a sudden the last 

three years in my constituency the pay-outs have dropped off 

less and less and less until where last year it was a meaningless 

amount — a meaningless amount. The neighbours in the whole 

constituency have paid in very, very little. 

 

I’ll talk about my own constituency which won’t include my 

farm, because my farm happens to be in . . . the biggest part of 

my acreage is in the Shaunavon constituency. The severity of 

the drought down there is 29.94 compared to some of the other 

areas that go as low as 12 or 13. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier will say, well we’ve made special 

provision for drought, and we’ve made special pay-outs. And I 

want to quote from an article. I believe this one is in Saskatoon, 

a Canadian Press, a CP: 

 

Proposals to restructure the federal agricultural spending 

smack of ideas from people who don’t know what they’re 

talking about, says Garf Stevenson of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool. 

 

Pool members are proposing that they don’t expect and like a 

change like that. Last year when the grain prices were 81 cents 

higher than they are now, the farmers received $450 million. 

This year farmers are going to get more than $450 million less. 

 

How much more will they get out of Ottawa on the grain 

stabilization? Seventy-eight per cent of all wheat board permit 

book holders are enrolled in the plan, so more than one-fifth of 

the farmers will not benefit from that at all, Mr. Speaker. And 

the other part that I’m talking about is the area in the drought 

where the farmers didn’t contribute to the plan. 

 

So I’m wondering how that solution sits with you as being  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

466 

 

 

one where the American treasurer is supporting their farmers 

and it’s going to guarantee in Canadian funds close to $6.10 for 

the payment. How does that sit, and how can you shrug it off 

and say that the farmers are going to be covered by the western 

grains stabilization plan fund? The western grains stabilization 

plan isn’t designed to help out in the situation like this. I don’t 

think when that plan was formulated, and when that plan was 

put in place, that there was the thought and the design to be a 

solution, when world prices are artificially forced down by 

international treasuries that aren’t part of the Canadian farmers’ 

responsibility. We have no way to control that aspect of our 

income. 

 

And I maintain, and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that that is not a 

solution to the problem we’re facing today — the pay-out on 

the western grain stabilization. As good as it may be, and as 

much help as it will be to some people that have a market like 

you in your area, Mr. Speaker, who had a reasonably good crop 

and were able to deliver a reasonable amount of grain. And I’m 

confident that people north or close to the river and from there, 

north . . . In fact, I could look at my map and determine without 

getting an odd one, where the other did decide just where you 

fit in, but the areas there, it’s patchy. 

 

There’s a little block that could come close to beat you that 

might — that might have claimed some crop insurance as well. 

I feel bad that a large area of the province isn’t represented by 

someone that could be speaking on behalf of the farmers there, 

so I’m not going to put words in the speaker’s mouth. 

 

But farmers that are in areas where the crops weren’t good, 

aren’t going to benefit from western grains stabilization plan’s 

pay-out. So that excuse, Mr. Speaker, that won’t wash. That 

isn’t sufficient. What we really need is a pay-out that I’ve been 

asking for ever since the threat has been out there that the price 

of grain is going to drop, and that is that we need a deficiency 

payment. 

 

The treasury . . . the federal treasury has to effectively deal with 

the problem, and the only way you can deal with it, every 

bushel of wheat that is sold has to be paid for in the same form 

as the European Common Market and as the Americans are 

doing in subsidizing the farmers. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers are efficient; they are hard working and 

they’re productive, but they cannot compete head to head in a 

world market with other producers across the world who are 

being subsidized. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers cannot compete with Fort Knox and the 

treasury from there. The problem is national subsidies from the 

federal treasury in the U.S., or maybe the member from 

P.A.-Duck Lake thinks that Fort Knox is as broke as you are 

here in Saskatchewan. Well I’ve got news for you. They have 

$6.10 Canadian for every bushel of wheat the farmers in the 

United States grow. That treasury is standing behind the 

farmers. 

 

My cousins and my counterparts down in the United States that 

are farming down there in North Dakota and Montana, and even 

some down in Kansas, are selling their grain equivalent of 

$6.10. And I will get to the details. I will get to the details of 

how they’re paid out in a  

little bit, Mr. Premier. The problem is one that those people are 

being subsidized by their treasuries, and Canadian farmers are 

asked to go the billion dollars on their own, and I think that’s 

more than we can expect from our farmers. They need a 

deficiency payment on all the grain they produce. A federal 

deficiency payment should be based on something like $6 

wheat. 

 

I’m not alone in calling for a deficiency payment, Mr. Speaker. 

If you look at the press clippings and you watch what’s going 

on, the Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee called for it. 

Wheat pool president Ted Turner has called for a deficiency 

payment of $3 per bushel. That would bring it up . . . It would 

have brought it up close to $6.54 per bushel. Pool figures show 

it costs $1 billion for all Canada in 1986-87 to make a $3 

pay-out. And I think that, if you look at The Western Producer 

on March the 27th: 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee wants 

Ottawa to subsidize grain prices so prairie farmers receive 

the same returns as their American counterparts. 

 

And I think that’s only fair. The other part to make that entirely 

fair is if we could get our fuel and our input costs for the same 

price as they go down there. But it also wants . . . And I want to 

quote from this article of March the 27 in the Producer. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee also wants 

the federal government to make a deficiency payment to 

farmers to cover the difference between expected low 

initial prices and what U.S. producers are getting under a 

subsidized American program. The advisory committee 

wants the government to assure farmers of a price 

comparable to the U.S. target price program. For the 

1986-87 crop year that price for wheat in Canadian funds 

is about $6.10 a bushel, or $225 a tonne. 

 

That deals with the issue as far as the deficiency payment. Let 

me talk a little bit about the farmers’ input costs, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think the top of the list on farmers, when the price of 

grain is so low, I predict that very little fertilizer will be used; I 

predict that a minimum of chemicals will be used; but there’s 

no way to get your seed in the ground without some fuel. 

 

The Tories . . . During the election we had our leader talk about 

it, and it’s been mentioned by many on numerous occasions. In 

1984 Brian Mulroney promised Canadian farmers that a PC 

government would eliminate all federal sales tax and excise tax 

on farm fuel. We liked that promise. People across the piece 

supported it. But what’s happened? The promise has blatantly 

been broken. 

 

The Premier today, oh, forgive them; they’re a new 

government. Forgive them; they’re a new government. They 

haven’t had time. Well I’ll tell you, they could have done away 

with that promise on farm fuel exactly the day they were sworn 

in. That promise could have been removed if they would have 

wanted to. It’s not a matter of being a new government or an 

old government That 12 cents a gallon, coupled with $20 a 

barrel oil . . . And we  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

467 

 

 

think that $20 a barrel oil isn’t all bad; $20 a barrel oil isn’t all 

bad. 

 

In fact, when we were getting $6 a bushel for our grain, I would 

ask the former minister what was the price of oil. What was the 

international barrel price for a barrel of oil when we were 

getting six bucks for wheat in 1975? What was it, Mr. Speaker? 

Well I’ll tell you how much it was. It was about 11 bucks. 

Eleven dollars a barrel, the price of oil — the price of wheat 

was six bucks. Now we’ve got the price of wheat down to $3.30 

— maybe a little less when you take off the handling charges. 

The handling charges are 33.5 cents a bushel for shipping, 

approximately, that handling charges go to Vancouver. So you 

subtract that from their price, we’re getting about 3.15 a bushel 

— half, half the price of what we got when oil was $11 a barrel. 

 

So for the Premier to trot off with his entourage of political 

supporters — past president and the president and the financial 

people that try and put together your election package — for 

you to trot off to Ottawa and convince the farmers of 

Saskatchewan that we’ve got to get an injection into the oil 

industry or everything’s going to go under. I want to tell you, 

once the price of oil is half of what it was in ’75, then you’ve 

got reason to go. Then you’ve got yourself a problem. 

 

Once the oil goes down to $5.50, then he’s got himself a 

problem because that’s what the oil company should get .That’s 

what the oil company should get if we’re supposed to grow 

wheat for 3.15 a bushel. The oil price should be 5.50 and then 

you’d have a legitimate argument. Because if the oil price 

would be $5.50, Mr. Speaker, I again could do an acre for four 

cents, like I used to be able to. 

 

I bought a John Deere 8020 tractor, Mr. Speaker, and you can 

remember those 8020s when they were brand-new. We could 

work summer fallow and seed and cultivate for four cents an 

acre. And we were getting about two bucks a bushel for wheat. 

Price of wheat went up to $6 a bushel and it was costing us 

about two-bits an acre to farm. 

 

What’s it costing now? What’s it costing now for fuel? I’m 

getting $3 and the oil companies are getting 20 bucks a barrel, 

and he’s running off to Ottawa crying about the oil cartel. He’s 

crying about the oil cartel and how bad off they are. Why not 

worry about our neighbours? Why not worry about the 

Saskatchewan farmers who are trying to make a go at that price. 

If the price of oil would come to down to where it belongs at $3 

wheat, get the oil for $5 a barrel, then we’d have a solution 

because then the farmer could possibly grow wheat. Because 

the oil price would be down, the chemical price would be down, 

the input cost to make fertilizer would be down. 

 

The best thing for the Canadian farmer would be if the oil price 

would be tagged to the price of wheat. If we had the oil price 

tagged to the price of wheat we’d be able to make it. But at $20 

a barrel, like my colleague from Shaunavon says, that makes 12 

bucks a bushel. You double the price of oil, and you double the 

price of wheat from ’75 and you’d have yourself 12 bucks a 

bushel, not just for a thousand bushels, for all our grain. And 

then we’d have a solution to the proposals that are there. 

The other area of concern that I’m raising in this motion, and 

that’s the concern we’re having with the Nielsen report. I don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker, and when you’re getting into this debate — 

and I really hope you are — when you’re getting into this 

debate, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Agriculture for 

Saskatchewan, at least give some of your time to the concerns 

that farmers are facing and get into the debate and tell us what 

you told the Deputy Prime Minister about his report. Tell us the 

words and the language you and Ron Barber and George Hill 

used when you talked about the Nielsen report and what that’s 

going to do for agriculture. 

 

(1515) 

 

Introduce increased producer premiums for crop insurance by 

20 per cent, is what Nielsen says — in a time when we’re 

supposed to take an 81 cent cut in our wheat. Nielsen says we 

need a 20 per cent increase in our crop insurance premium. 

Introduce a variable freight rate for the shipment of prairie 

grains to make the grain system more competitive — at a time 

when farmers are asked to take 81 cents. Force the 

abandonment of some of the branch lines to make the rail 

system more competitive. Allow the railroads to avoid 

accountability for the state of the rail system by paying the 

Crow benefit directly to producers. Cancel grain cash advances 

for prairie farmers. 

 

The only little goodie the prairie farmer had when he harvested 

his grain in the 1st of September or August when the new quota 

book was issued and you had your bin full of wheat — you 

could get a cash advance, zero interest. Cancel that program, is 

what Nielsen said, and end the farm fuel tax rebates. Instead of 

reducing the prices like you promised, that report says to end it. 

 

I think it’s time for you, sir, to stand up in this Assembly and 

tell us and tell the farmers of Saskatchewan and tell everybody 

what you think of the Nielsen report. Or did they bother sending 

you one? Or is that the question? Have you never seen this one? 

Don’t you know the Nielsen report exits? Because not one peep 

came out of the political party that you represent. And the 

Agriculture minister saying what the effect that’s going to have 

on our farmers and on our people for Saskatchewan — not a 

word was said as to what you would do about the Nielsen 

report. 

 

I wish you’d have told them in no uncertain terms, and I wish 

you would have demonstrated to him that you’d tear up that 

report and you’d get rid of that report because it doesn’t do 

anything for Saskatchewan farmers. That’s your job as Premier. 

That’s your job as representing the farmers that we represent. 

 

The other area I want to get into . . . And I’m pleased: I was 

pleased to hear the comment. I was listening . . . I was at a 

function in Gravelbourg, and we went out to the car, and we 

were listening very carefully to your nominating committee. We 

were listening to the nominating meeting, and we were 

watching and waiting anxiously, with bated breath. Everybody 

was anxious to start celebrating and say, the election’s on — 

let’s go for it. And the only good news we heard from that is 

that you’ve amended, and you’ve come back on one issue, and 

that is Bill C-215. 

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

468 

 

 

Lorne Nystrom, for more than two years . . . for two years 

Lorne Nystrom has been working hard across Saskatchewan 

and across Canada trying to introduce a concept that called 

parity pricing, to increase the commodity price of goods 

consumed in Canada to a place where the farmer would be paid. 

Under Bill C-215 wheat, oats, barley, beef, and pork sold for 

domestic and human consumption would be priced at levels 

which would return the cost of production, plus a margin of 

profit for farmers. The pricing formula would be adjusted 

annually. 

 

Finally, finally our Minister of Agriculture has come around to 

endorse that concept — finally he’s come around to endorse the 

concept. He’s saying just in wheat, he’s saying just in wheat — 

but it’s a start. You’ve got your foot in the door, Mr. Premier. 

You’ve got your foot in the door, and when you’re back as an 

agricultural economist or as researcher, after you get your feet 

warmed up enough call an election, we’ll have you do some 

studies on this as an agricultural economist and realize that it’s 

an important sector — an important factor in supporting the 

income. 

 

The other area that this can be put into place . . . And you 

suggested a fairly broad number. You said it could be a 

difference of 1,000 to $2,000 per farmer. That is going to 

depend on how you implement it. Are you going to give the 

domestic price increase to so much per farmer, or are you going 

to just slap it in to the wheat pool — the commodity pools — 

and then it’s divided evenly on the amount of bushels that’s 

grown? That’s going to depend whether it’s $1,000 a farmer or 

$2,000 a farmer. And it could even go as high as . . . I mean on 

1,000 bushels or 2,000 bushels per farmer. I think the difference 

could be that it could be made as much as $20,000 per farmer, 

guaranteed farm income, if it’s so much money per farmer. 

 

I think that those variables are ones that can be discussed and 

looked at afterwards, but the principle that you support, you’ve 

finally come around to seeing it our way. We appreciate that 

push forward in getting the consumer to pay what it costs to 

produce it. That’s a good start. I think once that’s done, then 

we’ve come a long way. 

 

The other that is of great concern to me, Mr. Premier, is the 

International Grains Agreement. The last International Grains 

Agreement was signed in 1971, Mr. Speaker. Since that time 

we’ve had both Liberal and Conservative governments in 

Ottawa, and the only difference between those two governments 

and the position they’ve taken on the International Grains 

Agreement is that one’s been in, and one’s been out. Neither 

party has aggressively campaigned for either a floor price or a 

ceiling price on the Canadian grains agreement. They’ve gone 

along and they’ve used the Canadian wheat council in London 

— the International Wheat Council in London — to use it as a 

platform or as a forum for discussion of wheat problems. 

 

Canada has never, let me repeat, Canada has never officially 

called for an agreement on a floor price for wheat sold on the 

international market. They’ve slid along and used it as a forum 

for discussion. The office has become one of protocol with no 

economic clout, no  

power, no thrust. They talk about problems of subsidies; they 

talk about market supplies; they talk about contributions donor 

countries should be making; they talk about foreign aid and 

related concerns in foreign aid. But they’ve never, never talked 

about a floor price. 

 

Here we’ve had a government in Ottawa that has slipped up and 

let pass an opportunity to sign a new Canadian grains 

agreement when the price of grain was high. They haven’t done 

a thing. What have they done? They’ve knuckled under, bowed 

to the four leading grain traders — Cargill Grain, Continental 

Grain, Bunge, and Castle and Cooke — and they’ve bowed to 

them to let them manipulate the market-place and let them 

control where it’s at. 

 

The number one priority from this discussion we’re having 

today and this session is to urge Ottawa to reopen the talks. 

They’ve just signed a memorandum of intent in London at the 

wheat council. I would urge that you urge your colleagues in 

Ottawa — Wise, the Minister of Agriculture — to put forth the 

position that we need a floor price. This business of the 

European Common Market and the Americans dumping their 

grain is something that we, as farmers, can’t compete with. And 

unless you understand that aspect of it, we’re going to be in big, 

big trouble — we’re going to be in big, big trouble. 

 

The other aspect of the resolution that I propose to move, that 

I’ve been talking about, and that is as it relates to the price of 

chemicals — the introduction of federal legislation to enable the 

early development of low-cost generic farm chemicals. 

 

Before our colleagues in Ottawa is a Bill that will deal with the 

farm chemicals and the price of farm chemicals and generic 

chemicals. Two hundred and thirty million dollars was paid out 

by Saskatchewan farmers in 1985 alone to buy pesticides. A big 

part of that $230 million is mark-up, which results in higher 

profits to chemical manufacturers. Prices for farm chemicals 

stay sky-high because the chemical manufacturers are granted 

17 years, Mr. Speaker, 17 years of patent protection for any 

pesticide that they bring on the market. During those 17 years 

they are able to gouge farmers, and that’s why Saskatchewan 

family farms have had to pay that kind of money — $230 

million. 

 

New Democrats want to make some changes to that legislation. 

Our party spokesman, Lorne Nystrom, has introduced a Bill in 

the House of Commons to reduce the patent time for farm 

chemicals from 17 years to four years. This will end the 

monopoly pricing practices and cut the cost of farm chemicals 

dramatically. 

 

In 1969 legislation was passed to permit generic pharmaceutical 

drugs to be sold. The cost of pharmaceuticals was immediately 

reduced to all people of Canada. Similar reductions could 

happen. And I am urging you, in spite of rumours from Ottawa 

that they want to change the Pharmaceutical Drug Act so that 

they can lengthen the patent life — in spite of that — I would 

urge the Minister of Agriculture, and your colleagues, to urge 

your friends in Ottawa to reverse that decision and make sure 

that Saskatchewan farmers are protected. 

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

469 

 

 

There’s many, many, many more things I could be saying about 

reasons why we should have a priority debate, but I am pleased 

that the leader of our party is prepared to second this motion — 

and you’ll excuse me, Mr. Speaker, while I fill this in. I move, 

seconded by our leader: 

 

That this Assembly give priority of debate to a definite 

matter of urgent public importance, that being the 

announcement of initial grain prices for the 1986-87 crop 

year which are the lowest grain prices in seven years, and 

threaten the health of the entire provincial economy unless 

solutions are agreed to. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address some 

remarks to the House on this issue, which I’m sure all hon. 

members will acknowledge is a very, very important issue 

facing our province. The seriousness is indicated by a simple 

review of the figures. And I will not review them exhaustively, 

save to say that the initial prices for number one wheat are 

down 81 cents; for amber durum wheat, is down 81 cents; for 

oats, down 38 cents; for barley, down 66 cents a bushel. And 

those, Mr. Speaker, are respectively 19 per cent on red spring 

hard wheat and durum, and 27 cents on oats, and 25 cents on 

barley. 

 

(1530) 

 

And nobody, I think, can deny that those are very, very large 

drops in initial payments. They are the lowest in seven for 

wheat; the lowest in eight years for barley — and a 27 per cent 

drop, the lowest in eight years, for barley, has got to be a very, 

very serious issue. It appears that farm income across the 

prairies will drop about $1 billion, and about half of that would 

be in Saskatchewan. 

 

The reasons, Mr. Speaker, are not far to seek for the setting of 

initial payments at these low prices. The U.S. lowered the floor 

price, the low rate, by 27 per cent, and that has had the effect, is 

having the effect, of lowering the world prices of grain by about 

the same amount. The world price of grain has been set 

effectively by the United States government. They have slashed 

the price by 27 per cent, and the result is drops in world prices 

of about that order. 

 

Mr. Mayer, the minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat 

Board, has indicated that he is not lowering the initial payments 

by the full amount. He is “cushioning the amount,” to quote Mr. 

Mayer. And while we, of course, welcome the fact that he is 

cushioning the amount, this means that the prospects for a final 

payment are not very good. If, in fact, they have increased the 

initial payment over and above what they would have had they 

been applying the same test as they have in previous year, if 

they are cushioning the amount which the farmer will lose, then 

the prospects of a final payment are less than brisk. 

 

And farm leaders have reacted, some of them with fairly 

colourful language, but all of them with very, very clear 

language. Mr. Turner of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool  

says, what is going on; why are we selling wheat to Japan at 

below the cost of production? Harvey McEwen of the Western 

Canada Wheat Growers, the old Palliser wheat growers, says 

prices have gone all to hell. Charles Swanson of the Manitoba 

Pool Elevators and Bruno Friesen of the Alberta Wheat Pool, all 

are saying the same thing. Turner is saying, “We need a 

deficiency payment of at least $1 billion.” He’s speaking, I 

believe, for all of western Canada. The quote was not clear. 

 

Larry Kristjanson of the Canadian Wheat Board says the U.S. 

farm Bill, in effect, broke the world price, and this is a reaction 

by the U.S. government to what amounted to predatory pricing 

by the European Economic Community. 

 

But the result, Mr. Speaker, is that prices are far too low. 

They’re lower than the cost of production, and we are going to 

have fierce competition in international markets. 

 

Now ordinarily I suppose people would not shy away from 

competition. Canadian farmers can produce a bushel of wheat 

as cheaply as anybody else in the world. And subject to 

transportation costs, they can lay down their wheat around the 

world as cheaply as anybody else. And competitions, therefore, 

would not ordinarily hold any perils for Canadian farmers. 

 

The idea of competition is very much championed by some 

people, including members opposite. But unfortunately, this 

competition is a different kind of competition. Producers are 

going to be forced out; producers are going to be forced out 

because there is a surplus of grain. But it is not the inefficient 

producers who will be forced out. It will not be the high-cost 

producers that will be forced out. No, it will be farmers whose 

federal governments, whose national governments, will not 

protect them in the world wheat war. Those are the farmers who 

will be pushed to the wall. 

 

There is no question that what is happening now as a result of 

the changes in law in the United States — and we’re now here 

criticizing specifically the United States government; they 

perhaps had little opportunity to do anything else in the light of 

the predatory pricing going on for some years by the European 

Economic Community. We’re not here to allocate praise or 

blame. We’re saying that Canadian farmers are caught in this 

cross-fire and it’s a body blow. 

 

And the question we must now ask ourselves is: can Canadian 

farmers roll with this punch? Have they got sufficient reserve, 

have they been operating sufficiently profitably so that they can 

roll with this punch at least for short time? And the facts are, 

regrettably, that they have no extra reserve. A look at the 

Economic Review of 1985 makes clear that the net farm income 

of Canadian farmers was in 1984 — we don’t have the ’85 

figures — $311 million. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is half of 

what they made in 1983, less than a third of what they made in 

1982. Three hundred and eleven million dollars net farm 

income less than half, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I want to 

underline this — less than half the amount made in any single 

year since 1974. So that the farmers in 1984 were in no position 

to absorb body blows of this kind, were in no position to take 

on the U.S. treasury or the European  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

470 

 

 

governments’ treasuries. 

 

Now the year 1985, for which we do not have the figures, was 

not a banner year for Saskatchewan agriculture. By and large 

farmers did poorly in 1985. Although many did fairly well, as a 

group they did not do well. It was not a good year. I look at 

these figures when I see net incomes at times in 1982 of over $1 

billion, and 1981, which was a very good year, of $1.6 billion. 

To give some sense of comparison, 1975, $1.4 billion, and in 

’84, $300 million. Now these farmers are in no shape to take on 

a major price war. Take $300 million and subtract a loss of 500 

million, which I believe this will be, and you don’t have to be 

very sharp at figures to know that farmers are going to be in 

very real problems. It will be grim in 1986 and, I think, even 

grimmer in 1987 by reason of the cash flow-throughs which 

will not be coming in 1987. There is no real prospect of a good 

final payment. Other payments will reduce because of the way 

that support programs are structured. 

 

I would like the government at the appropriate time to prepare 

some estimates, based on average crop assumptions and the best 

price assumptions we can lay our hands on, as to just what it 

will mean for Saskatchewan farmers. Because I think that 

people in Saskatchewan should know this, because they move 

about. They ought to be able to talk to their neighbours in other 

provinces and have facts to explain the real problems that are 

going to be faced by Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

I would very much welcome a kit indicating just how serious 

this is — not a doom and gloom kit, but a hard facts kit — that 

Saskatchewan people could use when they talk to their friends 

and neighbours in British Columbia or Ontario, indicating just 

what the nature of the problem is. 

 

There is not an awful lot of room for optimism in the very short 

term. Now we’re not now saying that all is gloom and doom. 

Saskatchewan farmers have faced many problems, but in this 

particular instance they want to know that they have an ally in 

dealing with this particular battle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There’s not much room for optimism 

on the score of world grain prices because world stocks are at 

record highs. The stocks of almost every grain in the world are 

at record highs, and as a group they are at record highs. Some of 

the stocks — the corn stocks in the United States — are 

astronomic. And this is not good new for world grain prices. 

 

Now what can we do? Well first and foremost, we must resolve 

that our federal government must act. Our federal government 

must act. And they must act in this way. They must provide a 

deficiency payment for Saskatchewan farmers. They must 

provide a deficiency payment for all farmers in western Canada. 

 

Our farmers need some protection. This is a problem that in no 

sense was brought upon by any action of the Saskatchewan 

farmers, or indeed by any governmental  

agency in Canada. It is a world price battle and one in which 

farmers in the United States, protected by their government, are 

battling with farmers in Europe, protected by their 

governments. And caught in the cross-fire are Saskatchewan 

farmers, not yet protected by their federal government. 

 

Farmers deserve the sort of protection which . . . Perhaps we 

can’t ask for what European farmers are getting, but we can 

rightly ask for what American farmers are getting. And they 

require it. And that must be number one. Deficiency payments 

must be number one. And we clearly must urge the federal 

government to move in that direction. 

 

Now there are other things that can be done. Reference was 

made to the western grains stabilization program. It’s already 

provided $450 million last year and will provide about perhaps 

500 million this year. And that is not very much, more having 

regard to the fact that grain prices, wheat prices, are 81 cents a 

bushel less. 

 

So western grain stabilization is not to be despised. It is a useful 

supplement to income. But by and large it will not be very 

much more this year than last. And in the face of a drop of $500 

million in the amount that farmers will get for their product 

when they deliver it to the elevator, it is not going to in any way 

bridge the gap. 

 

A reference has been made to the fact that more than 20 per 

cent of Saskatchewan farmers are not covered by the western 

grains stabilization plan, and they also will be suffering. 

Reference has been made to a $10 price for domestic wheat, and 

no one will deny that that would be useful. We are now paying, 

we as consumers in Canada now are paying the Canadian 

Wheat Board about $7 a bushel for wheat which is used to 

make the breads and the macaroni that we consume here in 

Canada. If this was raised to $10, the effect would be to put an 

extra $3 into the pool on about — my estimate —about 10 per 

cent of the grain. Ten per cent of the wheat, I should say. Now 

that is not very much; $3 a bushel on 10 per cent of the wheat is 

about 30 cents a bushel across the piece. 

 

This is again useful, but in the face of an 80 cent drop in prices, 

a 30 per cent increase paid for by consumers in Canada, is not 

an adequate response to the problem. Other things might be 

done. We could defer any increases scheduled for grain freight 

rates. And some of those people who saw the Crow rate 

disappear and weren’t worried about it must now be a little 

more worried, because those increases in grain freight rates are 

coming right off of farmers’ incomes and farmers’ incomes are 

cut to the bone. One would wish that we had the opportunity to 

relive those years so that we could have the Crow rate still in 

place. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, other governments, notably the 

Government of the United States, subsidize the price of 

transporting grain. Much of the U.S. grain crop is shipped out 

through the Mississippi River system, a very heavily subsidized 

transportation artery. And therefore there is no reason why our 

farmers should not have some measure of  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

471 

 

 

subsidy as well. That subject has been debated in this House 

before. Our position on it is well-known. The position of 

members opposite is well-known. And I regret that that issue 

has been lost by Saskatchewan farmers and they will have to 

pay more for shipping their grain. 

 

I turn now to fuel taxes, and we had in 1984 a firm commitment 

from the federal government that the federal taxes on farm fuels 

would be removed. The government has now been in office for 

18 months. In the face of what is certainly going to be the worst 

farm year so far as prices is concerned for many, many, many 

years, it seems very, very appropriate that the federal 

government now honour the commitment so that that farm input 

cost would be reduced. 

 

And with respect to fertilizers, I know my colleague, the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, has referred to fertilizer 

costs and farm chemical costs. We would urge the government 

opposite to urge the federal government to deal with farm 

chemicals the same way that pharmaceutical chemicals have 

been dealt with for a good number of years, that is that the 

patent protection be modified so that generic chemicals can be 

manufactured and marketed. It has produced very substantial 

savings in the drug market, and in the prescription drug market 

— those types of chemicals. It can produce dramatic savings for 

farmers with respect to farm chemicals, and we would urge the 

government opposite to press that point on the Mulroney 

government because our farmers need every break they can get 

in this very difficult time. 

 

With respect to the provincial government, I will not now 

outline all of the things they have done — they will doubtless 

do that — or might do. One of them I will mention. One of the 

costs is land taxes. Land taxes have increased rather 

dramatically because of the withdrawal of the property tax 

rebates, and I would urge the government to consider the 

reintroduction of property tax rebates. We know that these are 

not large sums of money individually, but in the aggregate, it 

would be 40 or $50 million for Saskatchewan farmers, and 

would be of assistance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, farmers in the next two years will be under 

greater pressure from low prices than at any time in the last 40 

years. A simple calculation will indicate that, if these prices that 

are now out there on the world market are sustained for any 

significant period of time, it will be the period of lowest prices 

on the international grain markets for many, many years. 

 

Now the issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simple. It is whether or 

not the federal government will stand behind Saskatchewan 

farmers. That is the issue. When the farm machinery companies 

were in difficulty, the federal government was seen to stand 

behind Massey-Ferguson. When the banks were in trouble, the 

federal government was seen to stand behind major depositors 

and bond companies and other banks and trust companies — in 

the Northland Bank, in the Canadian Commercial Bank. The 

Government of Canada, in other ways, in other ways stands 

behind, let us say, the automobile industry. We cannot go to the 

United States and bring an automobile into Canada without 

paying a tariff, and this assists the automobile industry. So we 

have many, many industries  

in Canada which have already received the protection of the 

federal government. 

 

The farmers are perfectly willing to compete on a world market, 

on a level playing field. The question is now whether the 

federal government will protect our farmers when the playing 

field is anything but level. Farmers clearly are now competing 

against the treasury of the United States and the treasury of the 

European Economic Community countries. It is just plain 

wrong to ask Saskatchewan farmers to compete against the 

treasuries of those powerful and rich nations. It is just plain 

wrong to send our farmers out there unarmed when they’re 

competing against farmers in the U.S. and Europe who have 

massive government subsidies. 

 

And so it’s not a complicated issue, but it’s a vital one for 

Saskatchewan farmers. We need a federal government which 

will stand up for western farmers, Canadian farmers, in the way 

that the U.S. federal government is standing up for their farmers 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . in the way that the French and 

German governments are standing up for their farmers. Nothing 

other than that will do the job. It is not a complicated issue, but 

it is a vital one. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need a government opposite, we 

need a government in Saskatchewan, which will demand that 

we have a federal government that will act in this way, that will 

demand action from Ottawa and will use all its resources to get 

deficiency payments, which are the only answer to the ongoing 

problem faced by Saskatchewan farmers. Their competitors get 

those payments. Our farmers deserve no less; they need no less. 

 

We need a government in Saskatchewan which will make that 

clear, and we need a government at Ottawa which will respond 

to this pressing need of Saskatchewan farmers. I will support 

the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m rising in 

response to the motion as put forward with respect to the 

importance of agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan and 

the current economic times faced by farmers and farm families. 

 

I believe it’s fair to say that no other minister of agriculture and 

no other premier in this country is closer to and is more aware 

of the agricultural needs and the farm financial picture, not only 

in Saskatchewan but indeed across Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have been working in the province of 

Saskatchewan for the last four years with farmers, with our 

colleagues in neighbouring provinces, with various federal 

governments, Liberal and Conservative, to put together 

packages to help Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And we’ve done it through many, many vehicles. We’ve done it 

through the tax system. We’ve done it through  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

472 

 

 

direct grants. We’ve done it through education. We’ve done it 

through financial assistance. We’ve done it through 

opportunities for marketing their products. And we’ve done it 

quite clearly with a great deal of money from the Government 

of Saskatchewan to farmers in our province. 

 

I can give you just a brief example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

will go through them in a bit of a detail. 

 

But just in the small publication we put forward that farmers 

appreciate very much with respect to the assistance that they 

can get, the farm purchase program, which is interest rate 

protection, from ’82 to ’85 was $31 million in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Counselling assistance program. — new, never been here 

before — was $49 million. The agriculture credit corporation in 

Saskatchewan — $64 million. The feeder association 

guarantees — $7.5 million. The oil royalty refund program — 

$149 million to reduce the price of fuel. Irrigation assistance — 

just under $1 million. The livestock tax investment credit, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — $12 million. Other provincial programs, and 

I’ll put them together — 18 million. 

 

On top of that, we have provincial and producer programs that 

were put together, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Saskatchewan beef 

market insurance programs — $81 million. Saskatchewan hog 

assured return programs — $30 million. 

 

And then on top of that, Mr. Minister, we had federal and 

provincial programs. The prairie livestock drought assistance, 

which was 26 million. The Saskatchewan livestock drought 

assistance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which was 30 million. The 

north-east flood compensation package, which was 14 million. 

 

Then on top of that, if you take the federal-provincial 

co-operation in crop insurance of 642 million, and the western 

grains stabilization program, federal and provincial, $418 

million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to point out is in the 

last four years the average farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan received $24,640 from the Saskatchewan 

government or the federal government. Average on a year, they 

received $6,000. 

 

And in 1986, Mr. Speaker, it’s even bigger. The average farm 

will receive $35,960 in federal and provincial programs 

between the province of Saskatchewan and the federal 

government. And the average farm per year, well certainly in 

that year, will almost quadruple what they’ve received over the 

last four years. Now I will go through these in some detail, Mr. 

Speaker, in a moment. 

 

These programs, Mr. Speaker, are far and above anything that 

has ever been designed in the history of Saskatchewan or the 

history of the country with respect to agricultural assistance and 

farm insurance. Mr. Speaker, these programs were not in place 

by previous administrations. These programs were not there 

under the NDP. These programs were not there when they were 

in power. These are brand-new programs to protect people in 

the province of Saskatchewan that were not there  

before, that literally amount to billions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the hon. members 

were talking about agriculture, this side of the House was quiet 

and listened to them. When I’m talking about agriculture, they 

don’t like to hear the truth so that they holler and fool around in 

their seats and so forth. Well I would ask for their respect 

because I think this is an important topic and not one just to be 

flirted with. All right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are in this legislature 

discussing the role of farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 

and the role of governments, Mr. Speaker, and the role of the 

provincial government and the federal government. And I’m 

just asking them to give me the same courtesy I gave them 

when they were speaking in this legislature. If they want to hear 

about agriculture, I’m going to talk about agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some things that are different under our 

administration than the previous administration. And there’s an 

attitudinal difference with respect, Mr. Speaker, to how we 

co-operate with farmers and to build with them and to deal with 

them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, listen to them again. They can’t stand to 

listen to the truth about agriculture. I would ask you: please 

listen; take the patience to listen and find out the truth about 

agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you know what happened? We have some new 

programs and we cancelled some of their programs. And let me 

tell you about them. This what farmers — farmers all over 

Saskatchewan . . . Well obviously in 1982 they took every seat 

for the Progressive Conservatives except two in the South and 

two on the east side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what the answers were of the NDP 

opposite. This was the answers in agriculture, and all there was 

— all there was. And they’ll have to live with it. They had a 

program that said, if you’re in trouble in agriculture, the 

government will buy your land; and you can go out there and 

you could be called a share-cropper because you will be able to 

live in this new system, this new system, where they picked it 

up either from Cuba or from the Soviet Union, called land bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the answer to farm difficulties. You’ve 

never seen any financial assistance in the ’60s or in the ’70s that 

was anything close to the programs that I’m going through here 

today that are brand-new — brand-new — weren’t there before. 

 

There was the land bank. The land bank was the answer to 

everything in Saskatchewan. When you had financial 

difficulties and the price went up and the price went down, or 

costs went up, they said, you sell your land to us and we’ll hold 

it in government, and then when you’re all finished farming and 

it’s all over, then we’ll be able to say  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

473 

 

 

well here’s a grant, or here’s some welfare because we own the 

farm in government. That was the answer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t obviously an answer. It wasn’t a 

solution at all. It was rejected categorically by people because it 

didn’t’ work. It didn’t provide some help to people. 

 

I’m going to go through programs today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that will show concrete assistance and understanding and 

appreciation for agriculture in this province. 

 

(1600) 

 

I’m going to mention one other — interest rates. The former 

administration can stand there, and the Leader of the Opposition 

can get up and say, well somebody in Ottawa has to help 

farmers when it’s difficult times. Somebody should. Somebody 

in the province should do something when it’s difficult times 

for farmers. And he is sitting over there today saying, my gosh, 

we should be doing something. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

can remember when those folks were in administration and 

interest rates went from 10 per cent to 12, to 15, to 18, to 22 per 

cent — through the late ’70s and early 1980s — and do you 

know what they said? And do you know what they did? 

Nothing. 

 

Farmers were going broke accumulating the debt, and they were 

hurting, and they had their backs to the wall. And what did they 

say? Nothing. Not 1 cent. They let the bank take the whole 

farm. Banks were going right into farmers and taking it all 

because of the high interest rates, and these people didn’t do a 

thing. And they stand up and say today, during difficult times, 

somebody should be doing something about agriculture. 

 

Well at 20 per cent interest rates and 18 and 17 and whatever, if 

they had done anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’d have seen 

some success in agriculture and a lot stronger agriculture today. 

But they didn’t do a thing. So the answer was, we can’t protect 

you, but you can sell your land to the government. That was the 

answer. Put your land in land bank and we will protect you. 

 

And then they would go around, Mr. Speaker . . . and I listened 

to the former minister of Agriculture bragging about all the 

money they made speculating with farm family land. They 

bought the land for $150 an acre, and it had gone up to $500 an 

acre, and they said, look at all the money the government has 

made on the back of the land bank and the families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how they can stand up and even 

raise this issue in the legislature. I don’t know how they can do 

that and go home and look at themselves in the mirror. When 

they would take a million acres of farm land and speculate on it, 

people resent it today and they resented it then. Interest rates 

would go up to 22 per cent and they wouldn’t give them 1 cent 

— no protection at all. And they can stand up in this legislature 

and think that they know anything about agriculture. It’s 

shameful. I don’t know how they can raise it. 

 

And then in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker, they had a new idea.  

They said that they were going to really help folks. They 

introduced a new tax for agriculture — a brand-new tax, Mr. 

Speaker. So if somebody died in your family on the farm, if the 

dad died, the NDP had a new tax. They called it succession 

duty; it was the NDP death tax. And they would tax that family, 

the widow and the orphans, and if you couldn’t pay the debt, 

Mr. Speaker, they would charge you interest. They would 

charge interest, Mr. Speaker, at a time when families were 

hurting. 

 

Let alone they didn’t help when the interest rates were going 

up, but then if somebody died in the family and the family had 

to be passed on to women and children, they said, no, you’re 

going to pay the NDP this death tax. And they charged 

Saskatchewan families $28 million in that death tax, regardless 

of interest rates, charged them interest on it. And if they 

couldn’t pay, they said, well give your land to the government. 

We’ll put it in the land bank, and we can speculate with it, and 

it will go from $100 an acre to $600 an acre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that designed those policies are 

standing up in this House today saying that they want to defend 

agriculture. Nobody in the country would believe them. Where 

were they when it mattered? Why didn’t they defend families 

and farms during drought? I didn’t see any big payments from 

them during drought. You can’t find any. They talk about farm 

fuel. Who taxed gasoline in the province of Saskatchewan? The 

NDP. Who taxed it? The NDP. Who took off the farm fuel 

rebate? The NDP. 

 

Who has put it back on? We have taken the tax off; we have 

provided rebate programs; we have cut their taxes; we have had 

large payments. The complete mirror image, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, And they can stand up in this legislature and say, oh 

well, they would go to the wall for farmers. They have no more 

respect from farmers; they don’t deserve any respect, and they 

shouldn’t even raise it in this legislature. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, farmers want a lot more than that. They 

want to see some vision. They want to see some long-run 

programs that will allow people to build. They want to see 

communities grow. They want to see better research, and they 

want to see real help, I mean financial help -— hard-core help 

— something that you can hang on to and put in your pocket 

and invest in Saskatchewan. Not land bank, not death tax and 

succession duties, not no help when there’s high interest rates, 

not charging them through the nose for fuel — that was the 

NDP answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that agriculture have an agricultural 

college that is absolutely the best in Canada and, if it can be, the 

best in the world. And people have asked for years because it’s 

going to give us the research and the extension and the 

connection between academics and the farmers, to make sure 

that they’ve got the very best information. And they tried to get 

it for years, Mr. Speaker. They asked for a brand-new college of 

agriculture. Where was the members opposite? It’s not 

important, not a priority. Agriculture was not a priority. It was 

only a priority to grab the land and to speculate with it — that’s 

what they did — or tax it. But agriculture was not a priority 

because there was never an agricultural  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

474 

 

 

college built under their administration, and they were there a 

long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers also want markets developed. When the 

NDP moved into the province of Saskatchewan, packing plants 

moved out. Burns moved out of Prince Albert; they partly 

nationalized another one because agriculture does not trust the 

NDP, nor agriculture processing or manufacturing. They know 

that if they don’t treat the farmers right, Mr. Speaker, they 

won’t treat small business right, and they won’t treat industry 

and agriculture right. And so they left. You find me, Mr. 

Speaker, meat packers and processors and food distributors that 

think that the NDP ever believed in agriculture and the food 

business. They don’t’ know anything about it, and what’s more, 

all they wanted to do was exploit it. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker . . . farmers wanted their costs reduced. Give 

me a single example where the NDP reduced their costs. They 

charged them tax on their energy. People have said, I want a 

rural gas distribution system because I can’t cut my costs as 

much as 60 per cent in Saskatchewan. The NDP said, no, we 

don’t care; it’s not a priority. Agriculture colleges aren’t 

priorities; rural gas aren’t priorities; cutting your costs aren’t 

priorities because we can get your land and we can speculate 

with it and then we can brag about it. That’s what they did. And 

that’s what happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have introduced a rural gas distribution system to help cut 

the costs for rural communities and farmers, livestock 

industries, processors, manufacturers, communities — and it 

should have been done 20 years ago. In four short years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have got that a long ways down the road in terms 

of being implemented to families across this province, because 

we believe in them. They are a priority, and they will stay a 

priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations can 

do a lot for Saskatchewan farm families and agriculture. Crown 

corporations can provide individual line service to farm 

families, and they’ve asked for it for years. Never done by the 

other people, but we are providing it because it helps maintain 

rural Saskatchewan — part of a mainstream community. And 

we have said, Mr. Speaker, that we should do whatever we can 

to provide protection to farm families with respect to power 

lines, and wherever possible bury those lines, along with rural 

gas and telephone line service, to make sure we have safety and 

efficiency and a real solid community farm way of life. 

 

None of that was done before. And these people can stand up 

and say, you have to stand up for agriculture. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided irrigation programs, and I haven’t 

started to get into the financial programs. 

 

We have provided building blocks for rural Saskatchewan and 

farmers — building blocks — whether it’s irrigation, whether 

it’s agriculture college, whether it’s cutting their costs, whether 

it’s rural gas distribution system, whether it’s individual line 

service. And, Mr. Speaker, there is no more mechanism in 

Saskatchewan  

that says, if you’re in any trouble, we will take your land and 

we will speculate it. We stopped the land bank policy. 

 

And there’s no more system that just sits back and says, if 

somebody dies in your family, you’ll get taxed. It isn’t here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. It’s not here. It was there under 

their administration, but it isn’t here now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made significant changes. And the 

members opposite say . . . If I might, Mr. Speaker, say, well it 

was removed in ’82 or ’81. There was no death tax. Well then I 

ask them: if you’re so proud of your removing it, how much did 

you pay back to Saskatchewan families? How much did you 

give back? Not one penny. You took money from families like 

mine, and farm families all across the province, and they sit 

there and chuckle and say, oh yes, but we took it off. Well after 

you took it off it was $28 million from widows and orphans at 

the worst time in their life, and you charged the interest on it, 

and you never gave back a cent. 

 

And you can stand up and you run all over this province saying, 

you, Mr. Premier, have charged a tax on used cars for months; 

you made a mistake, and you took it off; you should pay it back. 

Well I’ll tell you, you can’t stand up and talk about agriculture, 

nor can you stand up and talk about giving money back when 

you would tax farmers $28 million at a time of death and not 

give them one penny back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is important in this province and it’s 

important in this country. I decided to take on the Agriculture 

portfolio because it is important, and it’s important enough to 

me to be in the Premier’s chair. I got it on the national agenda, 

and I got it on there because I said agriculture should be 

important, and it should be discussed by first ministers, not just 

Agriculture ministers. 

 

And as a result of the kinds of things that we’ve been able to do, 

Mr. Speaker, we have brought more money to agriculture. And 

I’m not saying it’s enough. But I’m saying that compared to 

anything else, and what we’re about to do, you can’t match it in 

history, whether it was in 1970s or 1980s or the 1940s or ’30s 

or in the 1800s, anywhere in North America. 

 

And yes, yes, I can phone and talk to cabinet ministers from 

Saskatchewan. We know there will never be NDP cabinet 

ministers from Saskatchewan in Ottawa. I know that. But there 

can be cabinet ministers in Saskatchewan that are Progressive 

Conservative, that are farmers, and that know what farming is 

all about. And I can phone Bill McKnight. I can phone the Hon. 

Bill McKnight, who’s from the heartland of agriculture, and I 

can phone him as a cabinet minister. And I can phone the Prime 

Minister and I can say, I need help because there is a drought in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And do you know what happens, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, and is also the 

Agriculture minister, calling his friend and fellow 

Saskatchewan politician in Ottawa and cabinet, saying we are 

going to build this together? Do you know what happens? 

Saskatchewan can stand on its own two feet, and with 

co-operation with the federal government you’ll  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

475 

 

 

see millions and indeed tens of millions and hundreds of 

millions of dollars come right out to Saskatchewan. 

 

We said we had a drought and we needed help, and there was a 

$150 million shot come right through Saskatchewan and 

western Canada. Never been done before, ever in the history of 

Saskatchewan or across this country — ever. And it’s to defend 

agriculture. Farmers in the north-east said they have a flood and 

they need assistance. We can phone our cabinet ministers and 

the Prime Minster and say, would you help us fix it? And you 

get some support, and you get action, and cash goes right into 

farmers’ hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we want protection for out cattle men we 

can call the Alberta people, we can call Manitoba people, and 

we can call the Prime Minister and say, will you do something 

about it? And do you know what happens? They protect 

Canadian cattle men from those offshore imports that are 

subsidized so highly. And it’s done. It’s done, not just from 

somebody whining and screaming about it, but by somebody 

phoning and say, these are the facts, and I’m telling you the 

straight goods; this is what needs to be done. And it is 

accomplished. 

 

For years and years and years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

farmers had to pay capital gains tax. They had to pay. The 

former government opposite didn’t on the land they speculated 

with, but people did — people did — farmers and families. 

They made a little bit of money over the life of their farm; then 

when they sold it and wanted to retire, they had to pay capital 

gains. And farmers throughout Saskatchewan came to me, and 

came to people like me, and said to the Prime Minister: Can you 

take it off? It’s 50 to $60 million a year to farm families here. 

 

(1615) 

 

And the new government, the new Mulroney government, took 

the capital gains tax off, and it’s worth 50 to 60 million every 

year to farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s action, that’s cash, and that’s caring for farmers, 

and response from a federal government that has powerful 

representation from Saskatchewan in that federal government. 

Saskatchewan people can be proud that they have elected those 

kinds of individuals that can sit in cabinet and make the 

decisions that are necessary here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously when Saskatchewan farmers . . . 

And a lot of Saskatchewan farmers, and not only in my riding 

but throughout southern Saskatchewan — and some involved in 

the NDP, I’m sure; well, I know the member from Shaunavon 

— are involved in the energy business at the local level. And 

when we want a brand-new western energy accord, Mr. 

Speaker, we can get it. And we phone, and it’s good for 

Saskatchewan; no more ceiling, no more regulated tax; a break 

for western Canadians and farmers. 

 

Fifty million dollars last year, Mr. Speaker, $50 million went to 

farmers in Saskatchewan out of the oil patch — 50 million right 

to farmers and farm families throughout this province. And I 

know the NDP doesn’t like the oil patch at all, and it’s their 

number one enemy. But with a new  

western energy accord carved out between the province of 

Alberta and the province of Saskatchewan and the brand-new 

federal government, what do you get? You get $50 million of 

cash injected into rural Saskatchewan from Estevan to 

Lloydminster and every place else there’s oil and gas. 

 

And that’s powerful. That’s not just rhetoric. That’s not 

somebody just standing up and squealing and waving his hands 

and cackling, or whatever you do. That’s concrete action, 

because you understand farmers and you understand business 

and you understand how to co-operate with each other, and 

build. Not cry. Stand on your own two feet and say, this place is 

going to be built. 

 

I don’t care what the OPEC people are doing. I don’t care what 

Americans are doing. I don’t care what anybody else is doing. 

We’re going to stand on our own two feet and defend 

Saskatchewan agriculture and farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to dwell on a 

lot of other topics, but obviously we can get co-operation with 

respect to upgraders and with respect to other projects — the 

Regina upgrader, the Husky upgrader, and fertilizer projects and 

so forth — that make sense for Saskatchewan. They’re jobs. 

They cut the cost of fertilizer. They cut the cost of fuel. We 

have never been able to refine our own fuel in this province, 

never under the NDP. You always took it from Alberta. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be able to take our own natural gas and 

make our own fertilizer, our own fuel, and make our own 

gasoline and diesel fuel for Saskatchewan people to make them 

competitive. 

 

I mean, if it was so obvious, why didn’t they do it before? 

Because they don’t understand it. They never have and they 

never will. Nobody, nobody in western Canada or in 

Saskatchewan or any town or village or community here should 

ever let them get back in and do the kinds of things that they did 

to Saskatchewan family farms and people — ever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The farmers and rural people, 

small-business and industry people, know what building’s 

about. If you co-operate with industry, if you co-operate with 

other governments, if you put that package together, Mr. 

Speaker, if you put that package together you can build even 

during difficult times. 

 

I’ll tell you what a government is judged on when it comes to 

agriculture. It’s judged on how hard it tries and how hard it 

works under all conditions. 

 

The former administration lost in a boom, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think it’s worth reminding them. Things were going . . . You 

had $6 Durham and $7 wheat and high potash prices, and you 

know what? They lost because people finally figured them out. 

They don’t really care about families or farmers or anybody 

else. They just care about what the rules and the tools of power 

to speculate with people. 

 

Well, I’ll tell you how you’re going to be judged, Mr.  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

476 

 

 

Speaker, how I will be judged, my cabinet will be judged — 

how hard you try during difficult times and good times and all 

times. Are you going to bow your neck and put your back to the 

wall and defend families and farms and other people? That’s 

how you’ll be judged. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when I go down the things that they did to 

Saskatchewan families, farm families like mine and others, 

compared to anything that we’re doing today, Mr. Speaker, they 

shouldn’t have even raised the point in the legislature. They 

don’t have the credibility to speak on it all. 

 

What do I see today? Mr. Speaker, I see today we have 

designed a large number of brand-new programs and policies 

that help livestock industry, help people during difficult times 

and so forth, and I will touch on a few of them. But what I see 

today from the opposition that can stand up there is, me too, me 

too, me too. If they had it all figured out, why didn’t they do 

any of this when they were in power for 11 years? Why didn’t 

they do any of it? Where were you? What happened? 

 

Well, today, Mr. Speaker, you look at things that go on in this 

province and you look at the kinds of things that we’re doing, 

and all of a sudden the opposition is saying, well it’s kind of a 

good idea that you provide interest rate protection. They do that 

now. They say, well it’s kind of a good idea. He thinks it’s good 

to provide interest rate protection and it’s good to provide gas 

tax cuts. And the NDP say, well it’s good to have royalty 

holidays. Oh and it’s good to have pension plans, and it’s good 

to support the free enterprising small business, and it’s good to 

stimulate the oil exploration, and it’s good to build upgraders. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if they think so highly of those things, I 

don’t know why they don’t just vote for me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, those are the reasons that 

we were elected, because the other guys didn’t do it. And now 

they’re very popular. This is really something, that the Leader 

of the Opposition is going to do all these things plus, because 

he’s finally walked around and he’s listened to people and he’s 

heard the message. Well I don’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. They 

didn’t do it when they had 11 years, and their track record in 

agriculture is pitiful; it’s pathetic. 

 

I’ll tell you what they’ll do, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what 

they’ll do to farm families and everybody else. They will tax 

your gas. That’s what they’ll do, because they did it before. 

They will tax your clothes. They will tax your power bills for 

farmers. They will tax them again. They will stop Rafferty 

projects, which are irrigation designed to help agriculture They 

will close the oil patch again, because they’ve done it in the 

past. And they will centralize government in Regina. They 

don’t care about rural communities, Mr. Speaker. You watch 

out, Melville, because you won’t get any redistribution or any 

decentralization. Swift Current won’t. The water Crown in 

Moose Jaw will be coming back here. Everything else in 

Saskatoon will be coming back here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they will centralize because they don’t care  

about rural Saskatchewan .They only understand the seat of 

power. 

 

And they’re against the bacon plant, and they’ll cancel that. 

North Battleford, look out. You won’t have yourself a bacon 

plant. Prince Albert, you won’t get yourself a paper mill and a 

pulp mill, because they’re against that, and they’ve said so in 

the legislature. There will be no upgraders, Mr. Speaker, 

because they will be cancelling those. All they could do for 11 

years was talk about them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they will tax like they used to. They will hurt like 

they used to. They will cancel like they used to. They will put 

the damper on this province and send it back 50 years just as 

soon as they can get a hold of power. They will cancel all those 

because people don’t trust them and they don’t trust the people. 

Do you think small business trust the NDP? Rural 

Saskatchewan and farmers who deal with rural people, small 

business — do you think small business trust the NDP? They 

don’t trust them. Because the small-business man says, I believe 

in free enterprise. And the NDP says, well I don’t. The NDP 

doesn’t. They’re socialist. They admit it. Fair ball. 

 

But you can’t ask the small-business, free enterpriser to believe 

in a socialist. They won’t. And farmers don’t trust them, 

because all across this province, virtually every rural riding 

went Progressive Conservative. And business doesn’t trust 

them, because what do you do? Well I’ll tell you what you do. 

 

They talk about money. They talk about several hundreds of 

millions of dollars. And this is the best example I can give. This 

is the classic solution. Land bank was, I suppose, classic 

number one. And here’s classic number two. 

 

If they weren’t out buying land from farmers and speculating 

with it and bragging about it, then they went around and they 

took the farmers’ money. And they took $600 million from 

farmers. And they said, we don’t like those big multinationals 

out of New York that are in the potash mines. What we’ll do is 

we’ll take all your farm money, and we will give it to the 

multinationals for their potash mines and send them home to 

New York, and let them put $600 million on Wall Street in the 

banks, and we get the bill in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 

farmers get the bill for $600 million of debt. And we give it to 

the guys we’ve least liked, the multinationals, send them to 

New York, pay them back in American money, with interest, 

and farmers get the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t like to hear that. But I want to tell you 

what happened to me when I was campaigning in Saskatoon. 

This is a man that understood the CCF and a man that 

understood people and understood the kinds of things that 

people appreciate in this province. His name was Mr. Gray. He 

was an old friend of the former premier, Tommy Douglas. 

 

And I knocked on his door and I said, would you support me? 

I’m seeking the nomination. He says, I can’t, son; I’m CCF. 

And he’d had several heart attacks and I started to visit with 

him. He was a nice fellow to visit with, and I said, well how’s it 

going? And he was upset. He was terribly upset — with the 

NDP. And I said, oh what’s your  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

477 

 

 

problem? And he says, are we ever silly — talking about the 

NDP, his party. He says, if we were true socialists, we’d have 

taken those big guys and said, get out of town; here’s a dollar. 

And then we’d have the mines. 

 

But he says, you know what this other bunch does, now that 

they call themselves the NDP. Do you know what they did? 

They borrowed $600 million of yours and mine and gave it to 

them and sent them down to New York. And he says, do you 

know what I got? I got a bill. The people of Saskatchewan got a 

bill. He says it’s the craziest thing he’s ever seen. He says they 

don’t know what they are. They don’t know whether they’re 

socialist; they don’t know whether they’re in business; they 

don’t know what they are. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, it was a 

terrible financial move for farm families, rural families, people 

all over this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you add up the NDP record of land bank, death 

taxes, paying $600 million and sending the money out and 

we’re still paying for it, and, Mr. Speaker, you won’t find 

anybody in Saskatchewan who can be proud of the NDP record 

in agriculture. You won’t find them any place, because nobody 

can defend it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have designed in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the last four years many programs that are, and 

have been, some of the most effective that you would ever see 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and, indeed, across Canada. 

 

We have programs to protect people against high interest rates. 

They go from 8 per cent money to 6 per cent money to zero per 

cent money. The first-time-ever cash advances for the livestock 

industry — we’ve never seen that, Mr. Speaker. Targeted tax 

incentives, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that farm families can 

have enough holidays and a break and an incentive to invest in 

agriculture, processing, and manufacturing. Venture capital 

corporations to make sure there is investment money in 

agriculture. And we have designed programs to provide security 

for farmers. We have provided programs to help them in 

marketing. We have provided assistance, Mr. Speaker, 

assistance to people in this province like they have never seen 

before. 

 

As I said after question period today, I have just returned from 

the capital, talking to federal counterparts. And we put a 

package there that’s worth hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe it will be delivered to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It will be delivered here because they can count 

on folks like Bill McKnight, and Ray Hnatyshyn, and Len 

Gustafson, and the Prime Minister, and the co-operation 

between me, the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of this 

province, and the Prime Minister of the country. 

 

And the programs we’ve delivered to date — when we said we 

would deliver them, they have been delivered. And they have 

brought cash and hope and heart and confidence to people who 

needed it when there were difficult times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve designed a package of programs, and more 

to come, with respect to western grain stabilization, with respect 

to higher price wheat, with respect to various  

kinds of financial packages that we can put together for 

Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, the record of this 

administration is, going to the wall for farmers under difficult 

times. You’ve never seen so much money, you’ve never seen so 

much attention, you’ve never seen so much co-operation, and 

you’ve never seen so much sincerity, Mr. Speaker, in trying to 

help farm families. 

 

The administration agrees with the hon. member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg; the agriculture situation is serious, and 

it does deserve priority, and it deserves sincere respect in fixing 

the kinds of things that we have to do. I, for one, Mr. Speaker, 

will stand here and say I agree with the hon. member; this is 

serious. I will absolutely agree 100 per cent with the kinds of 

things that we are building today, and, Mr. Speaker, I will 

challenge the record of the opposition on agriculture any place 

in this province, any place in the country, any place at all at any 

time, because it’s absolutely pathetic. And my best advice to 

them, Mr. Speaker, is that I don’t believe they’re credible in 

even raising the issue, and neither will the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 

listened to the Premier of this province get up in this House and 

speak on this Bill, and he gets up and he says, how can we stand 

up in this House and even bring up this issue? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s one thing that I noted, and I’m sure everyone in 

Saskatchewan noted, that during that whole time that he spoke 

in this House he never once mentioned the 80 cent drop in the 

price of wheat for farmers of this province. Not once! That’s 

not an issue on his part. It is not an issue, Mr. Speaker. He 

talked about everything else that he could think, of potash 

mines, and you name it. He talked about everything, but not 

once did he talk about what is happening to the farmers of this 

province today. The fact that we’re losing 81 cents a bushel; 

that, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t bring up. 

 

Now I see the member from North West would like to get up 

and say something, I’m sure, but he never does. And I’m sure 

he’ll have the opportunity to do that in this House. But most of 

them are good at only speaking from their seats, Mr. Speaker. 

They don’t get up in this House and talk to the people of the 

province and tell them what they think should be happening, or 

what this government isn’t doing. And that’s a former 

Conservative; that’s what he is — a former Conservative. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the members 

to calm their voices a bit and give the hon. member the 

opportunity to speak. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Listening to the 

Premier — and I notice he doesn’t even want to hear what I 

have . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask the member 

for Regina North West to calm down and let the member speak. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier of  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

478 

 

 

this province wouldn’t even listen to what anyone else has to 

say in this House at this point. And I don’t blame him, because 

when I listened to him and when he stood there and talked in his 

own sanctimonious manner as to how he was doing so much for 

the people of this — and specifically for the farmers of this 

province . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, he even talked about a CCF 

person that he met in Saskatoon and how this person told him 

that what the NDP did was buy potash mines in this province, 

and what did he get out of it? All that he got is someone handed 

him a bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s any sensible person in 

this province that would believe one word of that. I didn’t 

receive a bill on the potash, and I don’t anybody else has. In 

fact, the potash did bring us revenue during the term that we 

owned it. But I know the government doesn’t want to hear that. 

They didn’t want to hear that when they were in opposition, and 

now that they’re in government they want to get rid of the 

potash mines. They want to get rid of all the assets of this 

province. They’re not interested in what is happening to the 

farmers today. 

 

They say that they did all the good things for farmers during the 

last four years. And he mentioned some of those things, Mr. 

Speaker, like the crop insurance. That was supposed to be 

something that the Tories brought in. Well that was in for years, 

long before the Premier ever heard of it, I’m sure. Beef 

stabilization, the hog assistance program, farmstart — all of 

these programs, Mr. Speaker, were in place long before the 

Premier even got into politics. 

 

And what is happening now, Mr. Speaker, most of those 

programs that the farmers had some help from are not as good 

as they were four years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — As he stands in this House and he says that the 

people of this province should never let the NDP even get in 

here again. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of this 

province will make that decision. And I know we have a lot of 

intelligent people in this province. They’re not all 

Conservatives. There are some in there, and a lot of them, that 

know what’s happening. They know what’s happened in the 

past. 

 

They know what’s happened in the past. The farmers today, I 

am sure, would only wish that we could go back to the ’70s and 

make the profits we were making then. If only we can make the 

profits we made in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker. But today we don’t 

see that, and we haven’t been making those profits for the past 

four years. And by the sound of this government, it seems that 

we won’t be making any profits for the next while. 

 

They say we don’t believe — the Premier does — he says we 

don’t believe in small business, we don’t believe in small 

business and the private enterprise. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

was in business myself once. That was in the ’60s, and I know 

how tough it got then, and that was under the Liberal 

government, the Thatcher Liberal government at that time. And 

I know how tough it got from ’64 up to ’70 because I was in 

business then. And I know what it was like after ’71 and, Mr. 

Speaker, I would  

wish that things would only get back to the point that they were 

then, in the ’70s. I wish were back to the ’70s, under the 

administration of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier also said if the NDP ever got back in 

that we would set this province back 50 years. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I had to admit one thing, that this province has been 

set back 50 years, and it’s been set back by this government 

over four years. Four years is all it took to set it back 50 years, 

and it’s going to take a long time to rebuilt it again. But, believe 

me, the people of this province and a New Democratic Party 

will rebuilt it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, what have we seen over the last 

four years, and what do we see today — which I suppose is 

more significant than any other year — is the fact that we’ve 

got wheat prices in this province lower than they were in the 

’30s. That is the impact that it will have on this province today 

and on agriculture today, the lowest prices. And it seems that 

drought, grasshoppers, and Conservatives all seem to go 

together, and low wheat prices. 

 

The Premier should have gone to Ottawa this past week and 

demanded that the government of Ottawa do something for 

agriculture. But what happened when he went there? The 

Premier goes to Ottawa and he takes along some of his political 

people — the president, Ron Barber; and the former president, 

George Hill; and the executive director, Don Pringle; and the 

campaign director, Dave Tkachuk — people who also work for 

the government. And that, Mr. Speaker, are the people he took 

there, and what did he bring back? Before he even got back 

from Ottawa, the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 

Board came to Saskatoon and announced an 81 cent drop in the 

price of wheat. That was what the Premier of this province 

accomplished when he went to Ottawa. 

 

But he didn’t go to get something for the farmers. He went to 

Ottawa to try and build, as was stated in one of the news 

articles, that big blue machine. That was the purpose of his trip 

to Ottawa. He saw he was having some problems in 

Saskatchewan. So you don’t go and try to help the farmers to 

keep up the price of wheat. But he went there to try and build 

that big blue machine. That’s what the Premier was doing in 

Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What he should have been asking for was deficiency payments 

for the farmers. He should have been asking for deficiency 

payments because today we can’t even say that parity pricing is 

going to be any good. Once the price of wheat went down 80 

cents, parity pricing is no longer relevant. 

 

A small farmer, Mr. Speaker, who farms only about five 

quarters of land — and I have many of those in my constituency 

yet — that small farmer stands to lose, with the price of grain 

dropping by 81 cents a bushel, some $16,000. That’s what he 

stands to lose today. 

 

The only thing that the federal government will probably be 

offering now is parity pricing, bringing it up from $7  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

479 

 

 

domestic price to $10, amounting to maybe — if they go on 

what they been proposing, 2,000 bushel limit at $10 a bushel, 

which means only an actual $3 increase from what we’ve had 

before — what’s it going to bring us? About $6,000. So that 

that same small farmer is going to have $10,000 less after the 

parity program even comes into effect. He’s lost 16,000 now. 

He will lose $10,000 even after the parity pricing comes in. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what’s happening in this province today. 

There is no way that farmers of this province can possibly — no 

way that they can possibly survive that kind of price decrease in 

wheat. 

 

We’ve seen many farmers going bankrupt in the last four years, 

Mr. Speaker, many of them. Many of them have been going 

bankrupt. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there are going to 

be a lot more going bankrupt if this government doesn’t get 

after Ottawa to bring in a program that’s going to do some good 

for the farmers. 

 

But it’s quite obvious that this government is not going to do 

that. They are not going to do that. They talk about all the 

things that they can do. The Premier says that all he has to do is 

phone Ottawa and he gets whatever he wants. Well I wish he 

would have stayed home and maybe phoned them; maybe we 

wouldn’t have had an 81 cent drop a bushel. But, Mr. Speaker, 

he talks about the phone calls that he can make and all the good 

things he can get. He says he can phone Ottawa any time and 

get help. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what kind of help he was really 

talking about? We know one thing that he was really concerned 

about, was help for the oil companies. He says this Western 

Accord is a great thing; somehow this is supposed to be good 

for the farmers. That’s going to help the farmers. All he has to 

do is make a phone call and Ottawa is going to do it. 

 

And it seems that he’s still concerned about the oil companies. 

For the last four years they’ve been getting royalty tax holidays. 

They’ve been making hundreds and hundreds of millions of 

dollars off the taxpayers and the resources of this province. And 

now the Premier goes to Ottawa and he says, we’ve got to give 

them a little more. That’s what he went to see Ottawa for, and 

he didn’t even see the Prime Minister because he was up in 

Florida. He didn’t see the minister responsible for the wheat 

board; he was in Saskatoon. But he did see the Minister of 

Energy and he’s saying that we’ve got to bring the price of oil 

up again. 

 

The farmers can’t have cheap fuel. We’ve got to bring it up, 

that’s what the Premier of this province is saying. When the 

price of oil was going up, the oil companies were saying, we 

don’t want government involved; we want them to stay out of 

our business. The Premier of this province was saying the same 

thing: governments shouldn’t get involved; we should let the 

market-place establish the price. 

 

And the Premier today says, we don’t believe in a ceiling price. 

Well, it’s quite obvious they don’t; they liked it when it was 

going up. The oil companies liked it when it was going up. And 

the farmers were going bankrupt day in and day out because the 

price of fuel was going higher  

and higher. 

 

And now when the price of oil started to drop on the world 

market, after all those hundreds of millions of dollars of tax 

holidays that the oil companies had, and the high prices that 

they enjoyed for a number of years, the Premier of this province 

goes to Ottawa and he says, we can’t let it drop any more; we 

can’t let it drop any more; we have to stop it. Somehow he 

seems to think that what farmers need right is lower grain prices 

and higher fuel prices. That’s what the Premier of this province 

thinks. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, he also talked about the Crown corporations. He 

talked about Crown corporations and what they did for this 

province. Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the 

Crown corporations like SaskTel and SaskPower and Sask 

potash did a lot for the province — no question about it. It was 

those Crowns that provided power to every farmer in rural 

Saskatchewan. It was the Crown, SaskTel, that provided 

telephone service to every farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and that will be extended. We said it last fall, that it 

should be extended to private line service too. And those same 

Crowns will continue to provide better service for the province 

of Saskatchewan, but not as long as this government is in, 

because they want to sell them off. They’d like to get rid of it. 

They’d like to sell the cable system off, get rid of it to their 

friends. 

 

Are they concerned about the farmers of this province? No. 

We’ve got plenty of money for Peter Pocklington, but we’ve 

got no money for the farmers. We’ve got a lot of money for the 

Weyerhaeuser — $248 million of taxpayers’ money — but we 

don’t have any money for the farmer. That’s what they keep 

saying. In his whole speech he wouldn’t even mention the 

farmers. He wouldn’t mention the drop in the price of grain. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is how concerned the Premier of this 

province was about the decrease in the price of grain. He was so 

concerned that he wouldn’t even mention it once in his whole 

speech. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province saw him 

for what he really is. They saw him for what he really is — a 

Premier, one can’t make a decision, one that is not honest with 

people, one that won’t tell the people how it really is and what 

is happening . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lusney: — But he tries to deceive them into thinking it’s 

going to be so good, just elect another Conservative 

government and it’s going to be so good in this province. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they know how good it’s going to be. They’ve had 

four years of how good it is. They’ve had four years of it and 

they know, they know how they’ve suffered in those four years 

and they know after the announcement that we heard yesterday 

that many of the farmers are not going to be on that land any 

more. 

 

And the Premier was one of those people that, while he  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

480 

 

 

was still an economist that he likes to talk about, he said that 

we’ve got too many farmers out there. We’ve got to get rid of 

some of them. We have to weed them out There’s a lot of them 

that are inefficient; we’ve got to get rid of those guys. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, they are doing it. Their programs are doing it. The 

federal Tory programs are doing it. They are weeding those 

farmers out, and they are weeding them out very fast. We are 

not going to have too many farmers left in this province if this 

government continues to operate the way they have been. And 

that’s part of the program. That seems to be part of their 

long-term program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the Premier tries to tell this province and the people of this 

province that he is very concerned about what is happenening. 

Well, Mr. Premier, I know they won’t believe you. They won’t 

believe you at all. 

 

He talks about all the programs that he put in — and I’ll leave 

out some of those that I mentioned which were certainly none 

of which he put in. He did offer the $25-an-acre loan program. 

And what did he do with that? There’s going to be farmers out 

there that have to pay it back next spring. And with 81 cents 

less or $10,000 less in income, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 

farmers are not going to be able to make that payment. They 

will not be able to make it. Those farmers are going to have 

some problems. All it did was put them a little further in debt, 

and you can ask the farmers, or you can ask any business man 

in this province, and they will tell you that you cannot borrow 

yourself out of debt. Any of them will tell you that. 

 

But this Premier says, we’ll put you further in debt and we’ll 

put you yet further in debt. We won’t give you any proper help 

or assistance We won’t do what other countries are doing for 

you, but we’ll put your further into debt. That, Mr. Speaker, is 

what this government is saying. And I don’t think anybody will 

believe that that is the solution to what agriculture is facing 

today. That is not the solution to the problems of agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

He talks about the farm purchase program. It’s the same like the 

loan program — another debt load on the farmer. And farmstart 

is foreclosing on farmers. I know a number of farmers that have 

applied for the ACC loan but because they have problems with 

the Farm Credit Corporation they can’t get the ACC loan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that $25 an acre really helping the farmers 

that are in desperate financial difficulties? No, it certainly isn’t 

helping those farmers. We need a program that will give every 

farmer of this province a reasonable price for the grain that he 

produces, a price that he can make a profit on. Then he won’t 

need the loans from this government or any other government. 

He needs to get a price like General Motors, and 

Massey-Ferguson, and John Deere, and anyone else that sells 

anything in this province or produces or manufactures anything. 

They want to get a price that’s going to cover their cost of 

production, plus a profit. That’s all the farmers ask. They don’t 

ask for big profits. They ask to get the cost of production 

covered, plus a little bit of profit. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, does this government tell General Motors or 

Ford or Massey or John Deere that they  

shouldn’t be making a profit, that they should take less for what 

they manufacture? No, he’s not telling them that. But from his 

obvious silence about the price, the drop in the price of grain, 

he is telling the farmers that they should be prepared to take a 

drop in the price of their grain. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tighten their belts is what he’s saying. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — And as the member from the North West said, 

tighten their belts. Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me we’ve had 

that said once before. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Trudeau said that. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — And it wasn’t only Pierre Trudeau that said 

that. I think if we went back in Hansard to the ’30s, we’d find 

that there was another government that said that the farmers 

have to tighten their belts in the province. And we’ve got 

another government here 30 years later that are saying the same 

thing: tighten your belts. Tighten your belts. That’s what they 

are telling the farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I don’t think that we should allow this government to 

destroy agriculture, to destroy the production of food. They’re 

prepared to shore up the banks, they’re prepared to shore up the 

oil companies, but they’re not prepared to shore up the farmer. 

Now tell me, Mr. Speaker, how many people in this country 

could survive on oil and without food? Mr. Speaker, food is the 

most important commodity in this province, in this country. 

 

But no, to the Conservatives, provincially, federally, food is not 

an important commodity. The production of food is not a very 

important industry. They seem to think that oil is more 

important. And if you’ve got oil, then somehow you’ll live on 

it. Well I’d like to feed every one of those members across that 

floor oil for at least a month and see how long they’ll survive on 

it. Because I think the people of this province want food more 

than they do oil at this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got oil in this province. We’ve got the 

capability of producing all the food we need for ourselves and 

to export. All we have to do is take advantage of what we have 

and make sure that it is used for the benefit of everyone in this 

country. 

 

But that, Mr. Speaker, is not what this government is doing. 

They are not doing that. They should be talking today about 

lower input costs for farmers. They’ve let the price of wheat go 

down. But did the Premier mention anything about lower input 

costs, fertilizers, chemicals? He doesn’t say anything about that. 

He didn’t mention the farmers at all in his speech. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He mentioned something about 

fertilizers. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Well one of the members said he mentioned 

something about fertilizer. Well he sure did. He mentioned the 

fact that a few days ago he announced a fertilizer plant that’s 

going to be attached to an upgrader that doesn’t even exist. That 

is what he announced. A fertilizer plant onto an upgrader that 

doesn’t even exist.  

  



 

April 9, 1986 

 

481 

 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how is that going to bring down the price of 

fertilizer? 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are a lot smarter than what this 

government thinks. Business people of this province are a lot 

smarter than what this government thinks. They are not that 

easily fooled. And they haven’t been calling an election, and we 

know why. They know that they may have some problems 

there, so they won’t call it. And maybe their friends haven’t got 

quite what they wanted yet. 

 

They want to sign that Weyerhaeuser deal. They want to get 

everything on the dotted line. They want to make sure that if 

they are defeated they are going to leave this province the same 

way that Marcos left the Philippines. That’s what they want to 

make sure of. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s an example of just how desperate the 

situation in farming is today. A nice little heading on a paper 

that says: “Farm figures frightening and getting worse.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that that is the truth. 

And just to read what it says: 

 

Net farm income has dropped sharply in recent years. 

Statistics Canada report Saskatchewan farmers’ net income 

for 1985 was projected to $830 million, a drop of 23 per 

cent from 1984, and it predicts a further drop of 17 per cent 

in 1986 to 686 million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, statistics seem to show that net farm income 

now is only about $5,000 per farmer. That is all the farmer 

realizes, about $5,000 net income. And when you look at that 

same small farmer that was making $5,000 last year and then 

when he’s going to lose $10,000 on the grain that he produces 

this year, what is going to happen to that farmer, Mr. Speaker? 

What is going to happen to him? That farmer is not going to 

exist: he is going to have to leave his farm. If that continues, 

there won’t be very many farmers left. 

 

It says that average yield has to be — and these aren’t my 

figures, Mr. Speaker — it says average yield has to be about 

48.2 bushels of wheat for a farmer to break even. That’s what 

we have to break even today. And now they drop the price of 

grain another 81 cents. How much do we have to get, Mr. 

Speaker, to break even today? 

 

And this government went to Ottawa and all they could discuss 

was oil prices. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the farmers of 

this province realize exactly what is happening. They realize 

that this government is not going to support them. We know 

that the federal government isn’t going to do it either because 

they haven’t made many moves to do it. They made a lot of 

promises, but they haven’t done anything that is going to help 

the farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one could go on and on and on about the problems 

and what this government has failed to do; what the federal 

government has failed to do. But, Mr. Speaker, I know there are 

many other of my colleagues that would like to say something 

in this debate, and I will therefore be supporting the motion put 

forward before us.  

And we would like to certainly see this government take some 

positive steps to try and save the agricultural industry in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

enter into this debate today, because there’s a few facts that I 

want to make sure the opposition has straight. They’ve been 

distorting them and twisting them, turning them around all 

afternoon, and I just want to set the record straight on a few 

items. 

 

First of all, on grain prices. Mr. Speaker, I came home farming 

in 1975. And in 1975, Mr. Speaker, I was quite shocked to find 

that the initial price offered for wheat was $2.25 a bushel. 

Today we have initial price announced of 3.54. And members 

opposite were going on all afternoon saying we’ve never had an 

initial price this low ever before, not since the ’30s. That’s 

hog-wash. That’s hog-wash, Mr. Speaker. When they were in 

power we had an initial price on wheat of 2.25. So here they 

are, Mr. Speaker, dooming and glooming again, and distorting 

the facts once more time. 

 

Later on that fall — October the 9th, I believe it was — we had 

interim payment of $1.50. And if the sanctimonious simpletons 

in the opposition knew anything about farming or about the 

wheat board or how grain is priced, they’d realize that you 

receive an initial price — which can be changed part way 

through the year with an interim payment — which is followed 

up at the end of the year with a final payment. 

 

But they don’t seem to understand that, because not too many 

of them are farmers. And the guys who are farmers there tend to 

drive Lincolns and fly planes and don’t really worry too much 

about the price of grain, except, Mr. Speaker, when it suits their 

own purposes to stand up in his House and go on and on and on 

and say, I’m worried about agriculture now. For 11 I wasn’t, 

but I’m worried about it now, Mr. Speaker — and 

sanctimoniously stand here and try to peddle that garbage to the 

people out there. 

 

Well the people out there won’t believe that, Mr. Speaker. Not 

now, not in 1982, and not in the future — ever. 

 

Another point, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to straighten out for 

the members opposite, especially for the member . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to advise the 

Assembly that the time for this debate has elapsed, and being 5 

o’clock this House now stands adjourned until 2 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


