


















































June 24, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 24, 1986 
 
 

2275 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Labour-sponsored  
Venture Capital Corporations 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is Mr. 
Jack Vicq, associate deputy minister, and to my right, Kirk 
McGregor, assistant director, taxation and economic policy 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know whether or not 
it’s possible for an investment to be made in an existing company. 
Section 2(b) defines corporation: “means a corporation 
incorporated, continued or registered . . .” Later sections suggest 
that a company must not have had any previous investors to 
qualify. And I wonder what the situation is here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, they can. Under the definitions, the 
objective on the existing companies is to maintain or expand the 
operations. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Investments may be made in new 
corporations or in existing corporations. I take that as the 
minister’s answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But on the existing corporations it’s a little 
more narrow. The objective with the existing corporations is either 
to help them expand or to in some circumstances maintain jobs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. And is there any limit on the amount 
which may be claimed as an eligible deduction under the existing 
corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the maximum investment for an 
individual would be $3,500 with the amount claimed $700, as a 
maximum. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is it possible for employees of an existing 
company who own shares in the company to qualify for the 
deduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As long as an employee doesn’t own more 
than 10 per cent of the existing company and 10 per cent of the 
venture capital company. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So existing investors, people who are now 
investors of a corporation but not exceeding 10 per cent, who are 
also employed by the company, can land this windfall even 
although they are not labourers in the ordinary sense. It seems to 
me that this might be used by existing investors to put more 
money into a company, and by so doing gain an income tax 
advantage. And it doesn’t strike me that that’s what you’re 
attempting to do here; you’re not attempting to reward existing 
investors who may want to increase their investment in the 
company. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well first of all, they have to be employees. 
To the hon. member, first of all they have to be employees. And 
secondly, we put those limits on the 10 per cent limits that I 
identified earlier, to prevent the type of activity that you alluded 
to. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Would the minister define for me what is 
meant by an eligible investment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The eligible investment provisions . . . I have 
difficulty giving you precise definitions of a specific example of a 
company, but the definitions are in 2(1)(g), which is what 
constitutes an eligible investment. It must be equity capital. We 
have the type A corporation, which means that that’s the type of 
corporation that could invest in several different businesses; or 
type B corporation, which is the single-enterprise type of 
corporation — which is similar to the differences which exist 
under the venture capital corporations generally. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m sorry. I frankly don’t follow that 
explanation, and I doubt that anyone who didn’t know a great deal 
more about it than you would, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 
put that in understandable language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well let me go through. If you will turn to 
sections 9 and 10, they have some rather lengthy definitions of the 
eligible investments. If you’ll take a look at 9 and 10, the section 9 
pertains to eligible investments to be made by a type A 
corporation, and this subsection provides that a certain percentage 
of the corporation’s equity capital must be invested in the equity 
shares and debt of eligible businesses at the end of certain 
stipulated periods. 
 
The Act contemplates three types of investments: first of all, 
equity shares of eligible investments; secondly, secured debt of 
eligible businesses; and thirdly, marketable securities. Again, I can 
go into considerably more detail, but the definitions of eligible 
investments are generally defined in that section 2 that I referred 
to, and more specifically detailed in sections 9 and 10. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — For the purposes of 2(f) then, an eligible 
business, what number is contemplated to be defined in the 
regulations? I’m trying to get a grip on what you’re doing here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There are some negotiations with the 
Government of Canada, but the expectation is that we will end up 
with maximum sized businesses of about 300 or less. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, businesses larger than . . . Is that the 
only criteria? Does it matter whether they’re doing business in 
Saskatchewan, employing people in Saskatchewan? Is the number 
of employees the only criteria? Could I incorporate a company in 
Saskatchewan, do most of its business in Alberta and B.C., and 
still qualify for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, they have to be primarily Saskatchewan, 
and the objective must be to create jobs in Saskatchewan, or to 
maintain jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2276 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Does it matter whether or not in fact any jobs 
are created? I gather that’s not a criteria. If they chip in some 
money to retire existing debt, I gather that’s not . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. There may be situations where it may 
look like the company may be in financial difficulty, and in order 
to maintain jobs, to restructure debt for equity investments. So 
again I reiterate that it’s not only create new businesses, but there 
may be circumstances where the employees may wish to maintain 
the jobs. That is, they are eligible in those circumstances. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there also is a reference to a . . . 
I’m trying to find it — the section which deals with a labour 
organization, a labour association. I’m wondering what is . . . 
section (o), to be precise. I’ve now found it. Labour organization 
means: 
 

(in) a labour organization as defined in The Trade Union 
Act; 

 
All well and good. 
 

(ii) a corporation incorporated . . . pursuant to The Non-profit 
Corporations Act . . . 

 
All well and good. 
 

(iii) an investment co-operative; or . . . 
 
Now I’m wondering what is contemplated by (o)(iv). 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We left it open for further consultation with 
the trade union movement, but we could foresee, for example, 
perhaps a group of teachers could well fit into that category. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The teachers, however, would have to be 
employees, I gather, of . . . I guess they would not have to be 
employees of the association. And they don’t have to invest in the 
company of which their employer is in either, I guess, if teachers 
are . . . Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s correct. But they’re an association of 
employees. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Those are the primary questions I had. We 
don’t have any serious objection to this, and I’m not going to 
delay its passage. 
 
I am not convinced that it’s going to produce very dramatic 
results, actually, as it’s now structured. In some ways I hope it 
does. It would be nice to see employees with an ownership, with 
an interest of an owner in the business — the sort of industrial 
democracy. I’m not sure that’s going to happen. It certainly won’t 
happen under the kind auspices of this government which has 
done what it can to make the role of working people as difficult as 
possible. But even under a more benevolent government I doubt 
that this is going to have dramatic results. However, we don’t as 
such have any objection to it and don’t intend to delay its passage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, perhaps we’re a little more  

optimistic than the hon. member. 
 
We’ve had a fair amount of interest from some of the trade unions 
and some of the co-operative associations in the operation of the 
legislation. Certainly I don’t expect results overnight with this. 
This is a new direction that the province is taking; it will take 
some time. If we recall, the venture capital concept itself was slow 
getting off the mark, but has now accelerated to the point where 
last year it was 32 million. 
 
So I believe that as employees become more and more familiar 
with the program and as the program expands, that it will meet 
with a fair degree of success, I believe. The results in the province 
of Quebec are in a not totally similar type of operation, were well 
received, and I think that ultimately this will be well received by 
the employees of the province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’d be interested in knowing who you have 
consulted with for drawing this up, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have talked, or my officials have talked 
with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, the steelworkers, CUPE, the 
union of nurses, Department of Co-operatives, etc. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — On one or more of those groups you didn’t 
make much of an impression, because I spoke to them and they 
hadn’t heard of it when I called them. So the impression was not a 
deep and lasting impression. As I say, Mr. Minister, we don’t 
intend to delay the passage of this and we’re prepared to let this 
pass. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 2 has an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 

Amend subsection 2(1) of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by relettering clause (i) as clause (g); 
 

(b) by relettering clauses (g) and (h) as clauses (h) and (i) 
respectively. 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1915) 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 10 has an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 

Amend section 10 of the printed Bill by striking out “eligible 
businesses”: 

 
(a) in clause (1)(a); 

 
(b) in clause (1)(b); 

 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2277 
 
 

(c) in clause (2)(a); and  
 

(d) in clause (2)(b); 
 

and in each case substituting “an eligible business”. 
 
Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 11 has an amendment which reads: 
 

Amend subsection 11(1) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“prohibited investments that are prescribed in the 
regulations,” and substituting, “investments that are 
prescribed in the regulations as prohibited investments”. 

 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Shillington: — With respect to section 12, the “eligible 
investor may apply to the minister on the form prescribed by the 
minister for a tax credit . . .” Is that a form which is going to come 
with the income tax form and is the income tax form going to get 
this much worse? I remember counting the pages of my income 
tax return this year. The income tax return and related document 
was 49 pages long. I wonder, Mr. Minister, how much more 
complex this document can get. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there’ll only be an additional line on 
form 21C and the T2C form, which they already have. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 17 has an amendment. It reads as 
follows: 
 

Amend section 17 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out subsection (3); 
 

(b) by striking out “subsection (4)” in the second line of 
subsection (5) and substituting “subsection (3)”; and 

 
(c) by renumbering subsections (4) and (5) as subsections (3) 
and (4) respectively. 

 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 18 has an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 

To amend subsection 18(3) of the printed Bill by  

striking out “them” in the second line and substituting “him”. 
 
Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 19 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 22 has an amendment as follows: 
 

To renumber section 22 of the printed Bill as subsection 
22(1). 

 
Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 23 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 28 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The amendment to clause 28 is as follows: 
 

Amend subsection 28(1) of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out “assets” in clause (1) and substituting 
“equity capital”; 

 
(b) by striking out “21” in clause (q) and substituting “22”; 
and 

 
(c) by repealing clause (r) and substituting the following: “(r) 
prescribing any other matter or thing required or authorized 
by this Act to be prescribed in the regulations”. 

 
Clause 28 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, when you 
contemplate this being proclaimed into law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My preference would be at the earliest 
moment, but we do want further consultations with representatives 
of the trade union movement to make sure that there are no 
particular difficulties caused them. We will have further 
consultation with them before the Bill is proclaimed 
 
Clause 30 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan and Providing for the Payment of a Minimum Monthly 

Pension 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To my immediate right is Mr. John Wright, 
executive director of tax and economic policy; to my left Lorelle 
Schoenfeld, Department of Justice, legislative services; Mans 
Crozier, superintendent of pensions, Department of Labour; and 
Adil Sayeed, tax  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2278 
 
 

and economic policy; and Mr. Bill Shupe, assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, do you anticipate that GIS 
(guaranteed income supplement) will be reduced by the amount of 
any pension income received under this scheme? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Consultations are going on with the 
Government of Canada. The expectation is that these will not be 
ruled as income for GIS purposes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is the basis of that belief? By every 
criteria used so far with respect to the income for the purpose of 
determining GIS, this would qualify as income. On what do you 
base that expectation? Certainly not the existing definition of 
income under the scheme as set down by the Parliament of 
Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s a new program. It is obviously 
unique and to date . . . You ask on what we base our belief — that 
we have received a great deal of co-operation from the 
Government of Canada and its officials. We expect that it will not 
be included as income for GIS purposes, and it’s just based on 
discussions with the Government of Canada. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it certainly fits the existing 
criteria of income for the purposes of determining the amount of 
GIS a person is entitled to. What discussions have led you to 
believe that this scheme will be exempted from the operation of 
the legislation? Because that is in fact what you’re seeking. By the 
existing criteria, this certainly qualifies as income and therefore 
would go to make up the income which determines whether or not 
a person is eligible for GIS. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we have the same optimism which led 
us to give the opposition the advice on the Saskatchewan heritage 
grant program for seniors which, under the traditional definition as 
you indicate, would be taxable for GIS purposes. They are not 
included in income for GIS purposes, and we expect the same 
thing to happen in the case of the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t think there’s any comparison, Mr. 
Minister. This is said to be pension income, is like all other 
pension income in that part of it is paid for on a monthly basis by 
people who then have that money available to them when they 
retire. I do not understand the basis for your optimism, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t understand why they would give you an 
exemption unless they have some special interest in seeing this 
government re-elected. Given the amount of damage you did to 
them in the last federal election, I wouldn’t understand that motive 
either unless they were complete fools. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if they’ve given you anything specific, 
or is this more high hopes and optimism on the part of this 
government, who traditionally looks before it leaps, and generally 
winds up getting itself into difficulty as a result. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated now on three occasions that we 
expect that the uniqueness of the program and the fact that we 
have had co-operation with the federal government will mean that 
the Saskatchewan pension provisions will not be included in 
income for GIS purposes. Having said that, again I believe that 
there was some indication from the opposition in the past that the 
Saskatchewan heritage grant would be included in income. That 
was found to be unfounded — and I say that politely. It was found 
to be unfounded, and they are not included for the purposes of 
calculating the guaranteed income supplement. 
 
We just expect that . . . Although this is new legislation, it is 
unique legislation, there is an understanding, certainly within the 
federal government, as to the need for some type of legislation. I 
believe that the federal government would much prefer that it 
work as cause problems. They see the advantages to initiatives 
which encourage people to save for their retirement, initiatives 
which will at least begin the process of getting adequate pensions. 
 
So one may differ from time to time the best way to achieve the 
objective. But as I say, there has been a great deal of co-operation 
with the federal government. And our expectation is that these will 
not be income for the purposes of guaranteed income supplement. 
And I’ve given you that on three occasions, and we are quite 
confident. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Without any evidence on which to base such 
confidence, I think it is clear. The minister has answered the 
question three times, and each time he said, based on previous 
co-operation, we’re confident. I gather . . . I take it from that 
you’ve received no assurance from the federal government that it 
won’t be. You are just simply flying on blind optimism as you 
have in the past. 
 
Did it ever occur to this government to seek a decision from the 
federal government in advance of launching the scheme? This is 
an important point, Mr. Minister, because if GIS . . . if it is income 
for the purpose of determining GIS, then the pension scheme 
makes even less sense and is going to be less attractive to 
low-income people. It will of course still be attractive to 
upper-income families as a good investment. So if indeed this 
scheme is intended to do anything for lower-income people, it’s 
essential that it not be income for the purposes of the GIS. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, did it ever occur to you to seek those 
assurances in advance before leaping into this scheme. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the member doesn’t understand the 
process. Obviously the provincial government made a policy 
decision as to proceeding with a provincial pension plan. Having 
made that decision, once you initiate changes to the tax system, 
there are informal discussions at the officials level with the 
Government of Canada. That is the standard practice in all 
initiatives by provincial governments that are changing the tax 
system, or changing the income system. And so there is that 
informal process. That is traditional. It was certainly begun, in this 
case, at the officials level in the traditional matter. And again, we 
are quite confident that the benefits will not be income for the 
purposes of guaranteed income  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2279 
 
 

supplement. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I think your income is . . . I think your 
optimism is without much in the way of solid foundation. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you anticipate that the income received under this 
pension scheme will be taxable under the Income Tax Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, again, the consultations have been on 
going and to further reiterate, we do have support from the federal 
Minister of Health and Welfare, in terms of the home-maker’s 
pension. So again, we have some confidence for our views. 
 
Certainly, once the benefits begin to get paid to an individual, if 
the individual is in a taxable income level, like any other RRSP 
(registered retirement savings plan), it would fall within the 
taxation provisions, like any other RRSP. So it would depend at 
what level of income the individual has, but it’s similar to any 
RRSP. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you think this is 
going to be taxable income under the Income Tax Act and yet not 
be included as income for determining GIS, I think that’s going to 
require some skilled advocacy to persuade the federal government 
of that position. 
 
What you are saying is: this is going to be taxable income for the 
purposes of the Income Tax Act but won’t be income for the 
purpose of determining GIS. And unless that latter point is 
accurate, it’s not going to be very attractive for low-income 
people. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, of 
course it is. The member should know that. So I say, Mr. Minister, 
I think you are dreaming, and I think it’s a point you ought to have 
. . . I know the minister will stand up and repeat his optimism that 
this is not going to be taxable, but, Mr. Minister . . . I’m sorry, you 
did not say that. You said you thought it was going to be taxable. 
 
I know the minister will stand up and repeat his optimism that this 
will not be income for the purpose of GIS. I think that’s not likely 
to be. If it’s income under the Income Tax Act, it is very likely to 
be income under the GIS scheme as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, that is totally incorrect. There are two 
different programs involved. No one getting the GIS is paying 
income tax. I mean, it is a senior supplement. If at that income 
level, they are getting GIS, then — and this is not income; we’ve 
discussed that — you get someone at a higher income that may 
have other sources of income in addition to their pension income. 
If they receive the benefits of their RRSP, and they’re in a taxable 
category, they will pay income tax. So there are two different 
programs involved and two different policies involved. So to try 
and equate the two, they don’t work together; they are not 
designed to work together. One is an income supplement; the 
other is based on people who have taxable income. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to pursue 
it. I guess time will tell. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to take a long time in dealing with this 
Bill. We had a debate this afternoon of an hour and three-quarters 
in length — of an hour and one-quarter in length; it’s not 
necessary to repeat that. 
 
There are, Mr. Minister, two shortcomings that I see with this Bill. 
Let me say in the beginning, and I will repeat it in the end, I saw 
members this afternoon go to considerable lengths to describe our 
position. I will give them some assistance in doing that. We voted 
for the Bill on second reading, vote for it again in the third 
reading. 
 
We wished however that you had expanded your vision 
somewhat. This Bill is a great deal less than it might have been. 
One of the difficulties with this scheme is that it is a provincially 
funded scheme. It therefore lacks portability. Some changes to the 
federal pension scheme would have been a great deal better for 
Saskatchewan people, indeed for all Canadians. 
 
So I express the regret, as I have before, that this is a provincial 
scheme. It is I think unwise for provinces in this country to be 
setting up pension schemes. They lack portability, and the poorer 
regions of the country are unlikely to enjoy this quality of pension 
schemes that richer regions . . . 
 
As well, Mr. Minister, I think the voluntary nature of this scheme 
is going to mean that those who need it most are unlikely to take it 
up. That is particularly true if it’s not exempt income for the 
purpose of determining the GIS. But even if you do achieve that, it 
is still, Mr. Minister, I think unlikely to be taken up by 
lower-income people. When single parent families, and so on, 
struggle as they do to put food on the table, to pay the rent, to put 
decent clothing on their children to send them to school, never 
mind such things as hockey equipment and musical instruments, 
they are unlikely to be putting lumps of money into this scheme. 
That’s unfortunate, but I think that’s the way our society is. 
 
While the member from Morse, I believe it was — it may have 
been the member from Regina Victoria — wonders why it is that 
those people squander all their money. I say that is a heartless 
remark. There’s little squandering of money at the welfare level at 
which you people provide, and I say that is a heartless remark. 
 
Mr. Minister, it therefore, I think is going to . . . And as well, I 
think it may well be abused by upper-income families where all 
the income falls into the hands of one person. For those people, 
who will probably not lack adequate reserves in their retirement 
years, this is a form of investment. It’s a very good one, since 
someone else pays half the cost of the investment. 
 
I think it would have been a sounder scheme and would have 
provided more assistance to those in need, had the criteria of the 
guaranteed income supplement been used, and that is, you would 
have used family income instead of an individual’s income. This, 
as I said earlier in the day, makes it possible for spouses of 
high-income people, often professional people but sometimes 
senior  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2280 
 
 

executives in corporations, to take advantage of this scheme. And 
they’re often affluent families who, as I say, will not lack for 
savings or reserves in their old age. This is an investment for them, 
and a very good one. I’m not sure, however, such upper-income 
families are an appropriate target for public funds. A more 
appropriate target for public funds are those on the other end of the 
income scale, and I don’t think it’s going to do a great deal for 
them. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, I say in conclusion, as I said in the 
beginning, that the pension scheme undoubtedly will assist some 
people, and we therefore do not intend to vote against it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do have one other concern which is unrelated to 
anything which I’ve said so far this evening, although I touched on 
it this afternoon, and that is that there would appear to be little in 
the Bill which establishes guide-lines for the sort of investments 
the government may make in this scheme. 
 
The minister will know as well as I do that for many years funds 
in the hands of the official guardian were lent out at rates which 
were below the market rate. And I do not wish to impute anything 
other than the highest of competence and integrity to this 
government; but frankly, I suspect that others who are less 
generous than I might suspect that the government is going to 
borrow these funds for its own purposes at rates which are not 
equal to the market rate. 
 
I look back not only upon our experience in years gone by with the 
official guardian; I look back as well, Mr. Minister, on SaskPen, 
an investment that I think is becoming increasingly suspect. And it 
appears that in some cases, SaskPen moneys have been used to 
provide funds for developers who are friends of the government. 
So I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that there ought to be strict 
criteria for . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services did not 
answer the questions last night. I listened to the member from 
Regina Elphinstone ask you repeated questions; I saw the minister 
repeatedly avoiding answering those questions. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that there ought to be some strict criteria in 
this legislation which would govern the kind of investments that 
these funds in this pension fund can be utilized for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I remain, like most of the public, 
absolutely amazed at the NDP position on the Saskatchewan 
pension plan. For the first time a government is recognizing the 
individual contribution of home-makers in this province, and 
when that is done, the NDP takes a position that no, we should not 
look at their individual contribution, we should look at the family 
income levels as opposed to what the home-maker has contributed 
or the position of the home-maker. 
 
I’m sorry, and I advise the hon. member we are not going to stand 
here and apologize for treating home-makers as making full 
contribution in society and that they should have some opportunity 
for a pension plan. We considered and rejected your proposals that 
the  

home-maker should not have the opportunity to make her own 
decisions and to make her own contribution and have a pension 
plan in her own right. 
 
We have a fundamental difference, and what difficulty I have is 
that is fundamental to the concept of the Saskatchewan pension 
plan. And every time you have objected to the fundamental core 
concept of the Saskatchewan pension plan, you have criticized it, 
but some of your members say you’re going to vote for it. But this 
afternoon the hon. member knows that the member from Regina 
North East stood up in this House and said that he was going to 
vote against the Saskatchewan pension plan — and that is 
precisely what he said. He said it on two or three occasions this 
afternoon. 
 
Now certainly the Leader of the Opposition has said that he would 
vote for it, and you have said you would vote for it. But this 
afternoon the member from Regina North East made it abundantly 
clear on a couple of occasions that he was opposed to this pension 
plan and was going to vote against it. Everybody is wondering 
how on the one hand you can say you’re opposed to the 
fundamental core concept, which is that home-makers should have 
a pension plan in their own right, and then you say, oh well you’re 
going to vote for it anyway. That’s amazing a great number of 
people in the province. 
 
With regard to the question of portability, the Act makes provision 
that if other government shave similar compatible plans, that we 
can enter into reciprocal agreements. Certainly if the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan are making a 
contribution to the pension plan, there should be some realization 
that that, as much as possible, should stay in the province. And if 
someone elects to move, why should we be making that 
contribution beyond the borders unless there’s a reciprocal 
arrangement? 
 
Certainly with making that contribution, we believe that there are 
a couple of obligations: one, that as much as possible the money 
stay in the province. Obviously if someone retires and is receiving 
benefits and moves out, they still get their benefits. Secondly, it is 
totally portable within the province of Saskatchewan. As people 
move from employer to employer or from community to 
community, the pension plan will go with them. 
 
Finally, with regard to investments. If you take a look at section 17 
of the Bill, section 17 sets out the investing rules for the pension 
plan. They are quite specific and they are laid out similar to 
virtually all other government pension plans. Certainly the one 
criteria that we would wish is that if it is a good investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that that should be seriously looked at 
by the board of trustees. I don’t think that is unfair, and I know 
that the people of Saskatchewan don’t think that’s unfair. If there 
are opportunities for good investments in the province, I would 
hope that all Saskatchewan pension plans — not just the 
Saskatchewan pension plan itself that we’re debating tonight, but 
all people investing in the pension plans — I would hope that they 
would want to see their investment funds, if there’s a good 
opportunity in Saskatchewan, that they be taken seriously. I think 
that’s only fair. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2281 
 
 

(1945) 
 
I think it’s only fair that some of the moneys, if at all possible and 
they’re good investments, be utilized in the province. I strongly 
suggest to the hon. member that most people in the province 
would agree with the government’s position on that. Again, we 
have a fundamental difference on a very core principle to the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, and that is that home-makers should 
be treated as individuals in their own right and should have the 
opportunity to save for a secure retirement. 
 
That is a principle that we are putting forward. It’s one that you’ve 
opposed, and I know much to the concern of many organizations 
out there, but it is fundamental to the position of the government, 
and let me assure the hon. member that the decision to look upon 
home-makers as individuals in their own right was a very easy 
decision for this government to make. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Table 1 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may, Mr. Chairman, take the opportunity 
to thank the many officials, some of who are here tonight, for their 
work, not only in drafting, but in review of the many policy 
decisions that had to be made in the preparation of this legislation 
and the program. 
 
There’s been a tremendous amount of dedication by the 
individuals and a great amount of work, and I, on behalf of the 
government, would like to thank them for a very professional job 
under some time constraints. But they did a superb job, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I also want to extend my 
congratulations to the officials. This is one of the few programs 
and Bills this government has brought forward which has not been 
an utter and complete flop and a disaster and an embarrassment. 
 
To that extent I assume the officials must be capable and 
competent because they’re working with a government which has 
proved to be just the opposite. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act respecting the Establishment of 
Ambulance Districts and Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance 

Operators and Emergency Medical Personnel and the 
Provision of Ambulance Services in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I would, seated beside me is Jim 
Simmons, the executive director of the ambulance unit, the 
Department of Health; and behind me, administrative 
co-ordinator, Michael Littlewood; and Linda Zarzeczny is coming 
in in a minute. She isn’t here just yet. She’s one of the Crown 
solicitors for the Department of Health. 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Chairman, I had wanted to ask the 
minister a couple of questions about the advanced training 
program of the ambulance operators and some of the people who 
work with ambulances. Can you give me an update on where that 
program is at? As I understand it, the first class has now graduated 
and there’s no subsequent training taking place. Can you bring us 
up to speed on where that’s at at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I’d be pleased to do that. I was present 
just last week at the graduation of the first 15 graduates from the 
advanced medical technologist course. I think they will add a very 
good dimension for the training to our people who are working in 
the ambulance field. I believe the course is quite well constructed 
and in talking to the graduates the other day, they were very, very 
pleased that they were the first graduates of this course, and 
looking forward to entering the ambulance service. 
 
This was rather a pilot course; we’re evaluating it. I feel very, very 
positive that we will continue with the course in this next year. Of 
course it is sponsored by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Manpower, but . . . The one thing I was a little concerned about, 
and I think you would share my concern, is that you don’t want to 
turn people out if there isn’t employment for them. But certainly 
of these 15, I believe four of them are going out into the rural 
areas, which we will both appreciate. I certainly feel that there’s 
room for another class and probably subsequent ones down the 
way. I think they’re well trained and I think they’re going to add 
an extra dimension to the service in this province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —How many people are presently in the 
training course? You say 15 have graduated. Is there another 
group of them now in training? And or is that program now under 
— I suppose — review, awaiting whether or not these 15 get jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The 15 all have jobs. And they’re the first 
ones out of the course. As I said, we wanted to take a look at it and 
see how it was going to be accepted. It’s been very, very positive. 
I feel certain . . . You’ll have to ask my colleague when he would 
institute the course, but from our point of view, from the service 
end, we would like to see another enrolment of say another 15 or a 
dozen or whatever it is in this coming year. Whether that would be 
September or January, you’d have to ask the minister, but 
certainly I feel we’ll see more of them coming up. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —I know that there was some complaints from 
ambulance operators about the fact that the program wasn’t going 
ahead quick enough, and that the training program wasn’t ongoing 
— and this was earlier this spring. And they were saying that it’s 
never a lack of whether or not there are jobs for them, but whether 
or not the funding is there from the provincial government to 
allow for ambulance operators to hire people who are better 
trained. 
 
And I suppose it’s a bit of a Catch-22. Whether or not ambulance 
operators can hire these individuals is a  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2282 
 
 

question of money; whether or not there is funds available from 
the provincial government to hire more qualified individuals. And 
if the money isn’t there then they can’t hire them and you don’t 
need the training program. 
 
But it doesn’t necessarily follow that if you trained them and had a 
proper funding of the ambulance program, that of course I’m sure 
that all the ambulance operators would want to hire higher trained 
and better trained individuals if they thought they could afford to 
do it. 
 
And I would just encourage your government to continue on with 
this program because I think it’s well accepted by the public and 
by the hospital boards where they see the result of better trained 
and more qualified people in the ambulance bringing people in. 
And I just urge you to carry on in that area and not, I suppose, fall 
to the urgings of some of the bureaucrats in the Finance 
department who say in order to cut spending that this is one area 
that we can give up. And I well know how that process goes. I 
would just urge you as the minister responsible to stand up and 
fight like hell to make sure that the money is there for that. 
 
I want to ask as well, in the area . . . in Moose Jaw, the issue of the 
ambulance operator there changing. And I don’t pretend to be 
asking these questions for a supporter of our party, because 
Dwayne Hayter is the furthest thing from a supporter of our cause, 
as you’ll realize knowing the 1982 role that I believe he played 
within the ambulance operation. 
 
But I want to know whether or not a consideration was given to 
some type of an inquiry into the complaints that Mr. Hayter was 
making at the time that that change took place. I believe he 
approached you personally to see whether or not an investigation 
or a public inquiry or an inquiry of some type could be instituted. 
And if he didn’t approach you directly, I understand that he 
approached your MLAs in Moose Jaw and through them, to you. 
 
But is there any thought now about a review or an investigation or 
an inquiry into that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly on the whole aspect of the 
employment of the EMA-2 people, certainly we see that as an 
integral part of ambulance services. As you will recall, when I 
took over as Health minister, ambulance services were scattered 
throughout government departments. It was in Urban Affairs — 
more a transportation system than emergency medical treatment. 
So we had a report done. 
 
And I should say . . . And I give congratulations to my colleague 
of a number of years, the member from Moosomin, Mr. Birkbeck, 
who did a very exhaustive study into ambulance services across 
this country, and I think came up with a report that certainly has 
been the corner-stone for an improved service delivery in 
Saskatchewan. And of that, certainly upgrading of units, of 
equipment, is an integral part. Certainly the development of 
further trained personnel is an integral part which you see taking 
place. 
 
And there’s no dispute that those things . . . If you’re going  

to have better equipment and better trained personnel, funding has 
to keep pace with that. And I think the record over the last four 
years of ambulance services, with an ambulance unit created 
within the Department of Health where I believe it should have 
always been — it is a health service — and with an ambulance 
advisory board made up of a cross-section of people from the 
medical community throughout Saskatchewan, I think we’re 
certainly on the right step to making this perhaps one of the finest 
ambulance services in the province, and I thank you for your 
encouragement. And certainly I realize, as a minister . . . and I 
think you said something like, fight like hell. Well I think you 
know from my past operation in this House with you that I can 
stand up and fight for what I believe is correct, and I will certainly 
do that to get the money for the ambulance unit. 
 
The second part of your question was in regard to the Royal 
Ambulance of Moose Jaw. Certainly the board, for various reason 
that they felt were justified, thought to go on a bid for another 
supplier of service and selected a different ambulance company 
other than Royal Ambulance. The owner did make representation 
to me, and through some of my colleagues to me. I had members 
of my ambulance unit take a very close look at it to see that the 
board was operating within the mandate as set down. They found 
no discrepancies. I asked Mr. Birkbeck, the author of the report, 
and my legislative secretary, Mr. Lloyd Sauder, to go and visit and 
report back to me their findings. Both groups came up with the 
same finding that there was no impropriety in the operations of the 
board, so based on those findings I did not ask for any special 
inquiry. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Can you outline to the committee what led to 
the changes taking place where one ambulance operator was 
removed from the position and another one hired. Was it lack of 
service or improper equipment? What was the main reason that the 
change was made? Or was it a saving to the department? How did 
the change take place, and what were the reasons behind it? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There had been some dissatisfaction over a 
period of years with the board. I think financial accountability, 
certain costs — I wouldn’t deny that there was even some 
personality conflicts that maybe had entered in there a bit. There 
was numerous factors that led the board to decide, and I believe 
almost unanimously, that they should look for another operator. 
 
I think Mr. Hayter also had the opportunity to bid, of course, on it, 
but their decision was to go with another operator. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well I’m not going to spend any more time 
in this area, just to say that I know there were hard feelings. And I 
suppose regardless of the individual’s political background it’s 
unfortunate when a small-business man, an entrepreneur, leaves a 
position where he felt he was doing a good job. I think in all 
honesty he felt that way and simply can’t understand how the 
government allowed this to take place. Far be it from me to make 
the defence for him. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2283 
 
 

I would just say in closing that we’re a little disappointed that 
there isn’t more money for ambulances. And I understand that 
there has been some marginal increases. But what I’m saying is 
that with what is happening with the cut-backs from Ottawa in 
transfer payments through the EPF (established program of 
financing) funding, where we have seen a good deal of money 
being cut back, in Manitoba . . . I think most clearly at the 
committee stage of the federal Bill, clearly outlined what that 
would mean to Manitoba. 
 
What it will mean to us, according to the Canadian Hospital 
Association, is a 154 million cut-back in the next five years, or by 
1990-91, and I think this will lead to hard times in the ambulance 
service. Either it will mean restraint in the money that goes to 
ambulances or you will have to raise taxes in order to keep the 
same service because of the cut-backs of the federal government 
— as you have indicated in your own estimates, this year alone $9 
million to the Department of Health being cut back by the federal 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I will leave the Bill at that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, we’ve 
debated the idea of possible cut-backs for many weeks in this 
Chamber, so I don’t mean to get into that debate with the member 
opposite at this time. 
 
But I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, and the members of this 
House and the people of Saskatchewan, that it is one of the 
objectives of our government to have a first-class ambulance 
service in this province. And I believe, if you look back from the 
formation of the ambulance unit in the Department of Health and 
look at the steps that have taken place over the last three years, 
you will see that there have been significant increases, significant 
improvements. 
 
And as I said earlier, I realize, with people who are trained better, 
with more expensive equipment, with building a first-class type of 
system, it’s going to take more money each year. I can say that 
that’s a commitment this department has and this government has, 
to provide the best service possible for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 46 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting the Provision of Home Care 

Services 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would. The same two 
officials that were with me previously are here, and joining us is 
the director of home care, Mrs. Lois Borden. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to take  

very much time with this Bill. Basically what we’re doing is 
setting up legislation for the home care which our government saw 
fit to bring in back in the late ’70s and early ’80s: a program I 
think which has been accepted throughout the province and stands 
as a model in Canada, like many of the other social programs that 
we brought in while we were in government — the hearing-aid 
program and the SAIL program, dental program for children. 
 
The home care was one of the most recent ones that we brought in. 
And I remember very well in the House answering questions of 
your colleagues who were attacking the home care program 
continually while you were in opposition, but I think that now that 
you have had an opportunity to be involved with the program, you 
realize what a great program it really was, brought in by the 
Blakeney government in the late ’70s and early ’80s. But I was a 
little upset to see in the June 19, Star-Phoenix, a headline, “Home 
Care agency must trim services to meet budget.” 
 
The story starts out, Mr. Chairman, by saying: 
 

For the first time in the history of the Saskatoon district of 
Home Care, the agency is having to trim services to deal 
with its operating deficit. 

 
What we are seeing now is storm clouds on the horizon for this 
program which I think everyone in the province admits is a very 
excellent program for seniors and others who are in need of home 
care, whether they are people who are released from hospital or 
possibly people who are getting therapy after an accident and that 
type of thing. But what I’m hearing now from many of the home 
care districts is for the first time they are having difficulty with 
their deficit. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you indicate whether this is a 
widespread phenomena, or could you indicate how many home 
care districts are sharing the problem of the Saskatoon district 
home care agency of not having enough money from your 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I’m not going to argue with you over 
who invented the wheel, because there was a wheel invented, and 
probably when the first wheel was, it was like a wagon wheel and 
had a steel rim on it. But then as things improved, they became 
rubber tires, and I think for an analogy, we’re putting the rubber 
tire on the wheel. So certainly there’s been a number of 
improvements in home care over the last three or four years. 
 
One of the things that I see in home care provisions . . . There are 
two basic groups out in society that use home care, that is the 
younger disabled and the elderly. The greatest preponderance of 
those people are the elderly. We have over the past two or three 
years shifted the funding formula to be cognizant of that fact 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, it is and I hope you understand 
it, sir. 
 
Most recently in the last budget, we have put in a factor of a $30 
extra payment for anyone over 75 years of age. We are aware that 
Saskatoon home care has been increasing its service at an 
astronomical amount. We put extra  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2284 
 
 

money into Saskatoon home care last year of — well I remember 
the day in Prince Albert when I said there would be an extra 
$400,000 for those with heavy-care clients and I think a good 
portion of that money went to Saskatoon. In this year, over and 
above the funding formula that all others receive and the extra $30 
for those over 75 years of age, Saskatoon are receiving an extra 
$650,000. 
 
So it may be true that the demands in Saskatoon are greater than 
anywhere else in the province, but we’re certainly not neglecting 
them. I agree with you that if we’re going to look at servicing the 
needs of seniors in this province, there are three or four very 
important aspects. One is for those people who need heavy care or 
special care homes, and you know our record in construction of 
those — 1,600 over the past four years, I think, is greater than any 
other government in Canada. You need also home care services. 
You need respite care, and you need adult day care. 
 
But the thing that is most important, the thing that I would believe 
that I’m the most proud of is the acceptance by the people of 
Saskatchewan to the concept of district co-ordinating committees 
where everyone comes before the same committee and is 
evaluated under the same criteria. And that committee looks at that 
individual, Mr. Chairman, and says, I think that individual will be 
best served perhaps for a while in an acute care hospital. And then 
the day that they are going to be discharged or even before then, 
home care are let know, and they provide for those services. And 
they monitor that person, provide nursing services, meals, 
whatever is needed, and for some periods of time, they may go 
into a nursing home. And in some situations, we’ve explained this 
before — I won’t take up too much of the time in the House — 
but in some situations, and I think you would support me on this, 
that there are individuals in Saskatchewan who are going into 
nursing homes, and after a recuperative period, going back into the 
community with home care and living there for three or four years. 
 
When I listen to seniors, that’s what they tell us they want to do, 
and certainly there is no question here that beefing up the home 
care, as we’ve done in the past three years and in future years, will 
be a priority of this province. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Minister, you indicate that development 
of home care has been continuous. While we won’t argue about 
who started it because obviously we all know who started it. And 
there has been continuous development up till the last year. And 
these are the kinds of reports that I’m now getting, not from every 
home care board, I might add, but from a number of them — some 
of them rural and some of them, urban. 
 
But headlines like this, “Home care agency must trim services to 
meet budget”. And I suppose it’s a little bit like the development 
of the automobile under the Conservative government, when the 
Bennett government was in back in the ’30s, they had to take the 
motors out of the car and hook up to horses again. And what I’m 
hoping is that we don’t move backward in the home care area that 
this headline would indicate. And as I say it might be  

an isolated case and there may only be a few of them in the 
province. 
 
What I also hope isn’t happening is that this front that we are 
putting up here on Health isn’t just that and that a newly re-elected 
government in Alberta. And there’s a headline here, “Medicare 
services plan cuts being considered in Alberta” While a month 
before the election Mr. Getty was saying that there was no way 
that there would be any cuts to medicare, and now a month after 
the election, we have and quote from the Minister of Health in 
Alberta, “We’re looking at the possibility of taking some services 
now covered by health care insurance right out of the plan, Moore 
said.” 
 
Now I just hope that the people of the province if they chose, I 
don’t think they will choose to re-elect this Conservative 
government, but if they did, that they wouldn’t be treated in the 
same manner that your colleagues and friends in Alberta are 
treating the residents out there with health care, and the 
announcement that some of the programs will be pulled out of 
medicare and charged the full rate. And I don’t know whether he’s 
referring to home care or not, but it could be that that is one of the 
things they’re going to pull out of the medicare system, and as Mr. 
Moore the Minister of Health indicates, not include it. 
 
And when I see these kinds of cut-backs taking place that are 
referred to by the people in Saskatoon, I think that raises the 
spectre of a Conservative government in its second term taking a 
run at the medicare system which — and I’m not saying this of 
you, sire, because I don’t think that you are in that group, but there 
are some radical right-wingers in your party, and I’ve met a few of 
them who don’t believe in medicare. 
 
I have some in my constituency, and I know there are a few in 
your caucus — these radical right-wingers who think that 
everyone should pay for their own medicare. And these are the 
kinds of things that begin to creep into the medicare system after 
right-wingers have a chance to have a little go at it. That’s why 
I’m a little worried about a re-elected Devine government, that it 
might take a vicious turn to the right. 
 
There are other signs on the horizon — Peter Pocklington coming 
in, and Weyerhaeuser, a right-wing company out of the United 
States. And this isn’t meant to be any attack on the minister; but 
one individual, I think, it’s impossible for him to defend if there’s 
that kind of an attack on medicare being discussed and planned in 
your caucus by certain people in the fringes on the right-wing. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Who’s that? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well I’m not sure who they are, but I know 
there are some. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Me? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —No, it’s not the member from Moosomin 
because he’s not running in the next election. But I hear that the 
individual that’s running in his place is a radical right-winger and 
of the worst sort, and I had  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2285 
 
 

some . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I believe the member is getting 
off the topic of the Bill and I would ask him to please come back 
to it so we can expedite the business of this House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —I did want to refer to Public Accounts from 
1984-85, where the estimate for home care spending in your 
budget was 17.4 million and the expenditure was 17 million. And 
there was about 400,000 less spent, you know, than what you 
estimated. 
 
I think this is one of the reasons that some of the home care boards 
are running a little short now, is that you saved half a million 
dollars and, I believe, put it into political advertising to try to get 
members of your caucus re-elected. I’ll tell you, that’s an 
impossible battle in some of those cases, and I think that it would 
just be money better spent. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Tell the truth. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well this is the truth. This is your own 
document that indicates that in home care in ’84-85 there was 
close to half a million dollars less spent than what you announced 
in your budget. 
 
I’m not going to spend a long time, Mr. Chairman, because I think 
the public is now well aware of the kind of promises that are made 
and then the expenditures that don’t take place. We went through 
this with other items in Health, and I know that we can’t get into 
those in this committee. 
 
But I just say that a plan that is as important as home care, which 
we intend to expand when we get back into government to include 
transportation in all the home care districts as well as 
physiotherapy in all the home care districts, even if that means 
setting up an occupational therapist course at the university in 
Saskatoon — we’ve made that commitment. This argument that 
the department makes from time to time that there aren’t therapists 
to go around is a phoney one because we can at the drop of a hat 
set up a program in Saskatoon and start getting them out there. 
 
We have 45 home care districts. Each of them should at least have 
one therapist. And this is a commitment we’ve made to the people 
of the province and would intend to quickly set into place, both in 
the area of transportation and therapists, and extend the program to 
six basic items rather than the four that it stalled at, you know, 
after you people came into government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
is concerned about the funding for home care. I would think that 
any reasonable person out there would realize that in this year in 
this budget a 14 per cent increase, a 14 per cent increase in home 
care services, in view of the other types of increases across this 
country — across this country — is rather a sizeable commitment 
to home care. 
 
The member likes to go back to the old rhetoric of the NDP, to try 
and draw a long bow about some type of bogy  

man in health care. Let me lay that to rest. Look at the record of 
this government over the past four years in all aspects of health 
care. Look at that and compare it to any other four-year program 
in the history of this province, and you will see that the greatest 
commitment to health care in the entire history of Saskatchewan 
came within the mandate of the Devine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And the member opposite will stand up and 
he will make boast — he will make boast — he will make boast 
about increasing therapy. If he really believes in therapy, they 
were in government for 11 years, why didn’t they do something 
about it? In this last year we’ve doubled the number of therapists 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and we will continue to do that. 
 
And he stands here in this House and says, I promise this and I 
promise that. I’ll remind you, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll remind the 
people of Saskatchewan, that that same government in 1975 told 
the seniors of this province, we will bring in a chiropody program 
if you elect us. They never did. In 1978 they even went so far as to 
buy the chairs, and they hid them away so the seniors couldn’t find 
them. 
 
It was never a promise of the Devine government. But my 
colleague Mrs. Smith and I met the seniors about 10 days after 
becoming ministers and we said, what is your number one issue? 
And they said, our number one issue is a chiropody program. And 
that chiropody program is in place today in every health region in 
Saskatchewan. That’s commitment — that’s commitment to 
health. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, as I have consultation 
workshops throughout . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —Oh that word, “consultation” . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well you may be against it, because you 
wouldn’t listen when you were in government. It’s well-known. 
The member from Regina North East became one of the most 
arrogant ministers of the Blakeney government. 
 
However, let me get back to the topic of the Bill. Let me get back 
to the topic of the Bill. As I listen to the people in the consultation 
workshops focused on home care, the number one priority, they 
say to me, Mr. Minister, is increase home care services to our 
people, and I believe 14 per cent in the last year indicates that. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I’m sure you’re well aware 
of this, after the next election, when we’re government again, 
home care will again be a priority, and you will see continued 
emphasis on home care, co-ordination, and improved health 
services, just as we’ve seen in the last four years. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —I want to say that I have seldom seen such a 
display of arrogance, and, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what the 
minister is ranting and raving about. We were having, I thought, a 
reasonably careful discussion on home care, and I had laid out that 
our government had started the home care program back in the 
late ’70s,  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2286 
 
 

started up 45 home care boards and laid out some of the other 
programs we had done for seniors: stabilized nursing home rates at 
$390 a month; had a hearing aid program for seniors; brought in 
other programs — a drug plan that basically helped seniors a great 
deal. 
 
And the minister gets up and rants and raves about the great job 
he’s doing and then announces that they’re going to win the next 
election, and the Premier is afraid to call an election. These are the 
kinds of contradictions that the public has a very difficult time 
keeping up on. And I think what it shows is the wide division 
between the kinds of people in the Conservative party. The 
Minister of Health, who ran for the leadership, I think would have 
made a better leader than the present Premier Devine. 
 
But leaving that alone I think it shows the nature of the Premier, 
who on the one hand is afraid to call an election, and the Minister 
of Health who is ranting and raving about wanting an election 
right now. I think it shows the division within the caucus and the 
cabinet on the important issue of calling an election to clear the air 
so that we can get on with the business of running the province, 
getting the $2 billion deficit down, getting the proper kind of 
spending in home care that many seniors believe there should be. 
 
I only indicate that the news clipping I read to the minister is not 
the only problem I’ve heard in the home care program. There have 
been a number of other home care boards that have come forward 
and said that they’re having difficulty getting enough money out 
of the department. I’m not sure that it matters how much you 
announce as indicated in the Public Accounts. What is important is 
how much you spend. You can announce 17 per cent increases or 
15 per cent increases, but if you spend half a million less than 
what you announced, then they’ve got a problem. That’s the only 
point I wanted to make. 
 
I’m simply not going to get drawn into ranting and raving with the 
minister because that serves no useful purpose or the time of the 
committee. And I just think that we should be making sure that the 
seniors of the province are well taken care of and that the home 
care program not only has legislation but has the proper funding it 
deserves and needs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, if you look 
back over the history of home care and see that today, tonight, 
we’re bringing in legislation to give this very important service a 
legislative basis, indicates who is really concerned and who really 
wants to build home care. It was brought in in a very quick and 
swift action by the government previous hoping they could get out 
of building nursing homes, which they neglected terribly with a 
moratorium. We saw that home care as a valuable service and 
have built on it. 
 
I can give you that assurance that whenever the next election is 
called and we beat the birds on the other side, which we will do, 
then I say to you, you will see improvements in home care and a 
continuation of the best health care system in Canada under a PC 
government. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2030) 
 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on 

Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you, Bill McLaren on my right, the chairman of 
Highway Traffic Board; and Carl Shiels, with the safety services 
branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We’re dealing with the traffic Bill, Bill No. 
62? 
 
An Hon. Member: —Yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Was this not one of the ones that was dealt 
with in the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I ask the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: —Yes, that is correct. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Thank you very much. This was 
one that I think the committee had no questions which weren’t 
resolved at the end of the hearings. So, Mr. Chairman . . . If I may 
have the Chairman’s attention. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Yes, I’m listening. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You are. Good. As far as I think the 
opposition is concerned, you can deal only with those sections 
which require amendment and complete the Bill. You don’t need 
to read every section. To read every section of this thing is going 
to take a fair time, and we’ve done that in the committee, and as I 
said, had no questions unresolved. So . (inaudible) . . . No. I think 
the only thing you need to do is go to those sections which need 
amendment, and then we can agree at the end, I think, 
unanimously to report the Bill. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The first section to be amended is section 2, to 
which reads as follows . . . The amendment reads as follows: 
 

Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by striking out “made 
pursuant to The Vehicle Administration Act” in clause 1 (w). 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The next section to be amended is section 20 
on page 10. The amendment reads as follows: 
 

Amend section 20 of the printed Bill by striking out  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2287 
 
 

subsection (4). 
 
Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 81 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The next section then to be amended is section 
81. That’s found on page 34. The amendment reads as follows: 
 

Add the following section after section 80 of the printed Bill: 
 

Equipment standards. “81.1: No person shall operate or 
cause to be operated on a highway a vehicle that is not 
equipped in accordance with this Act and the regulations and 
The Vehicle Administration Act and the regulations made 
pursuant to that Act”. 

 
Clause 81 as amended agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That’s the total number of amendments to the 
Bill. Is clause 120, then, which will represent agreement on all 
clauses, agreed to? 
 
Clause 120 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If I may assist the chairman, this Bill was also 
dealt with in committee of the whole. I think there are no 
amendments to this Bill and I believe — no, I gather there is one 
— and there were no questions unresolved at the end of the 
committee’s hearings. 
 
So as far as I’m concerned, if there is an amendment or so, you 
may deal with the section which has the amendment and that may 
be considered to be dealing with all the sections. In other words, 
the only section we need to deal with, I think, with this Bill is the 
one or more sections which are subject to amendment. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the committee agreed to that? Okay, then 
we will deal with section 2, which has an amendment which reads 
as follows: 
 

Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Vehicle Administration Act” in clause (1)(m) and 
substituting “The Highway Traffic Act.” 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The next clause we will deal with is section 10 
on page 5. The amendment reads as follows: 
 

Amend clause 10(4)(a) of the printed Bill by adding “or the 
regulations made pursuant to that Act” after “Act”: 

 

(a) in subclause (ii); 
 

(b) in subclause (iii); and 
 

(c) in subclause (iv). 
 
Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles 
and Licensing of Drivers 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Within this Bill there is one issue which I 
want to speak to. I have done so in the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee and I want to do so in committee of the whole. 
 
I will do so under section 1 for the sake of simplicity, and then as 
far as I’m concerned there’s no need to deal with any other 
sections unless there are some amendments. 
 
The section which I wish to deal with is the section which 
transfers to Saskatchewan Government Insurance — and I gather 
there is an amendment — the section which transfers to the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance responsibility for driver 
licensing and reinstatement of driver licensing and suspension of 
driver licences. 
 
The function is judicial in nature; it is subject to considerable 
abuse if it becomes a political or an administrative matter. The 
existing Highway Traffic Board is set up in such a fashion that it 
gives it some independence from the political process. 
 
I think the problem with transferring this function to SGI is that it 
will be subject to interference by external forces. I’m sure the 
present minister wouldn’t do it, but I can see other ministers 
interfering with the process — friends of the government getting 
favourable treatment in this process of suspension of licences. 
 
The function has been carried on by the Highway Traffic Board 
without any difficulty for many, many years. That agency has 
discharged the matter well and without any interference. I don’t 
know why it isn’t being left there. To transfer what is a judicial 
function to a Crown corporation is an unusual move, and I think 
has the capacity for some considerable abuse. 
 
So I say to the government and the members opposite that I think 
this particular move is unfortunate. 
 
Clause 91 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The amendment reads as follows: 
 

To amend section 91 of the printed Bill by striking out “51” in 
the third line of subsection (1) and substituting “subsection 
45(5), section 51”. 

 
Clause 91 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 
Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of  

  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2288 
 
 

Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 

in Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions that I want to ask tonight, but first of all I want to 
make some comments regarding Bill 56 and the sale of the Prince 
Albert Pulp Company, and the sawmill in Big River, and the 
chemical plant, and their assets. 
 
I think what we’re dealing here now is the most important piece of 
legislation that has been put before this legislature in the five-year 
term of this Conservative government — or four years and some 
months. We are dealing with an issue that the public of 
Saskatchewan is now — and this has only come to light in the last 
week or so — has become enraged. 
 
And let me tell you, it doesn’t matter where you go in this 
province, reports are coming back. And I’ve seen many of them 
this last weekend when I went through Big River and Debden and 
up in northern Saskatchewan. Reports are coming from all over 
the province that this is the type of a Bill or the type of a sale that 
just cannot be tolerated by Saskatchewan. It is going to be our 
position to try and put a stop to this and to get some questions 
answered. 
 
When we take a look at what we are faced with here today — a 
government that has given away the assets valued at $248 million 
to a firm from Tacoma, Washington for not 1 cent down and no 
agreement to pay back 1 cent. This is what we are faced with in 
Saskatchewan. This is the type of a situation that cannot be 
tolerated and we in the opposition are going to do everything in 
our power to see that this does not go through in the form that it’s 
in. 
 
We are going to be asking for the document in schedule C, which 
most certainly is a document that’s around — and I will get to that 
a little later — but we will be asking that you table these 
documents or we will be asking that . . . 
 
As we know, the House is not going to prorogue, it’s going to 
adjourn. That will give you time to table the documents so that the 
citizens of Saskatchewan will know what is going to take place 
and what is involved. When we take a look at a half a billion 
dollars at stake in our province, we take a look at the assets of the 
Prince Albert pulp-mill, the Big River sawmill, the chemical plant 
in Saskatoon, the 8 million acres of forest that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation is going to take charge of — this we cannot accept, 
and we want some answers. 
 
When I see a government that’s prepared to give a company $248 
million and the only way they’re going to have to repay it is 
through profits of 13 per cent . . . And that is what’s in your 
agreement. They don’t have to pay 1 cent back if they don’t make 
profits of 13 per cent. 
 
I see a government in its fifth year of its mandate who has taken 
away $250,000 from the citizens in northern Saskatchewan for a 
food transportation subsidy — $250  

to supply fresh food and vegetables for citizens in northern 
Saskatchewan, and you cancel that program. And yet you can 
make an agreement with Weyerhaeuser Canada, a multinational 
corporation, to give them $248 million, all our assets, and access 
and control over 8 million acres of prime forest in this province. 
And yet you would take away and deprive the citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan $250,000 for a food transportation subsidy. 
 
(2045) 
 
I ask any member over on that side who has a conscience if they 
think that that is fair. And I think it’s about time that some of the 
opposition members got up on their feet and spoke on this Bill. 
Because I say to the other members, the Conservative 
back-benchers, it’s about time that you got up and spoke because 
let me tell you we are watching history repeat itself right before 
our eyes. 
 
You’re in the fifth year of your mandate. You are giving away our 
resources and there is not 1 cent going to be paid back. And I say 
history is repeating itself right before our eyes because let me tell 
you, the member from Shellbrook-Torch River — he takes notice 
now — and the two members from Prince Albert, and the member 
for Turtleford and the member from Redberry, and I tell you the 
member for Meadow Lake who has been piloting this through, 
you have just sold these members down the tubes and there’s no 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well that’s fine. I think you should 
get out and do some polling, I tell the member that’s chattering 
from his feet — from Saskatoon — who’s not going to run again. 
But you should go out and do some polling on the sale to the 
Weyerhaeuser and you’re going to find out, as I found out this 
week-end, and that my colleagues . . . And our office is burdened 
with telephone calls and letters coming in from citizens across this 
province who say, for God’s sake don’t allow them to sell off our 
assets. 
 
And that wouldn’t be bad; that wouldn’t be bad, Mr. Chairman, if 
we were selling off the assets, if we were getting some moneys for 
them. But I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister who is 
piloting this through, the agreement indicates quite clearly that not 
1 cent has been put up by Weyerhaeuser Canada. Not one red cent 
has been put up and not 1 cent will be put up in this agreement. It 
states quite clearly that the $248 million that the government has 
signed for will be paid back in profits. It also goes on to say, Mr. 
chairman, that the profits have to come up to 13 per cent or they 
don’t pay anything back. And this is what the members have said. 
 
We take a look at how confusing it is and we go to the news 
release that was released. And we see that the government, when 
they made this announcement . . . And it’s quite interesting. They 
made the announcement in March, March 25th, and I wonder why 
they would make an announcement like this on March 25th, with 
no documents. We never had any documents until three, four days 
ago when the hon. member from Meadow Lake passed us, across 
the floor, schedule C. That was the first time that we seen any 
documents. But I just wonder, Mr. Chairman, why, on the 25th of 
March, an announcement would be made in Prince Albert and 
subsequent announcements and dos carried on to promote this.  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2289 
 
 

I suspect, Mr. Chairman, that you were expecting an election and 
that’s why you were doing it. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake indicates that there will be no 
agreement signed until September. That’s when the agreement 
will be signed. Well I ask the members from Saskatoon: is that 
wrong? You check with your colleague from Meadow Lake and 
he’ll tell you exactly that, that it will be September under any 
conditions before an agreement of sale is signed. And I’m just 
hoping that there will be no agreement signed, and I say this in all 
sincerity, Mr. Minister, because when we take a look at this deal, 
and the more we hear from the citizens across this province . . . 
 
You want to take a look back at history. You only have to go back 
to 1971, when the Thatcher government was going to build the 
huge Athabasca pulp-mill, and that became an election issue. That 
became an election issue, and you know what happened to the 
Thatcher government on June 23rd of 1971. 
 
That was a small agreement. That was small compared to the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. When we’re dealing with Weyerhaeuser, 
we’re giving up the rights to 8 million acres of prime forest land, 
the best forest land that we have in this province . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Pardon? The member from Saskatoon who’s not 
running again continues to chatter from his seat. But I’m saying to 
you, Mr. Member . . . And I realize why you’re not running 
because when you take a look at the sequence of events that have 
taken place in the five years of this government — you have 
watched what they done with Manalta Coal; you’ve watched what 
they’ve done with Peter Pocklington; and now we see what’s 
taking place with Weyerhaeuser; then it’s no wonder . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please! Could we please 
have some order. All hon. members will have an opportunity to 
get up and debate the Bill in due course. At this time I would like 
to allow the member from Athabasca to debate the Bill, and I 
would ask all hon. members in this House to please co-operate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As I 
was saying, Mr. Chairman, that when you take a look . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Once more I ask the hon. 
members to be quiet. Can we have some order in the House, 
please. We can waste all night with . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —Can you get them quiet now? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order please. Order please! We can sit and 
waste the time of the House with idle chatter, but I don’t think 
that’s why we’re here. So I ask the House once more to please 
allow the member from Athabasca an opportunity to make his 
point. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 
500 miles to drive yet tonight, and I would like to get my 
comments off. But as I was saying, Mr. Chairman, before I was 
interrupted, when you take a look at the magnitude of this 
agreement, and the terms of the  

agreement, Mr. Chairman, I can see why a lot of these members 
are not running again. And I can see why another member today 
announced that he would not be seeking re-election. 
 
And I say to the member from Shellbrook-Torch River that he 
should stand up in his seat, because let me tell you this is very 
important to you, sir, to your seat. And if this goes through the 
way it is right now, and you allow Weyerhaeuser Canada to take 
control of 8 million acres of our prime forest in northern 
Saskatchewan, and if you allow Weyerhaeuser to accept the deal 
where they get $248 million to take over our assets, I think, Mr. 
Member from Shellbrook-Torch River, that you should get up and 
you should speak on this and you should talk to your colleagues 
and say, look, this is a bad deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a bad deal. And I say with all sincerity to the member from 
Prince Albert that he should also get up here and stand up, because 
he is an individual who speaks his mind . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . The member from Prince Albert. I say that you get 
up in this House and that you should speak on this and make darn 
sure that we’re not going to give away 8 million acres of our prime 
forest land to Weyerhaeuser Canada. And I say that you should 
because let me tell you, a Bill like this is dragging just about all of 
the last remaining seats that possibly could be won by the 
Conservatives right down the drain. And there’s absolutely no way 
that the citizens of this province can put up with this type of a 
give-away. 
 
Here we take a look at what is taking place, Mr. Minister, and then 
one has to wonder why would we be selling off the Prince Albert 
pulp-mill and all the other assets that are being sold off when the 
Premier and the minister get up and they say quite clearly that we 
need an integrated pulp-mill. So I say fine, if you need an 
integrated pulp-mill, why did you not sell off the pulp-mill and 
why did you have to sell off the chemical plant in Saskatoon. Why 
did . . .(inaudible interjection). . . All right, it’s part of the 
company then. 
 
But why did you not sell off the other part of PAPCO (Prince 
Albert Pulp Company), the sawmill in Meadow Lake? That also is 
a part of the company. Is that not true? Yes, you bet it’s true. So 
you say, well we’ve got to sell the chemical plant because it’s a 
part of PAPCO company. Well I tell you, the mill in Meadow 
Lake is also a part of PAPCO and that wasn’t sold off. 
 
So one has to stop and think, why is this taking place? I think the 
member from Saskatoon should get up and speak in opposition to 
this because he’s speaking from his seat continually. He’s yapping 
and yapping. You know, it reminds me of Yvon Durelle who was 
talking about the yip-yaps who sat around the ring and told him 
how to fight. Well, that’s exactly what you remind me of because 
you’re continually yip-yapping, but you never make any sense. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Okay, let the 
debate continue. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2290 
 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. But I think there 
are some very important questions that have to be answered here 
tonight, especially when we take a look at the fact that there’s a 
half a billion dollars of the taxpayer of Saskatchewan’s money, 
who is at stake here. And not only is it a half a billion dollars that 
is at stake, but there is the jobs that go with that. There is the jobs 
at Big River in the sawmill; there’s the jobs in the bush in Big 
River. We have to take a look at the chemical workers who are 
working in the chemical plant in Saskatoon. There’s all these 
workers. 
 
And let me tell you, there’s the spin-off businesses that go along 
with a continued operation such as we have today and that is the 
cafes, the garages, the truckers, the tree-fallers, and everything that 
goes with it, the grocery stores. Everything complements the 
other. But we’re selling it off to Weyerhaeuser and we know what 
Weyerhaeuser’s saying now. 
 
Here’s who we’re selling it off to — a company in the United 
States who has just laid off 7,500 employees and what they are 
trying to do with the 7,500 employees is to put them back to work 
at $6 an hour, Canadian, less than they are making right now. And 
the reason that Weyerhaeuser is doing that is because he says it is 
so that they can remain competitive in an unstable market. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. chairman, what the mill-workers in Big River 
are thinking. I wonder what the truckers and the loggers and the 
cafe owners and the garage owners are thinking. I wonder what 
the employees up in Prince Albert are thinking. I wonder what the 
chemical workers in Saskatoon are thinking when we have a 
company that is asking their 7,500 workers in the States to take a 
$6-an-hour cut, Canadian, in wages. This is what we’re dealing 
with. You’re dealing with a company like that that admits it’s an 
unstable market. You’re allowing them to come in here and you’re 
giving them $248 million to take over those assets. 
 
I say to the member from Regina South, or whatever it is, you 
know you can talk from your seat but I think it’s time for you to 
get up and speak in opposition to this. Because let me tell you, this 
is a serious situation because there is nothing in the agreements, 
there’s no agreements tabled, and we want schedule C because we 
know that the minister has it. It states quite clearly in the 
agreements that schedule C is there. We are going to be asking for 
that. 
 
(2100) 
 
I say that if Weyerhaeuser Canada goes through with this deal, 
what we could see is the sawmills at Big River and the chemical 
plants and the pulp-mill in Prince Albert all shut down. They 
could all shut down unless there’s something in the agreement that 
says that they can’t, because they admit that we’re dealing in an 
unstable market. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. chairman, and through you to the 
Conservative members, we’re dealing in a very serious situation. I 
think it’s the most important piece of legislation that has ever 
faced the citizens of Saskatchewan, especially since this 
Conservative government took over, because it’s the biggest 
give-away 

 in the history of this province. There has never been a give-away 
in the history of this province to the magnitude of the one that we 
are dealing with right now. 
 
When one talks about 8 million acres of prime timberland, that is a 
lot of land. That is a lot of land, I say to the member for 
Moosomin — 800 million acres. And he knows; he’s a farmer. He 
knows what 800 million acres is. And that is a lot of land, and 
that’s a lot of prime timber. And we don’t want to lose that. We 
don’t want to lose control of that. 
 
To say that you can have all this, plus all the other assets, and that 
you don’t have to pay 1 cent down, you don’t pay 1 cent down . . . 
And it also goes on to say in the agreement that if they don’t make 
any money in the first four years that the money they lose will be 
deducted from the initial price. 
 
And we take a look at the figures that were put out by the 
department themselves, indicated in writing by the Premier of this 
province, that in the next four years the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company and the Big River sawmill and the chemical plant will 
lose $100 million. 
 
I say to you, members in the Conservative caucus, that that is 
down in black and white, and that is the department’s analysis. 
And they claim that that operation is going to lose $100 million in 
the next three and one-half years. It’s right here; I got it right here. 
I will show it because we’ve got lots of time; we’ve got another 
hour that we’re going to be going. But in your own statement you 
say that $100 million is what that operation is going to lose in the 
next three and one-half years. 
 
You also put into the agreement . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, 
I’m not speculating; it’s in black and white. Mr. Chairman, the 
member is suggesting that I am misleading the House. I am most 
certainly not misleading the House. I have it right here in the 
documents. I have it from the Conservative government’s own 
documents that indicate that that operation will lose $100 million 
in the next three and one-half years. Under the agreement it states 
that any losses in the first three and one-half to four years before 
they get into the operation of the paper-mill, that that will be 
deducted from the initial price. 
 
I have that document; you’d better believe it because I wouldn’t 
use it unless I had it. And I’m just going to say that I will table it. 
We have lots of time and I will table it tonight. But just assume 
that is right . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well I’m using your 
figures; I’m using the Conservative government’s document. You 
are the ones who stated clearly that it will lose a hundred million, 
then all of a sudden that $248 million is reduced to 148 million, 
without 1 cent changing hands and without the taxpayers of this 
province getting 1 cent. 
 
I want to allow the minister to answer a number of the questions 
I’ve asked, and in particular, because it was brought up from the 
other side, that they sold the chemical plant in Saskatoon because 
it was a part of PAPCO. I say, Mr. Minister, and I ask you: why 
did you not sell off the Meadow Lake sawmill? I believe it’s the 
only remaining asset that PAPCO will have in this province. Why 
was it not also sold? And I know you’ll  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2291 
 
 

want to make some comments, and I will get the documents that I 
have and send them across to the member for Prince Albert 
regarding the $100 million losses. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member made 
quite a number of comments in the speech that he just gave. And 
I’ll just go through once again with the member from Athabasca. 
He mentions, why is Big River and Bodmin mill included; why is 
Meadow Lake mill not included; why is the chemical plant 
included. I remember those questions. We’ll just go into that 
whole scenario. I did this at least in part the other day, but we can 
do it once again. 
 
The reason that Big River or the Bodmin mill is included is 
because of the integration of the facility. It’s because it’s within a 
close enough distance that integration is possible in terms of being 
able to move residue from the mill to the pulp-mill, residue being 
the chips and so on, as I’m sure the member knows. It’s also 
within a close enough distance that you can have a haul going 
either way. 
 
In other words, saw logs from what we now know as the core, and 
PAPCO lease and what will become the Weyerhaeuser lease — 
Prince Albert area — saw logs can come from that area, move to 
the west of Big River to the sawmill and on the haul backward 
which makes it back to Prince Albert, which makes it a viable 
haul. Aspen, which grows in preponderance in the Bodmin supply 
area, can go to Prince Albert. That makes that viable. 
 
The Meadow Lake mill which is an installation of PAPCO, is just 
too far away to be integrated in a totally integrated operation, in 
terms of moving chips and so on. Although that is not to say that 
they won’t sell chips and they’ll compete as competitively as 
possible to sell those chips to the pulp-mill. 
 
So that’s the issue. The history of the Meadow Lake sawmill, and 
members there will well know that — the history of the Meadow 
Lake sawmill is that that sawmill was built originally to be an 
integrated sawmill with a pulp-mill which was to go ahead. And 
that was way back two governments ago, two governments ago 
back in the days of the Thatcher Liberal government. And the 
proposal there was to build a pulp-mill, as the member has said. 
 
When the New Democratic government came to office in 1971, 
they cancelled that pulp-mill. And so the sawmill at Meadow Lake 
which was up and at least partially constructed and may well have 
been completed at that time — my memory doesn’t serve me all 
that well — that mill which was to be integrated with a pulp-mill 
was there as an orphan, so to speak. And it has been operating on 
that basis ever since. 
 
So that’s why the chemical plant is included. It’s a part of the 
Prince Albert pulp operation and a part of that company, because it 
provides chemicals directly to the pulp-mill. The chemical plant at 
Saskatoon provides chemicals directly to the pulp-mill, and is a 
reasonable installation to have. And in fact, if my memory 
correctly once again, I believe the chemical plant in Saskatoon 
was built at the same time or very close to the  

same time as the pulp-mill was built in Prince Albert, because the 
two of them complemented each other and in fact were built to 
complement each other. 
 
So as far as the other questions, I mean there was a whole series of 
statements made by the member, and they come down to one very, 
very basic difference in philosophy. That member of the New 
Democratic Party says, why are these assets being sold; why is 
someone else, a company bringing their own money in; why are 
we asking investment from outside to come in and do something 
that the government should do, is what he says. 
 
He says the government should do this. He says the government 
should operate the pulp-mill because that’s what their government 
decided should be done, and they bought it and they lost money 
for a good long period of time. And it continues to lose money. 
And without integrating it with a pulp-mill — or with a 
paper-mill, I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman — without an integration of 
that pulp-mill with a paper-mill, the projections would be 
long-term in terms of losses. 
 
And regardless, the members will chirp away over there about 
whether it’s under a Tory government, under an NDP government. 
What I say to you, Mr. Chairman, is that that mill over a period of 
five years, 1981-1985, documents which I tabled today, has been 
losing for a good long period of time. In other words, it’s just 
hemorrhaging money, Mr. Chairman — just hemorrhaging 
money. 
 
And what I’m saying to you is that that must not be allowed to 
continue. The taxpayers, the public of Saskatchewan who have 
been paying for that bleeding which has been taking place must 
not allow that to happen. And we, on their behalf, will not allow it 
to happen. And that’s why we struck this deal we believe to be a 
very good deal for the future of the industry. 
 
And there’s another point that needs to be made, and what the 
member did not allude to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! 
Order, please! Order! Would the individuals in the back row 
please be quiet. I’ve asked for order about four times . . . 
(inaudible) . . . It still hasn’t quieted down. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, just one last point, Mr. Chairman, 
and I’ve made this point on several occasions in terms of the 
reason, the economic sense and the reason why this must take 
place, why there must be a paper-mill at Prince Albert. There must 
be a paper-mill there to integrate with that pulp-mill or that 
pulp-mill continues to be a money losing proposition for the 
public of Saskatchewan for a good long period of time. And that’s 
what projections are. 
 
And if that industry is not viable, this gives it potential for 
viability. There’s no potential for viability over the long-term if 
the status quo remains. That’s the point I made before. That’s the 
point that is clear to anyone who understands the industry, and that 
is true. 
 
And what I’m saying to the members is that . . . when the 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2292 
 
 

 industry has a potential for viability, there’s viability for the 
families who depend upon the industry, and for the jobs that are 
there and for the investment and for all that sort of thing. And 
that’s extremely important to the people across the northern 
forested belt. 
 
And the member here will say, we’ll talk about the various 
constituencies across that forested region and all of the problems 
that he perceives that there are there, and so on in terms of the 
potential for my colleagues and I to be re-elected. And I’ll say to 
that member from Athabasca, we have no difficulty whatever. In 
fact, I’ll say to the member from Athabasca and to the Leader of 
the Opposition and all those members over there, this Bill and the 
kind of philosophical difference that this Bill represents — of what 
we were doing, what we are doing here — it has everything to do 
with philosophy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
This Bill and what it represents, represents very, very clearly the 
reason that I came to Regina in the first place form that very 
beautiful part of the province, which I would in a personal way 
very much rather live there than live here. But I would come to 
Regina . . . I came to Regina to fight you guys on just this kind of 
thing. And I will stand here and as my colleagues will, and we will 
fight you on things like this — the investments, private investment 
versus you wanting . . . You have a penchant for owning 
everything in every industry, every installation. And what I’m 
saying to you is that I’m here and I’m awfully proud to be here 
and finally get an opportunity through the vehicle of this Bill to 
fight you on the very, very philosophy that I disagree so deeply 
with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that this is 
why history is repeating itself. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake indicates he came from a 
beautiful part of Saskatchewan to come down to Regina to fight us 
guys. Well let me say I think that every member in this legislature 
feels the same way — that they come from a beautiful part of 
Saskatchewan — because I think all of Saskatchewan is beautiful, 
regardless of its trees and lakes or of its farm land or whatever it 
is. It’s a beautiful province. 
 
But the member from Meadow Lake says he’s going to get up and 
fight us for his philosophy against our philosophy and private 
enterprise versus what we think is right. 
 
Well, when you talk about private enterprise or free enterprise and 
you pay Weyerhaeuser $248 million to take our assets, don’t have 
to pay a cent back, and you call that private enterprise? I say to 
you, Mr. Chairman, and to the other members, is that what you 
want to fight for? Is that what you want to fight for? 
 
I just wonder if all these agreements are standard. I just wonder if 
the agreement that you signed with Peter Pocklington has the same 
clauses in that that you have with Weyerhaeuser, where they don’t 
have to pay any money back for so many years and then when 
they do start to repay, it’s not unless they make 13 per cent profit. 
 

(2115) 
 
Now I just wonder if that is the same type of agreement . . . Now I 
see the member from Saskatoon is over on this side. Not only does 
he continue to talk from his own seat, Mr. Chairman, he’s now 
talking from somebody else’s seat. 
 
But I say, I wonder if these are standard agreements that you’re 
signing. I want to say that if you’re prepared to stand up here and 
fight for a half a billion dollar give-away, well let me tell you 
we’re prepared to stay over here and fight you guys and we’re 
prepared to fight you at the polls as soon as you get up the nerve to 
call an election. 
 
I think if you feel that strongly about this issue and you think that 
that is a good issue, then why don’t you call an election? You 
announced it in March; you wanted to call the election and you got 
cold feet. But let me tell you, I’m prepared to fight this issue on 
the doorsteps and I’m sure that every candidate in the New 
Democratic Party are prepared to go out on the doorsteps and fight 
and fight for this principle to protect the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan — and we will. 
 
The minister announced that the only way that that pulp-mill could 
possibly survive would be through an integrated facility such as 
the paper-mill and the use of poplar or aspen. I wonder if the 
minister could indicate: is it true that you will be utilizing poplar in 
the paper-mill? Will aspen be utilized and will the new paper-mill 
create, as you indicate in your releases, 215 permanent jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, in answer to the questions. And what 
I am very pleased bout in the last remark is because just the other 
day the members were suggesting that there’s nothing to show that 
there will be a paper-mill. Now they’re saying how much . . . You 
know, will they be using aspen in the production of paper and how 
many new jobs will be there. What I am saying is 215 net new 
jobs in this integrated operation. And the reason I say “net” is 
because there will be with the renovations to the wood room and 
some of the things which will take place in the existing pulp-mill, 
there will be some jobs there that are now in existence which 
won’t be there, but there will be an extra, you know, quite a 
number of jobs over in the paper-mill. And the 215 net is the 
increase in jobs in that area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well first of all, Mr. Minister, we do not 
approve of this deal, of this massive give-away. The question I 
asked was that if the paper-mill went ahead, would it be using 
aspen. You said, yes. I said, would it create the 215 jobs. You said, 
yes. It will cost the taxpayers of this province $248 million to start 
with? And the answer is yes. And other $250 million — and the 
answer is yes to that. 
 
Now we will put our proposal to handle aspen against your 
proposal any time. We have a proposal where we will initiate and 
we will help to start up two pilot projects using aspen wood to 
create power in this province — power that I want to say that your 
government totally ignored — the group from Big River who 
wanted to harvest the aspen. The two pilot projects that we are 
proposing to put up would create 250 jobs immediately,  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2293 
 
 

and the cost would be $20 million to Saskatchewan — $20 
million. 
 
Here you are with 215 jobs if it ever goes ahead — and I doubt if 
it will — and it’s going to cost the taxpayers of this province half a 
billion dollars. You said that they would have to repay it in 20 
years. And I have two documents here, one where you indicate 
that it will be paid back in 20 years. You now table another 
document that says it’s going to be 30 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: what has changed from 
the time of the announcement on March 25 of a 20-year program 
to the documents you have tabled now in schedule B that says the 
repayment shall be for 30 years? What is the difference in that 10 
years? could you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well a couple of things. First of all, the 
last question first. I have indicated . . . And the first release 
indicated, I have indicated as well, and I still indicate, that the 
expected repayment period is 20 years. It’s expected to be repaid 
over a 20-year period according to projections. Okay? 
 
But the document I provided with you is that it will be . . . that the 
document will be that’s it over a 30-year period. I mean the 
agreement will be signed on the basis of 30 years, but we are 
expecting . . . and the projections are that it will be over a 20-year 
period pay-back. So I just leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate 
— and I know you have indicated before that the final agreement 
will be singed in September — I wonder if you could give us, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you could indicate, when this agreement is 
signed, how much money, how much cash, Weyerhaeuser is going 
to give to the province of Saskatchewan. Are they going to put 10 
per cent down or 20 per cent down, the same as you ask in your 
Sedco loans or any banker in this province would demand of any 
business? Could you indicate how much money Weyerhaeuser is 
going to put down on this deal, cash up front? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things that I should clarify. 
The member talks about September 1st, and what I had said to you 
clearly the other day was that we expect closing to take place 
within six to eight weeks. So that doesn’t necessarily say 
September 1st. I wanted to clarify that point. 
 
The member in his former remarks talks about the use of aspen 
and the proposal around Big River. And I don’t want to dwell on 
this because the suggestion had no merit whatever, from what I’m 
told by people at Saskatchewan Power. 
 
But in terms of power generation and so on, that technology was 
. . . The feasibility studies were done in the province of Alberta; 
they were done in the maritime provinces; and I’m not sure of just 
the province, I believe maybe New Brunswick, the feasibilities 
were looked at. It was looked at in terms of whether or not it could 
be possible for that sort of power generation to work at the Big 
River area, and I’m very aware of the proponents of  

that and what they were suggesting. That was done for that area 
and the people at Saskatchewan Power who are expert in that 
electrical generation area say that it’s not a feasible operation for 
Saskatchewan. So it was dropped on that basis. 
 
But what we are talking about here, we are talking about 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, it’s not only something that 
they would have done. You people in the New Democratic Party 
are actually, if I read my newspapers in the north-western part of 
the province correctly, you’re suggesting after all of that feasibility 
and so on has been rejected in different parts of the country, and 
including here by Saskatchewan Power, you people are suggesting 
that yes, you will go ahead with such a hare-brained scheme. 
 
So what I’m saying to you, to the member . . . He asked the 
question: what is Weyerhaeuser corporation bringing to 
Saskatchewan? What I say to you is that they’re bringing, and I’ve 
said this to you before, they’re bringing $250 million to the 
construction of a brand-new paper-mill, which technology is 
known by comparison to the other thing you were talking about; 
the technology is known. They bring a marketing network which 
is second to none. Of the 250 million, just so that you don’t quote 
me out of context or anything which you folks are prone to do 
from time to time, 166.8 of that, or in other words two-thirds of 
that $250 million investment, brand-new investment, transfusion 
into the economy of Saskatchewan — $166.8 million will be 
coming directly from Weyerhaeuser into this development of this 
integrated facility. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, the assets of the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company, the Big River sawmill, and the chemical plant in 
Saskatoon, $248 million — how much cash up front is 
Weyerhaeuser putting up for those assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What they’re putting up is a paper-mill 
which will be integrated with those present assets. The present 
assets . . . Well we’ve been through it all before. So they’re putting 
up a paper-mill, $250 million — $250 million, a major, major 
project, not only for Prince Albert. But certainly it’s a tremendous 
thing for the city of Prince Albert and for that surrounding area; a 
tremendous infusion of capital and of jobs and so on — 
tremendous. But it’s extremely important for all of Saskatchewan 
too, as the member has said before. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder what would happen if everybody 
operated a business the way you guys are operating. Just imagine 
if you had a large hotel and you sold it to me for X number of 
dollars, without any money down, because I said to you, I’m going 
to build another hotel beside it some day down the road — and 
that’s exactly what you’re saying. My question was to you: how 
much cash up front did Weyerhaeuser put up to purchase 
Saskatchewan’ assets — 8 million acres of prime forest, the Big 
River sawmill, the Prince Albert Pulp Company and the chemical 
plant in Saskatoon. How many dollars were put up to acquire 
those assets? That’s what the taxpayers of this province want to 
know. How much down payment was put on to purchase those 
assets? Surely you didn’t give them all our assets for not any 
money down. You don’t operate like that. Farmers don’t operate 
businesses like that and I don’t think anybody  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2294 
 
 

else does. Now how much money did Weyerhaeuser put up front 
to purchase the assets that I have just indicated? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I hesitate to get into 
the analogy that the member raises. But since the boys want to 
chirp over there, I will get into the analogy. He says — if I quote 
you properly now — he says if you want to sell a hotel and I come 
to you and say, look, I’m going to buy this hotel and what I bring 
to it is that I’m going to build on to it; I’m going to build a major 
addition; I’m going to make it viable; I’m going to build a major 
addition and I’m going to make it viable and I’m going to keep all 
the people there working, plus I’m going to hire a whole bunch of 
new ones, and the doors will remain open and it will be viable on 
into the future. Okay. And what I’m saying to that member . . . 
And if the alternative to that is that the doors close and the 
bartender is laid off, and out go the people that work there and all 
the rest of it, and they’re laid off because there’s no continued 
viability for that hotel, I would say to you that that’s not an 
uncommon business practice. 
 
If a portion, Mr. Chairman, of the agreement for sale, if a portion 
of the agreement for sale, was . . . part of the agreement said you 
must build this major expansion . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. It’s very difficult to hear 
the minister. Are you finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Shaunavon makes it very difficult for us to carry on a reasonable 
debate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would most certainly 
like to find out how much money Weyerhaeuser put up. You talk 
about . . . You go on this business deal; you say that they’re losing 
money so you don’t want to put any money in because Prince 
Albert Pulp Company is losing money. 
 
Why did you not apply the same philosophy to the oil industry, I 
ask you, Mr. Minister? When things dropped in the oil industry, 
what did you do? You didn’t sell off all the oil wells or you didn’t 
give it away. What you did, you put more money into the oil 
companies so that they would keep operating, which they didn’t 
do. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now the oil companies . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Now the 
member from Lloydminster is getting into the debate, and I think 
that the member from Lloydminster should get into this debate 
because he’s another member that’s going to go down the drain on 
account of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You know, you say that the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company was losing money. You also indicate that the Big 
River sawmill was losing money. Now I don’t believe that. I don’t 
think that the Big River sawmill is any more inefficient than the 
Carrot River sawmill or the Hudson Bay sawmill or the Meadow 
Lake sawmill. I think that it’s just happened that the Big River 
sawmill had prime timber rights adjacent to PAPCO, and I think 
that’s why Big River was thrown in there and you’re  

using them as a black sheep. 
 
We know that the chemical plant in Saskatoon is not losing 
money. And we also know that you didn’t have to sell that 
chemical plant because it could still operate and still make money 
and still sell its chemicals to the Prince Albert Pulp Company 
without selling it off. 
 
But what you guys did with the oil industry — you give them the 
big breaks for the first four years, and then all of a sudden in the 
fifth year, when the things go bad in the oil industry, you up and 
you give them more money, more incentives. 
 
But you don’t apply that to Prince Albert Pulp Company; you 
don’t apply that here. So I ask you once again, very clearly, Mr. 
Minister: how much money did Weyerhaeuser Canada put down 
to take over the assets of the chemical plant in Saskatoon? The 
Prince Albert pulp-mill, the Big River sawmill, and the 8 million 
acres of prime timber, how much money did Weyerhaeuser put 
down? . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster says, who cares? What’s a half a billion 
dollars? 
 
Well I say this: the taxpayers of Saskatchewan care. And let me 
tell you, they will indicate to you and to the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster just how much they care when the election is 
called. 
 
And I ask you once again, Mr. Minister: how much money did 
they put up? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What we have is a commitment for $250 
million new investment in Saskatchewan — $250 million new 
investment: $166.8 million in cash investment that is not here now 
— investment from outside of the province and a debenture to 
repay from profits. 
 
And what I’m saying to the member and what I’ve said to the 
members up until now and will continue to say, is that paper-mill 
which will be built and the pulp-mill which now exists will be one 
unit. And that one unit will go a good long way to ensuring 
viability in the industry in that area. That is the key point that the 
members, I believe, understand — I’ll give them that — but I 
believe that they wish not to understand, and they do not want to 
acknowledge it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, let me ask you a couple of 
fairly simple questions. this has to do with your first assertion that 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . The member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster is commenting on my comments by saying 
that my questions are going to be simple questions from a 
simple-minded turkey. I just want everybody to know the 
witticisms which are coming from my left. And I am asking . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I think we should 
have all members please quieten down and allow the member 
from Regina Elphinstone to put his questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question, Mr. Minister, is this: you 
are asserting that the pulp-mill is not viable without  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2295 
 
 

having a paper-mill attached to it, and I’m not neither admitting 
this nor denying it at the moment. I am asking you when this 
situation came about, when this change in the pulp and paper 
industry came about so that free-standing pulp-mills were no 
longer viable. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m informed, Mr. Chairman, for the 
Leader of the Opposition, that the market price for bleach kraft 
softwood pulp increased to about 1980 and declined thereafter 
each year. 
 
But I would say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition another 
thing in terms of the purchase. From the point at which this mill, 
this pulp-mill that we now own, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
public of Saskatchewan now owns — which you bought — from 
that point, and in terms of the numbers of dollars that have been 
lost, and the fact that the interest was not paid off — we could not 
pay the interest on an annual basis for the loan which was obtained 
to purchase it — that thing has been a loser since the day that the 
public of Saskatchewan have owned it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if the minister could direct his attention to the question. 
And the question was: when did this change take place in the 
paper industry, that free-standing pulp-mills couldn’t support 
themselves and that you needed an integrated operation? 
 
It’s no good to say that the price of bleach kraft pulp went down, if 
at the same time the price of fine paper went down. You have got 
to tell me that that the integrated mills were making money and 
the free-standing mills were losing money, to justify your 
argument. Now you may have that evidence; I haven’t heard it. 
Please state to me, please state to me which of the integrated 
operations were making the money and which of the free-standing 
mills were losing it, then we would know that your argument had 
some validity. 
 
I must say that there are a number of free-standing kraft pulp-mills 
in Canada. And while I see some evidence of moves to integrate, I 
see a good number of . . . good deal of evidence of no moves to 
integrate. And these are by people like MacMillan-Bloedel and 
others who know a little bit about the pulp business. 
 
Now I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, again: why are you saying 
— however desirable a paper-mill may be, and that’s another 
argument — why are you saying that this pulp-mill is not viable as 
a pulp-mill but will be viable as a paper-mill and pulp-mill 
combined . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
The member says, look at the losses of the last several years. That 
is a non-argument because if the integrated . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
Look, if the member for Saskatoon Fairview is unable to follow 
the argument, I wish he would not interrupt when I am having a 
conversation with the minister. If the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview can tell me, can tell me one integrated corporation that 
made money, I wish he would. He should assist the minister. The 
minister is not giving me the answer. I want the minister to tell me 
which of the integrated mills was making money and which of  

the free-standing ones was losing money. 
 
Look, it is common knowledge, Mr. Chairman, that companies 
like Crown Zellerbach, who are pretty good operators, lost money 
in the ’82-83 period — integrated, free-standing, right across the 
piece. It is no argument at all to say that free-standing mills lost 
money if in fact the integrated mills lost money. That’s what I’m 
asking you to tell me. And I’m asking you to tell me why you 
believe the integrated mill will do that much better than the 
free-standing mill? 
 
An Hon. Member: —That’s a gotcha, George. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, it isn’t a gotcha. He’ll have the facts, 
but I would like him to share them with the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. I apologize for taking some time to 
put together some of this material. 
 
First of all, in the industry, if we can just go back through it for 
over a period of time, the premium is gone on what’s known as the 
northern fibre and softwood pulp — softwood pulp alone. And so 
there was a period of time when there was a premium on that type 
of fibre. 
 
As I mentioned earlier in I believe second readings, remarks about 
the way that the competition is now coming from some of the 
third-world countries who are very much getting into this 
business. 
 
One of the other major competitors, and the member will know 
this, and that’s been the case for a good period of time, is from 
Sweden — from the Scandinavian countries. There’s been a 
devaluation of their currency which gives a competitive 
advantage, a very distinct one, to Sweden. And we also have a 
transportation disadvantage. Those things are all things which 
mitigate against this softwood pulp-mill as it now stands. 
 
And one of the things about the integration with paper which is 
extremely important, as I had it explained to me by one person in 
the industry, is that paper, the final product paper does not 
discriminate against — if you will — the final price of paper is not 
discriminated against whether or not hardwood is used in the pulp 
which supplies it. 
 
(2145) 
 
And so what I’m saying is, that the forest mix that we have here in 
Saskatchewan and with the technology which is now available, 
which has been attested for some short period of time really at 
Prince Albert now in terms of the use of aspen — and we had 
some discussion about that earlier in this debate, I believe in 
second reading — the use of aspen is extremely important. And 
the forest mix that we have, with aspen in close to the pulp-mill, 
gives the company which will operate this Weyerhaeuser Canada 
. . . and I know they believe it or they wouldn’t be here investing 
in this new paper-mill. They believe it gives them an opportunity 
to in fact make a profit from an integrated facility because of all 
the factors that I outlined, plus some others. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2296 
 
 

There is certainly a trend, I think because of this new technology 
into hardwood and so on, there is certainly a trend in the industry 
across the country. Now you indicate some examples. I think we 
could dig up some of the examples in terms of showing what the 
trend has been. But I think if you look at the trend in the industry, 
the trend has been to more and more integration of pulp with 
paper, and that’s something that’s been in place for a good long 
time in some of the mills, but there’s more and more of a trend 
towards that in the last very short time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank 
you. This is . . . You’re telling me the reasons why the use of 
aspen in making pulp is indicated — and fair enough. Those are 
equally valid whether or not the mill is a free-standing mill or 
whether it’s integrated with a paper-mill, because obviously if 
you’re making aspen pulp, you’re going to sell the aspen pulp. 
 
The only argument in favour of integration that you made was — I 
presume I’ll make the argument for you — that the freight costs 
on paper as a percentage of its final value may be less than on pulp 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, if you want to dispute that, it 
was the only argument I found in your favour, in all of that. But 
we will admit, Mr. Minister, that up until 1981 or 1982, this mill 
made a fair bit of money. I take it nobody denies that . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well we’ll admit that in 1981 it had retained 
earnings of $93 million and paid dividends of 24 million. That’s 
not bad. And after paying dividends of $24 million it still has 
retained earnings of 93 and the 24 million were paid in that year. 
I’m just reading from the financial statement which you gave us 
for the year ended December 31, 1982, which has the 1981 
comparatives there. 
 
At some point this mill has rolled up some profits from 1966. 
That’s not the only dividends that have been paid, but I just make 
note of that, that the mill has rolled up some significant sums in 
profits . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well let’s . . . The members are I think not familiar with the 
finances of the Prince Albert pulp-mill. If I had the 1980 figures 
here or 1979 figures, the figures would be similar, and then the 
money to buy the equity in that pulp-mill was $10 million. That’s 
the original equity investment in this mill, and with an equity 
investment of $10 million, this company rolled up . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . If anyone doubts it, look at the figures. Don’t 
chuckle. These are the facts. 
 
The facts are that this mill was started up with a relatively small 
equity investment of $10 million. And if anyone doubts that, let 
him stand, and I will be able to refer him to the appropriate 
provisions. You can find them in the records of this House, if you 
like. 
 
On that very small equity base and very large debt load, it rolled 
up significant profits and became a very valuable mill. That was 
all . . . It paid all the interest on all the borrowed money which 
made up virtually its entire investment. 
 
Now this situation changed when the government acquired the 70 
per cent of the shares; we acknowledge  

that. And I chose my dates with some care. So there is no doubt 
that the mill made a lot of money in the ’60s and ’70s; and does 
anyone doubt that? If you doubt it, please give me the basis on 
which you doubt it. And if you . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
That’s right. 
 
What I am trying to get at is: why are you now saying that this 
company, which made a lot of money in the ’60s and ’70s, is now 
clearly a lemon. That’s what you’re saying, and you’re saying it’s 
a lemon and it can’t make money because it now must be 
integrated, notwithstanding the fact that it made a lot of money in 
the ’60s and ’70s. It only started losing money in 1982, and that’s 
a fact, or I believe it to be a fact. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you whether you agree with that and 
whether you think that the earnings history of the Prince Albert 
pulp-mill is very much different than the earnings of a good 
number of other pulp-mills across Canada at that time when they, 
too, lost money during this period? And if I am right, I am asking 
why you think that the track record of the Prince Albert mill 
would not be virtually the same as many other pulp-mills as they 
move into a period of higher earnings as is predicted -widely 
predicted by stock analysts? 
 
What is peculiar about the P.A. mill which tracked the earnings of 
the industry in all of the ’60s and the ’70s — for the last part of the 
’60s and all of the ’70s — and tracked the earnings of the industry 
during the ’80s? Why do you now say that it is a lemon and the 
other mills across Canada which lost money in the early ’80s and 
are now beginning to make money: why do you say that this P.A. 
mill is somehow different than the other mills in the industry 
whose earnings record it tracked for 20 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — For the numbers and the years that the 
member has said that he has chosen his years carefully, there’s no 
question. And the point that I made earlier is exactly that, that the 
mill in the ’60s and the ’70s no question, nobody disputes that it 
made money. I’ve never disputed that. And the point at which I 
have any figures — these figures that I’ve released today earlier, 
that you’ve quoted from and so on, are . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister is 
giving an answer, and I don’t think the Leader of the Opposition 
can hear him very clearly if we have another conversation going 
on across the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to reiterate 
what I said, at the earlier stages of this mill in the competition that 
it was in in the world market and so on, I believe, and there’s 
nobody has disputed — no one here I know has disputed — that it 
has made money over that period of time. 
 
The numbers which I released today and so on are related from the 
point at which the Government of Saskatchewan became the total 
owner of the mill, and at that point, and it was at that point as I 
indicated earlier, the market for pulp began a decline. There’s no 
question that that’s true. 
 
What you have said and what the Leader of the Opposition is 
suggesting is that analysts and market analysts and so on, are 
suggesting that there is a future. In  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2297 
 
 

other words, that the future looks positive in some way for the 
pulp industry. And what I’m saying is that the future looks better 
for the pulp and paper industry combined, when they’re combined, 
and that is the trend. And that’s what I have said to you, that we’ll 
try to provide to you some of the happenings within the 
competition across North America, that is that we are facing. I say 
we in terms of the operators, the present of that mill. And the trend 
is to integration with pulp and paper. 
 
And the clarification point that I want to make, and it is a bit of a 
strain here, but the clarification point that I want to make from an 
earlier answer to the Leader of the Opposition was that, it’s 
extremely important because of the forest mix that aspen is being 
used in this. No question that’s an important aspect. And what I 
tried to say is that the paper, the price of the paper on the market 
I’m given to understand, does not change in any way because it’s 
using . . . or as a result of the fact that it’s using hardwood in that 
mix. But if you’re selling pulp with hardwood in that mix, that is 
not developed into paper, it changes the price in terms of the world 
market. It changes in price, and in fact it’s a lower price, and that’s 
what I’m given to understand. That’s just a clarification from 
earlier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I hear the minister’s words. You’re 
saying that pulp sold as pulp is worth less that pulp sold as 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, yes, hardwood pulp. And I 
find that a little surprising. But never mind, if you assert that all 
that’s true, why, it may be true. I don’t want to argue the nuances 
of that with you tonight. 
 
I want to look at just one aspect of your document here, this rather 
remarkable document that you tabled today, and I want to take just 
one aspect of it. I want you to look at page 1 of your document 
and say, cost of common . . . I note on your right-hand side you’ve 
got “Total loss to the public of Saskatchewan.” You see that one? 
Okay. Then you say “Cost of common shares, December 31, 
1980, $186 million — $186,853,000.” Do you see that one? 
 
An Hon. Member: —Which is broken down on page 2. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Right. And the first of the breakdowns is 
$23 million paid to CIC for 30 per cent. Let me take that clear. 
Who paid whom $23 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That is there for clarification. Paid to 
CICIII . . . was paid by another agency of government — it wasn’t 
the Crown Management Board at that time, it was CIC, I believe, 
under your government. But that is the value that was put on the 
30 per cent by your people in CIC. So it was paid to CICIII which 
is the other company, by CIC — $23 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now let me get this clear. How much . . . 
I don’t know who bought them and who sold them, and I doubt 
very much that it’s what you tell me. But . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . All right. How did the Crown agency that sold 
them — where did they get them from? And how much did they 
pay for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the 23 . . . in 
fact the Leader of the Opposition, who carried out this transaction, 
is probably in a better position to say that than anybody over here 
is. But the $23 million, I believe,  

at least I would surmise, would be the market value of that 30 per 
cent of what that was worth. In other words, what was the original 
30 per cent, it was owned by the government back to the days of 
Thatcher’s government who took on a 30 per cent share of that 
company in equity. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I think, yes, and they were acquired 
for #3 million, and I was just wondering just how you had one 
agency of government sell something that they bought for $3 
million to another agency of government for $23 million and 
assert that the people of Saskatchewan had lost $23 million? 
 
Only the type of flimflam accounting which you have presented to 
us could possibly arrive at that conclusion. The facts are that we 
had a transfer of an asset, which stood on the books at $3 million, 
to another agency of government. If one of them paid too much, 
the other made a profit. There is no way that you can make a profit 
or a loss by selling from one agency of a government to the other. 
There’s no way that the public of Saskatchewan can make a profit 
or a loss. And when you put $23 million in there as a loss to the 
public of Saskatchewan by the moving of one asset from one 
agency of government to another, that is sheer, unadulterated 
flimflam, as is so much of this statement — sheer, unadulterated 
flimflam. 
 
And there is no way, there is no way, there is no way. No 
accountant would allow you — and I want to say this again — no 
accountant would allow you to say that the public of 
Saskatchewan had suffered either a profit or a loss, a profit or a 
loss, by transferring shares from one agency of government to 
another. That you can’t do. You can’t make a profit; you can’t 
make a loss. and when you say that someone lost $23 million, that 
is flimflam without substance and without foundation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the page clearly says: the 
breakdown of the investment in PAPCO, $23 million. Because the 
next line says $162.37 million, which you borrowed, which you 
borrowed to pay for 70 per cent. And if the 30 per cent is worth 
$23 million . . . Let’s put it this way: if the 70 per cent is worth 
$162 million, whether it is or it isn’t the fact is you borrowed that 
much money, and that’s how much money the public of 
Saskatchewan have in that 70 per cent, and the $23 million is how 
much the public of Saskatchewan have in that 30 per cent. And in 
the 100 per cent of that mill, what the public of Saskatchewan 
have into it is $186,853,915; that’s what the public of 
Saskatchewan have in that installation that’s now there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And, Mr. Minister, whether you say that 
they have it in there, they didn’t put it in. Nobody borrowed $23 
million; nobody borrowed $23 million. And when you impute 
interest to money that wasn’t borrowed, that’s flimflam, that is 
flimflam. That is flimflam. 
 
And when you say, as you do here, that somebody paid $23 
million for something and nobody borrowed any money for that 
$23 million — if they did it was one government agency made the 
profit, and one made the  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2298 
 
 

loss — and whatever else you can say about that, you can’t say the 
public of Saskatchewan lost $23 million, which is what you’re 
saying. And it’s false, and you know it’s false. And when you 
charge interest — nobody paid the interest mind you — but you 
impute the interest on $23 million which nobody ever paid, 
nobody ever paid to any third party, then that is flimflam. And 
you, Mr. Minister, know it’s flimflam, and it has no basis in fact. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just one quick point. The 
Crown Management Board, an agency of the public of 
Saskatchewan, has $186,853,915 invested in that, and I’ll leave it 
at that. I’m sure we’ll get to it another day. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and govern its activities and 
to provide for an appeal board with respect to certain 
assessment matters 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Labour-sponsored  
Venture Capital Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would ask that 
the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan  
Pension Plan and Providing for the Payment of a  

Minimum Monthly Pension 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act respecting the Establishment of 
Ambulance Districts and Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance 

Operators and Emergency Medical Personnel and the 
Provision of Ambulance Services in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I move that this Bill be read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting the Provision of Home Care 

Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I move the Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic  
on Saskatchewan Highways 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendment 
be read a first and second time now. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Registration of  
Vehicles and Licensing of Drivers 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2299 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would ask that 
the Bill be now read and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:15 p.m. 
 
 
 


