


















































May 12, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 12, 1986 
 

1237 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just prior to 
the break for supper, Mr. Speaker, I was asking the minister 
several very important questions pertaining to the social and 
economic problems that face many of our people in the more 
remote northern communities. And he responded by giving me 
some information, generalized information, about the northern 
revolving fund which generated 83 businesses in the North, Mr. 
Speaker. And out of the 83 new businesses in the North, that 
also brought about some 280 new jobs, I presume. 
 
But I was asking the minister several other questions that I felt 
important to raise. And one of them was: what other major 
economic development activities has the government initiated 
since coming into office? 
 
I maintain that . . . I concur that the minister and his department 
may have generated some 280 new jobs, but, Mr. Speaker, you 
know they have been in office now going into five years, and 
the figure to me is not all that impressive. I have had occasion 
here to talk during the break for supper with some Northerners. 
And, you know, the figure is certainly not all that impressive 
considering the fact that the government we’re dealing with in 
estimates has generated just so many jobs when we have a 
population of 30,000 out there in the northern administration 
district. 
 
And when we talk about major resource development, major 
revenues coming out from those resources; when we question 
this government about the number of jobs created, the number 
of training programs initiated by this government, the amount 
of money, the amount of resource revenue going back into the 
North from resource development — whether that resource 
development pertains to gold, uranium, forestry — we have no 
concrete evidence that the North is getting a fair share from the 
provincial treasury in terms of jobs, training, and other 
opportunities. 
 
They talk about bringing northern Saskatchewan in mainstream 
society with the rest of the province. But it would seem to me, 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that the only consideration that 
you have for the North is when you want to remove and take 
away revenue, resource revenue, from the North. 
 
I am very concerned about several aspects of environment, but 
that, as I understand, Mr. Minister, is not under your portfolio. 
 
So getting back to the estimates, I note with interest here the 
pamphlet that you handed me prior to the supper break, re the 
“adventure Catalogue” and Canada’s undiscovered vacation 
land. Undiscovered, it says. And I want to say, Mr. Minister, 
how appropriate you would 

have a pamphlet like that, entitled Canada’s undiscovered 
vacation land, because the conclusion I have is that you have 
undiscovered the people of the northern administration district, 
meaning to say that you have not recognized the many social 
and economic hardships that are confronted by the people up 
there. They are supposed to be mainstream, a part of this 
province, and yet we continuously ignore them. 
 
We have no concrete evidence today of a self-sufficient 
economic strategy for the people in the top half of the province. 
That is the conclusion I’ve arrived with, because to this point in 
time, Mr. Minister, we still have high — as high as 99 per cent 
— unemployment rates, and a welfare dependency rate which is 
equally high. 
 
Just the other day, Mr. Minister, I attended a meeting, a 
presentation conducted by the northern development advisory 
committee — an advisory committee established by the 
member for P.A.-Duck Lake as a sounding board for your 
government. And I was quite interested in some of the 
presentations made. There were presentations made by 
small-business sector people, people involved in construction, 
and I noted that this one person that made a presentation stated 
— one out of others — stated that your government . . . They 
had problems with regard to your government recognizing the 
need for training, recognizing the need for financing. I mean 
your government has a lack of providing the appropriate 
programs to meet three specific areas: training, financing, and 
tendering. Mrs. Pat Knutson made that presentation, Mr. 
Minister, and I had occasion to talk with her afterwards 
whereby she stated to that committee that they definitely 
encountered problems when it came to tendering and submitting 
bids. They are isolated and Regina is out of touch with the 
people in northern Saskatchewan. That is the message I got and 
in terms of financing, they had problems associated in getting 
interim funding and getting started in small business ventures. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you at this point in time: what 
process do you have in terms of Tourism and Small Business 
and all the other governments combined? What process do you 
have for tendering, accepting tenders, and providing the training 
required for heavy duty equipment operators and the like, 
special trades, etc.? What do you have in terms of financing, 
providing interim funding for those small businesses that do 
need help form your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think the questions 
were, in the part of it that made a lot of sense, what are we 
doing in training, in financing, and in tendering. In training I’m 
sure the member has heard of the Northern Institute of 
Technology which will be open this fall. A world-class, post 
high school — not even that — training facility. I’m sure the 
member is completely aware of that. I think that probably more 
than anything that has happened in recent years, that will impact 
on the training potential for northern Saskatchewan. I’m sure he 
appreciates that point. 
 
In terms of funding, as I indicated to him earlier today, all  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1238 
 

the programs that are available in southern Saskatchewan are 
available in northern Saskatchewan, as well as some unique 
ones. The northern revolving fund, we’ve had some discussion 
about. That’s certainly one funding mechanism that’s uniquely 
available to northern Saskatchewan. Venture capital equity 
money is available in northern Saskatchewan, the same as 
anywhere else. That’s certainly a concept that was unheard of in 
this province before 1983. Interest rate protection, another nine 
and five-eighths, or now after the budget and the estimates that 
we’re considering here, the 8 per cent program which provides 
a degree of confidence and a guarantee to small-business people 
on what their interest rates will be over a period of time. The 
business consultants’ activities in northern Saskatchewan, 
which are certainly directed in a much more meaningful way 
towards business than they ever were before. 
 
And of course another recent program would be the two-year 
holiday on provincial income tax that was introduced. You 
talked about start-up problems. You’re absolutely correct there, 
and that is certainly one program that has been designed to 
impact on those programs. 
 
I think the question on tendering — what happens in northern 
Saskatchewan? — same as happens anywhere else. Tendering 
goes to the lowest bidder, but we do look for some regional 
preferences in those things, but for the most part tendering is to 
the lowest bidder. 
 
Mr. Yew:— In terms of tendering, Mr. Minister, there is 
another person that made a presentation on behalf of our local 
native group — a gentleman by the name of Mike Mercredi. 
And he concurred with Mrs. Knutson, Knutson Construction, 
that definitely training and that program was of importance to 
them. 
 
But one item that I want to follow up with with regards to the 
response you’ve just given me, is the area of the northern 
preference clause that we had prior to this administration. What 
has become of the northern preference clause, Mr. Minister? Do 
people in the North have a preference clause of some nature that 
is recognized while in the tendering process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again the 
member on several occasions has tended to mix departments. I 
just communicated briefly with the member responsible for 
northern Saskatchewan, and I think that the question that you 
have just asked more rightfully belongs in his estimates, or 
possibly I could entertain it under Supply and Services. But the 
point we’re dealing with here is Tourism and Small Business. 
Our role in northern Saskatchewan, as it is in Saskatchewan, is 
to promote and encourage; to make it easier for people to carry 
out small business, tourism being one of the key elements in 
that area. 
 
(1915) 
 
And in the small business sector we have . . . I have indicated 
that in terms of what our department does, you know, we 
operate without any artificial contract rules. We could discuss 
what happened previously, I suppose, in terms of southern 
contractors acquiring a shadow partner in northern 
Saskatchewan and so on. But I don’t  

think that this is really the place for that type of debate. It may 
be a very reasonable and worthwhile debate, but I think we 
should try to concentrate this evening on the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business and its impact; and I’ve indicated 
some of those impacts. 
And I would go back to the previous answer when we indicated 
the, roughly, in excess of $10 million that last year was invested 
in small-business expansions, start-ups, or modernizations in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I restricted my remarks at that 
time to the impact of expanded or new small businesses, and I 
think that really is the thrust that should be followed when 
debating Tourism and Small Business estimates. And I would 
suggest that, as with that other question, that you would keep 
track of it and ask it to the member from P.A.-Duck Lake who 
is responsible for northern Saskatchewan on a broader basis. 
 
Mr. Yew:— I concur with you, Mr. Minister, that your mandate 
is to promote and encourage small business, and that is the very 
reason why I asked what position your department has taken 
with regards to accepting tenders. And I note with amusement, 
Mr. Minister, that this is now the fifth trip that the member for 
P.A.-Duck Lake has made over to your bench, in line of my 
questioning in regards to your estimates. That to me, Mr. 
Minister, tells me how ill informed you are with regards to the 
people in the North, and that has happened  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I think the minister . . . Order. 
I think the minister has been pretty explicit about the tendering 
system, which belongs to another department. If you have 
another question . . . Order. If you have another question 
regarding Tourism and Small Business, then proceed. 
 
Mr. Yew:— I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you in charge of small 
business throughout this province, and is your mandate in fact 
to encourage and promote small business development, 
industrial development, construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again it’s very 
difficult with the member from Quill Lakes expounding freely 
from his chair, and I think the question was: was this 
department responsible for encouraging and promoting small 
business? The answer is clearly yes. This department, however, 
does not have any construction projects in northern 
Saskatchewan. We have not awarded any tenders in the 
construction area. I believe your previous question had to do 
with the awarding of construction contracts, and I think I 
accurately indicated that that probably belonged in another 
department. It certainly doesn’t belong in ours. 
 
Our role is to encourage private sector small business. I think 
we have indicated a number of the things we do in that respect. 
I could go over them again, in terms of financing if you wish. If 
you would like me to repeat them for your benefit, I’ll give you 
the opportunity to ask me to repeat them. I’m fully prepared to 
do that. 
 
But in terms of contracts in northern Saskatchewan, particularly 
construction contracts, no, this department does not have any. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1239 
 

Mr. Yew:— It would seem, Mr. Minister, my conclusions are 
— and I believe that a good majority of the people viewing the 
procedures of the legislature will probably concur with me — 
that you do not have a mandate to provide for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan, the more isolated communities. You 
have neglected, you have abandoned them; you have ignored 
them. 
 
I’m questioning you with regards . . . We’re getting into 
specifics here. You confuse the matter at hand by suggesting 
that the question is more appropriate with this department or 
that department, or the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, or what 
have you. 
 
As I understand the system of government, you have created an 
atmosphere of confusion, Mr. Minister, not only in northern 
Saskatchewan but in the province as a whole. You enlarged 
your cabinet from 18 or 19 up to 24, and then your leader lost 
. . . had, you know, a feeling of a lack of confidence. When he 
got pressured by the public, he decided to demote a good 
number of your colleagues. 
 
And to this point in time, Mr. Minister, you know, when we’re 
questioning individual members of cabinet pertaining to 
concerns raised by our constituents, when you haven’t got an 
answer for those particular questions, you try to slough them off 
to another department. That is not what I call fairness. That is 
not what I call a government standing up and meeting its 
mandate of helping resolve and being responsible for all sectors 
of our province. 
 
I asked you earlier, Mr. Minister, prior to supper break: what 
major developments have you initiated? The only ones that I 
have to date that you have in general expressed to me is the new 
business starts, the 83 new business starts that you managed to 
initiate in the North. I don’t dispute those figures. Certainly you 
may have extended some loans, some grants, or what have you. 
And I’m not asking for the specific names of persons that have 
taken opportunity with regards to the northern revolving fund. 
I’m questioning you about major developments, you know. 
 
I would like to ask you again, Mr. Minister — maybe you’ve 
reconsidered — to provide us now with some answers with 
regard to major economic development initiatives up North, 
aside from the new business ventures that you mentioned before 
supper. I’d like to ask you for information pertaining to the 
number of jobs created, and a breakdown of what people have 
benefitted from those jobs; proportionately, how many 
Northerners have entered the employment circuit. If the 
minister has that information, I would certainly be pleased to 
receive it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I will remind the 
member once more that this is the estimates of the Department 
of Tourism and Small Business. I think we have, Mr. Chairman, 
one-quarter of our departmental complement located in northern 
Saskatchewan. I believe there’s something like 3 per cent of the 
population. I think that this department is clearly allocating 
resources and personnel and programs to deal with the problems 
of northern Saskatchewan. And that is, as I indicated before 
supper, certainly not indicating that those problems are solved; 
they’re a long way from it. But we will continue to  

work from it. 
 
If the member is asking — and he has never come out and said 
it — if there are intentions to reinstitute the department of 
northern Saskatchewan, to play one part of Saskatchewan 
against the other as was the position under the previous 
government, the answer is clearly no, we will not be doing that. 
 
He mentioned the projects in northern Saskatchewan that I 
listed. I gave him some of the categories. I can give him all of 
them. As I indicated, I gave him the numbers of business starts, 
business expansions or business modernizations that have taken 
place. He wanted to know what projects our department has 
instituted. 
 
I have to make it very clear that our department does not 
institute projects. Those are instituted by the people in northern 
Saskatchewan, consequently providing jobs for them, and it’s 
done by the people themselves. We don’t institute projects. 
 
If, in fact, you are asking what projects have taken place up 
there, I could mention a couple. Obviously, again, we’re beyond 
the purview of this department but possibly I can give you 
something to think about. You talked about a contract Starrex, 
for instance, the gold development, the original contracts, the 
original contract let for Starrex. I understand it went to a La 
Ronge company, particularly the road building. But again, that 
is well beyond the area of this department. 
 
I suppose a couple of other things — the wild rice development, 
which is the processing plant and so on — have all come into 
being since this government took office. Once again though, 
those are not things that we specifically institute. 
 
The paper project has been discussed in these estimates a 
number of times, at Prince Albert. Again, not instituted by 
government, a project instituted by the private sector, one that 
the member from Quill Lakes has clearly said he’s against and 
that he would look to make significant changes if that ever 
came to being. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will give you one other economic development 
project that we have undertaken in northern Saskatchewan. We 
have undertaken not to close the uranium mines, probably the 
greatest economic development project that there could be up 
there, as compared to your party’s policy of closing those 
mines. 
 
However, those are general things. I don’t profess to have the 
details on the specifics. I suppose the major projects branch of 
the Department of Economic Development would be one area. 
The minister of the northern Saskatchewan probably has a 
better handle on all those things. As far as Tourism and Small 
Business is concerned, as I indicated, in northern Saskatchewan 
we have 25 per cent of our departmental complement serving 
less than 3 per cent of the population. So I think that it’s safe to 
say that we are putting considerable emphasis on northern 
Saskatchewan; working very hard to solve the many problems 
that exist up there. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Aside from the names of individuals, Mr.  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1240 
 

Minister, I would like to have a list of the projects that you have 
initiated in your department. Can that be made available here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— I’ll try this one more time. Our 
department does not institute projects. We put in place 
programs, programs designed to help small business cope with 
things like the lack of capital. I think of the venture capital 
corporation, that whole program which has had a significant 
impact on the availability of capital. Hopefully that will 
broaden and be used to a great degree in northern 
Saskatchewan. I think it would be a natural. 
 
Interest rate protection for small business — the nine and 
five-eighths program, now the 8 per cent program; the whole 
change in the perception of our business consulting services, 
our business resource centres providing information, detailed 
plans, tremendously wide range of information for small 
business of all types. Those are the types of things this 
department does. We do not institute projects. 
 
Now I will accept that that may be considerably different from 
the practices of the administration of the NDP. We believe we 
are here to serve and work with the private sector, not to 
compete with them. And while that may be a different 
philosophy than the one you espouse, that is in any case the 
philosophy that we live by, and that is the philosophy that 
governs the actions of this department. So it would be 
impossible for me to provide you detailed information on 
projects that we have instituted. 
 
However, if you have questions on programs designed to help 
tourists, tourism, the tourism industry, small business 
throughout the province, particularly in northern Saskatchewan, 
we would be more than happy to attempt to answer those for 
you. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you, Mr. Minister. I then ask you: you 
dispute the fact that you don’t institute businesses up North, but 
you do provide other incentives under your department, Mr. 
Minister? I see that you have a fund available to promote 
northern business development, and also you have grants for 
northern economic development. Can the minister provide then 
a list of funding that you have appropriated to the various 
businesses, or people that have instituted projects throughout 
the North. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, under the Northern 
Economic Development Subsidiary Agreement or NEDSA as I 
think it’s commonly referred to, I can provide you a list of the 
grants that were paid out in ’85-86. If you would wish to take 
notes I will go through them very quickly. 
 
Gordon and Nora Carle in La Ronge, a project that . . . the title I 
have and I don’t have details on what exactly what it was — 
blueberry utilization, $13,500 in the ’85-86 year; Cold Water 
Fish Products of La Ronge, a crayfish utilization, $8,000; 
Buffalo Narrows pharmacy at Buffalo Narrows, expansion of 
pharmacy services to La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse, $60,000. 
Erwin Keller from La Ronge, cranberry utilization, $4,889; Don 
Holmes from 

Creighton, feasibility and market study for heavy duty 
equipment repair shop, $6,000; Pinehouse Co-op at Pinehouse 
Lake, the replacement of the retail store, $50,000; and Kikinak 
Friendship Centre in La Ronge, business activity, $25,000. And 
you can total those for the total grants. 
 
As well, I indicated that those are the provincial grants that 
were approved under the NEDSA, or the Northern Economic 
Development Subsidiary Agreement. The federal government 
also provided grants under that agreement. Obviously we don’t 
have details on those. 
 
And I would once again indicate we have talked about the 
performance of the northern revolving fund. I won’t go back 
into it. We’ve indicated the millions of dollars that have been 
loaned through that fund. And as I indicated before supper, and 
I think you accepted, that we would not be providing detailed 
information on the various people who had loan portfolios with 
the revolving fund. 
 
So that would be some of the programs that provincially we 
have provided under the grant program that is in place. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Mr. Minister, in terms of the . . . We’ve 
mentioned, or you have mentioned . . . And I’m interested to 
find out from you want incentives you have and encouragement 
you have provided to the wild rice industry in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: have you provided, aside from 
funding — we can maybe raise a question with regards to 
funding as well — but aside from funding, what kind of a 
promotion and marketing encouragement and support have you 
given this industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, just for the benefit of 
the committee — I’m sure the member asking the questions is 
aware of it — but for the benefit of the committee, some 
information on the wild rice industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The industry is one that is expanding at a fairly rapid pace, as 
I’m sure the member, being a representative of that area, knows. 
Our records indicate that 750 people — 634 in the North, and 
116 in the South — hold slightly over 3,400 permits. That’s in 
1985. Thirteen thousand, seven hundred acres are either in 
production or with production potential. Sixty-four per cent of 
the harvest is processed by the La Ronge Wild Rice 
Corporation processing plant which was opened in September 
of 1983. 
 
Some of the specific answers then to what has been provided 
from this department to this industry. 
 
The revolving fund forwarded one loan totalling $300,000 to 
enable the purchase of green rice from growers for processing at 
La Ronge. 
 
Tourism and Small Business is supporting enhanced market 
development for wild rice directly through contacts with 
marketing agents, and indirectly through SIAP (Saskatchewan 
Indian Agriculture Program) Marketing Inc., whose initiatives 
include development of  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1241 
 

Canadian and offshore markets. So market development is 
obviously one key area. 
 
We are continuing to support the SRC, (Saskatchewan Research 
Council), and the University of Saskatchewan in research into 
improved production, harvesting, processing, quality control, 
and plot management techniques —  those are all things. 
 
A couple of other specifics: financial support for La Ronge 
Wild Rice Corporation processing plant, which I mentioned, 
and working capital assistance for purchase of 300,000 pounds 
of green rice for processing at the La Ronge plant. So some of 
those, specifically in terms of dollars, and then the general 
concepts in terms of the marketing initiatives undertaken by the 
department, indicate the support for this rather rapidly 
expanding industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the industry, 
I concur. There’s a tremendous amount of potential in the 
industry, Mr. Minister. 
 
I just want to ask you a brief question here. With regards to an 
individual person applying for and getting a permit to leave; 
and once the permit is issued, in terms of starting up the 
individual into getting involved in the wild rice industry, does 
your department — or whatever other agency is probably more 
appropriate in that line of business — does your government 
provide seeding for the individual person that wants to get 
involved in the wild rice industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, DRIE (Department of 
Regional Industrial Expansion) and NEDSA have established a 
$50,000 fund to establish a seed bank for the wild rice industry. 
The Department of Agriculture may be involved. We don’t 
have details on that, but I think they’re certainly involved in 
some way. But for the most part it’s DRIE and NEDSA that 
have provided the seed money. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you, Mr. Minister. Getting back to the 
original question. Again, in terms of promotion, management, 
and marketing, Mr. Minister, it was the contention of a number 
of people involved with the wild rice growers association and 
the co-operative . . . I had occasion to talk to some members 
involved in the organizations. One I may mention here. I’m sure 
Oscar wouldn’t mind. Oscar Beatty is a very active wild rice 
growing enthusiast and he supplements his seasonal income 
through the industry. And it was his contention that, you know, 
there was not enough support provided by your government in 
terms of promotion, management, and marketing. And I want to 
know, Mr. Minister — you’ve stated a while ago that you do 
provide support, but how is that . . . You know, what is the 
evidence? What’s the substance of that support? I simply can’t 
understand it. You talk in general terms, and I haven’t seen any 
concrete evidence to lead me to believe that your government 
has actually put out an all-out effort like you have in tourism to 
promote this industry. You’ve got a major campaign here to sell 
Saskatchewan and attract tourists. But I have yet to see a 
program, a concrete program to promote this resource, wild rice 
industry. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
indicated that somehow wild rice had not received the same 
emphasis as tourism. I think obviously we in tourism have a 
billion dollar industry, and wild rice, while it has tremendous 
potential and is on the right track, considerably less. We have 
said very clearly in this House that in tourism we see our role as 
one of promoting the province, promoting the attractions, 
promoting the things that people can do in tourism here. And 
then we see the private sector as responsible for providing the 
services, the attractions, the facilities, that people will use when 
they in fact make use of or respond to our advertising efforts. 
 
In the wild rice industry we have concentrated many of our 
efforts in the marketing side. We have provided through various 
. . . $15,000 to SIAP, for instance, for marketing work. We have 
had marketing studies, a lot of work there. But we then see it 
the responsibility of the private sector in accessing those studies 
and putting them to work. 
 
More directly in terms of involvement, prior to 1983 of course, 
the wild rice had to be sent out raw. It’s now processed in the 
province. I think that is a clear indication of a step. And there 
was, as I indicated in the previous answer, a considerable 
amount of money involved in that. 
 
We have provided $600,000 in loans for various purposes in the 
wild rice industry: initial payments, harvesters, those types of 
things. There have been an awful lot of direct involvement in 
the industry. But the other analogy that I would draw in terms 
of wild rice and tourism is that in dealing with the wild rice 
industry, it was very diverse. They were not organized as an 
industry. Recently that has been overcome, and they are 
speaking now, I think, with a consistent voice. That’s happened 
recently in the tourism industry in the province as well. And I 
think that will make is easier for government and the private 
sector to co-operate and make the things happen that people 
want to happen. 
 
All I could say in closing is that I think we’re on the right track. 
I think there have been significant advancements in that 
industry. I think it has been primarily co-operation between 
government and people in the industry; not government 
dictating what should be done. And hopefully we’ll see 
tremendous strides in the very short term in that particular 
industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to say to you, 
Mr. Minister, I don’t feel that that 50,000 is sufficient enough to 
. . . When we look at the figures that you have provided for 
Manalta Coal of Calgary, Husky Oil of Calgary, the Peter 
Pocklingtons of Edmonton, Alberta, it certainly does not sound 
fair. 
 
(1945) 
 
You know, we talk about the tremendous potential that we have 
in this one resource. I look at your announcement the other day 
here, Mr. Minister, where you unveiled plans for a 3 million 
tourism marketing program strategy, and whereby you say that 
the potential 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1242 
 

of the industry re tourism is boundless, and we know we’ll get 
all the money back we spent on advertising. Certainly that may 
be money well spent. But in terms of a growing industry like 
the wild rice industry which is just new, the marketing problem, 
the promotion and the marketing problem . . . The message that 
I got from the people directly involved is that we do not expand 
into other areas of marketing other than our own back yard. Are 
we competitive in the world market, for an example? Are we 
competitive with other countries? When you say advertising 
and promotion and the like, is that . . . My understanding from 
talking to the wild rice growers personally, Mr. Minister, is that 
there is no encouragement in terms of getting the product 
marketed. And there’s no support in terms of promotional 
brochures going into other countries. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you probably have 
provided a lot of support, from the documentations I have here, 
for major, wealthy, affluent groups like the oil companies and 
the banks and the bond dealers and the Peter Pocklingtons. But 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you have provided insufficient 
funding to this industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, obviously all I can say 
is, that is totally incorrect. In this industry we provided 
significant funding on a proportional basis — a lot more for the 
rice industry to build their processing plant than the industrial 
incentives program that the Gainers project in North Battleford 
is accessing, a program that’s available to anyone. That’s 
simply not the case. And to argue that we haven’t done 
anything promoting the use of wild rice overseas is again 
completely wrong. Just shortly, not long ago, SIAP spent three 
weeks in Europe on a marketing program that we were involved 
in. And I think that indicates that’s totally wrong. We’ve also 
been marketing all across, or aiding in marketing all across all 
North America. 
 
And in fact the problem in the world rice industry is not so 
much on the marketing end. We’ve worked on that and they 
have markets now for everything they produce. I think that the 
results are there, that this industry has been supported by this 
government and supported in a large way, and I think on a 
relative basis equivalent of any other comparable industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to add my 
comments to those of my colleagues. I want to add my criticism 
of the comments which you made earlier about your staff. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you did was cowardly. You knew full well, 
you must have known, that the comments of the member from 
Shaunavon were not a criticism of your staff but a criticism of 
your government’s management and your style of management. 
You chose, Mr. Minister, to throw your public servants ahead of 
you and to try and deflect the criticism of your government by 
saying, you’re attacking public servants. 
 
The member from Shaunavon was doing nothing of a such; you 
knew it. And I think, Mr. Minister, it was a most unfortunate 
way to defend yourself. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d 
like to apologize to the Assembly for comments that were 
wholly inappropriate. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Yes, and I wonder if the member 
opposite would like to apologize for his colleague from 
Shaunavon. I emphasize once again that those points were 
brought to me by the members of my department. I will quote 
once more for the member opposite, if he wishes, the line that I 
indicated in the Hansard from this afternoon, in which he 
indicated that the very professional people who attend our travel 
shows and so forth to the United States were somehow there on 
a holiday. And they take grave exception to that, and so do I. 
And I certainly do not apologize to this committee; in fact, I 
think, if there’s apologies owed, as I said this afternoon, it’s 
from those benches. 
 
I think that we in political life develop fairly thick skins. I think 
that we can banter back and forth. I’m sure that when my 
colleagues were in opposition they chastised you for the amount 
of travel. I’m sure that the former minister, Mr. Gross’s trip to 
Baden-Baden was mentioned in this House. And the activity 
that you people have been undertaking the last three weeks, we 
get used to that. I think that’s . . . While it doesn’t really 
impress me as a wise use of the time of this Assembly, it’s 
certainly something we learn to take. 
 
I think, however, when people go to work in the civil service 
that they do not put themselves into a position to have to accept 
that type of comment. Unless there’s some substantiation, of 
which there was absolutely none, I don’t think that’s fair. And I 
think the members of my staff indicated some concern about it, 
and I pass it one to you. And if you wish to stand up and 
chastise me, that’s certainly within the rules of the game. But I 
would think that the apology obviously should come from the 
other benches. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Mr. Minister, the style of government 
which this government provided has caused a morale problem 
in the public service the like of which I have never seen. Mr. 
Minister, you have appointed . . . and I except the people 
around you from this comment, but this government has 
appointed an inordinately large number of people who have no 
competence, who provide no leadership. And this government’s 
problems with the public service can be all summed up in one 
word — that’s “management.” 
 
You lack management, and you’ve appointed an inordinately 
large number — your government, I mean — has appointed an 
inordinately large number of public servants to the public 
service who have no competence, who can scarcely find the 
wash-room after being in office for several years. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re a strange one to lecture about treatment of 
the public service. For anyone in this government to lecture 
anyone about the treatment of the public service is to pull a 
sliver out of your neighbour’s eye and forget about the beam in 
your own. You have the most massive morale problem in the 
public service I have ever seen. You’ve got it because of your 
style of government, and because of the patronage, the raw 
patronage involved in the appointment of too many public 
servants. You have forgotten something, Mr. Minister, that is a 
saying that is almost as old — well it’s  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1243 
 

almost as old as government. I remember a minister in the 
Douglas government saying that it’s easier to make an engineer 
out of a CCFer than . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman:— Order, order. I fail to see where this is very 
relative to the estimates that we’re in, and if you have some line 
of questioning in regard to the Tourism and Small Business, we 
will listen to those. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— I don’t know whether you were in the Chair 
this afternoon, but I listened to the minister carry on for some 
time about how the member from Shaunavon had slandered the 
public service and how the member from Shaunavon . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman:— Order, order. The line that you are going 
into has absolutely nothing to do with what was discussed this 
afternoon. So if you want to get on with the estimates, fine. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Suffice it to say, Mr. Minister, you’re a 
strange . . . anyone, any member of the treasury bench in this 
government is a strange person to lecture anyone about 
treatment of the public service, because it has never been worse 
than it was in the last few years. That is true of every 
department, including yours. That’s true of every department 
including yours. I have never seen anything like it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us what portion of the 
advertising for tourism of which you’re so proud — oh so proud 
— I wonder if you could tell us what portion of that 
advertisement was directed at Saskatchewan people and what 
was directed at people living outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment 
in response. The member suggests that the members of my 
department and many others have no confidence, I suppose I 
could rest my case on what I had to say this afternoon. It seems 
strange to me that the member who chooses to cluck like a 
chicken would contest anybody in terms of competence. 
 
The question was, Mr. Speaker, tourism advertising expenditure 
breakdown. The in-province expenditure . . . I know it’s 
difficult to hear. The member for North East is making . . . 
Maybe we would wait till he’s through and then I’ll give you 
the numbers. 
 
Okay. In province, $435,000; out of province — and I’ll give it 
to you by categories — general touring, $1.065 million; 
adventure, $108,000; and business travel, $82,000. That’s the 
advertising breakdown. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Mr. Minister, I didn’t see very much of the 
advertising that was directed at people outside of Saskatchewan 
except that which appeared in national magazines. That’s the 
only thing, I think, I would have seen. So I saw very little of it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the $400,000 you spent advertising in 
Saskatchewan was very self-serving. Those ads, Mr. Minister, 
which I saw were not directed at attempting to sell 
Saskatchewan. They were not attempting to sell Saskatchewan 
vacations to Saskatchewan people. The  

advertisements were intended to convey an impression that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is making life so wonderful that 
who would dare to quarrel with you? 
 
The advertising which I saw, Mr. Minister, directed towards the 
Saskatchewan market, was very self-serving. You weren’t 
selling Saskatchewan vacations to Saskatchewan people. You 
were trying — apparently with a real lack of success, judging 
by the fact that you’ve been fleeing an election now for some 
three weeks. It was an attempt to sell yourselves to the 
Saskatchewan people, and not Saskatchewan vacations. So, Mr. 
Minister, the 435,000 which you spent in-province was money 
that could have been a lot better spent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I’ve listened several 
times to this general comment, that the ads that we have been 
running both in and outside the province, are somehow full of 
political propaganda or, I think your term was, self-serving. I 
have some problems understanding exactly where that’s gone 
on. 
 
The ads that you see in Saskatchewan are the same ads that run 
in Alberta. This ad, for instance, the comments was made that 
there’s too much blue in the ad. Well if the blue skies of 
Saskatchewan are something that the members opposite don’t 
want to see in the ads, I would direct their attention to 
Manitoba’s ad. There’s more blue sky in it than we have here. 
And I don’t think they have a blue government, Mr. Speaker. 
We also balanced, though — we have some red sunsets. So, I 
mean, we’ve tried to fit. 
 
But for the life of me, Mr. Chairman, I try to take this comment 
seriously, by the member opposite, that somehow there is 
something that is not a straight promotion of the province, of 
the tourism industry, in these ads. And he’ll have to be much 
more specific. I can send him any of our ads that would be of 
benefit to him, and he can point out anything he’d like that 
specifically bothers him in terms of some lack of 
professionalism in these ads. But I would challenge him, as I 
have challenged the other members of his caucus, to point out 
exactly what it is he’s referring to. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t need those ads. I 
have seen all of the ads of this government I’m going to need 
for a long time, I’ll tell the world. You started out, Mr. Minister, 
you criticized us for spending $6 million on government 
advertising. You spent 11 last year, or the year before last; 
apparently 20 in the ’85-86 year, Mr. Minister; and Heaven 
only knows what you’re going to spend this year. I have seen all 
of this government’s advertising I want to see for a long, long 
time. 
 
(2000) 
 
I don’t recall, Mr. Minister, having said anything about the 
colour of the ads. It wasn’t the colour of the ads I was 
complaining about; it was the tone. The tone of them was 
intended to promote the government and not Saskatchewan 
vacations. The tone of them specifically, Mr. Minister, said 
little about Saskatchewan vacations and a great deal about what 
a good life people in Saskatchewan have. That is not selling 
vacations; that’s  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1244 
 

selling a sense of well-being to Saskatchewan people. 
 
An Hon. Member:— Oh you hate that. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— No, I don’t hate that. But I think, if the 
Conservative Party wants to do it, the Conservative Party ought 
to pay for it, Mr. Member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
It ought to arise without being artificially inspired. I think that’s 
our point. And this government, with the massive amounts 
you’re spending on advertising, is attempting to inspire an 
artificial feeling. I would be a great deal more annoyed about it 
than I am if I thought you had any chance of success. Such 
feelings of well-being, Mr. Minister, arise naturally or they 
don’t arise at all. And much of the advertising that you have . . . 
much of the money you have spent in-province has been a 
waste, but it’s not been any more than that. It hasn’t been 
effective, which I suppose might be the other side of the coin. 
 
So that, Mr. Minister, is what I mean when I say that the 
advertising is self-serving: much of it’s not talking about 
Saskatchewan vacations but about how grand life in 
Saskatchewan is. That doesn’t do an awful lot, by and large, to 
encourage people, or to inform people about what alternatives 
might be available in Saskatchewan vacations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Speaker, once again, I can only 
respond that again the member gets to his feet and indulges in 
innuendo, not one specific comment about what it was that so 
offended him. And I would challenge him once again to point 
out one specific line, or one picture, or one anything that can 
any way be construed to not be promoting the province — one 
line, one single specific. 
 
The same thing has applied in this House in terms of 
competence of the civil servant — plenty of innuendo, argues 
that we’ve brought in hundreds of incompetents, not one line to 
back it up. It’s that same innuendo — accuse, no facts. And 
once again, if he can point out one line, give me one picture, 
give me one specific thing in those ads that fits what he is 
saying, I’ll take it all back. But I challenge him to do that — 
give me one specific. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— You just finished proving my point, Mr. 
Minister. You said, if you can find one line that doesn’t 
promote Saskatchewan. That shouldn’t be the point of the ads. 
The ads ought to promote Saskatchewan vacations. There is no 
point in telling people . . . there is little point, I think, in telling 
people what a grand life people have in Saskatchewan. That’s 
not, Mr. Minister, what the ads ought to be doing. They ought 
to be telling people what a grand vacation they can have. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, your comment you just made proves the 
point. They are promoting Saskatchewan and not the 
Saskatchewan vacations, and there’s a real difference. Your 
advertising, Mr. Minister, simply is not targeted, nor is it 
intended to be. The last thing you want to do is have the tourism 
overrun with business. What you want to do is get re-elected. 
And the comment you just made, Mr. Minister, proves my 
point. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I rest my case. I don’t 
know what more . . . Again, the indication that that party have 
not changed one iota. They still believe that tourism should be 
stuck in parks — and we should try to determine how many 
relations of the member from Quill Lakes we can put on the 
park gates each summer — and that should be the role of 
tourism. 
 
We believe that tourism has a tremendous commercial potential. 
We are positioning this industry; we are working to serve this 
industry, and I think to suggest that you do not promote 
Saskatchewan when you promote tourism, is a the . . . well, I 
don’t know. It’s the silliest statement I’ve ever heard. And once 
again I would simply challenge him to point out any single 
specific that in any way bears up his argument. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Mr. Minister, I want to go on to a different 
subject if I might. I want to go on to some . . . I want to go on 
and deal with the statement of small business itself and its 
relative health. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was shocked the other day in the Legislative 
Assembly. I was shocked when I read the report of the Crown 
Corporations Committee and the amount paid the directors of 
SGI. A hundred and thirty-seven thousand dollars is a shocking 
figure. I said to myself I will venture to say that ranks with what 
is paid to the directors of very large and very wealthy private 
corporations . . . (inaudible interjections) . . .   
 
So I’m sure you can’t hear with the jackasses braying around 
you. You’d have to have remarkable hearing to be able to hear 
above the member from P.A.-Duck Lake and all the other 
members around there. I don’t know whether the chairman’s 
got a hearing problem, Mr. Chairman, but you might try and 
quieten them down. 
 
Mr. Minister, I went and got the annual report of the Royal 
Bank; the annual report did not disclose the figure; I couldn’t 
find it. I read it quickly and couldn’t find it. I did find some 
interesting tables though. So far as I’m aware, it’s the only 
financial institution which has published such tables. 
 
Table number 10 is the appropriate place to start. Table number 
10 gives the breakdown of the loans in each province. Suffice it 
to say, Mr. Minister, there are $3 billion worth of loans they 
have out in Saskatchewan, 15 billion in Ontario. And the table 
goes back through the years and the ratio remains about 1:5 in 
terms of the ratio of loans in Saskatchewan to the ratio of loans 
in Ontario. 
 
Table number 7, which preceded it, gives the loan losses and 
throughout the years it has remained, the percentage has 
remained about the same — 1:10, 1:8, 1:12 — until you get into 
1983, ’84, and ’85, and the ratio of loan losses escalate very 
rapidly. In 1983 it becomes 1 out of every 8; in 1984 the ratio of 
losses in Saskatchewan to losses in Ontario becomes 1 out of 3; 
and by 1985 it’s 2 out of 3. We have $27 million worth of 
losses in Saskatchewan versus 38 in Ontario. 
 
What I suggest is that relative to Ontario, losses of the Royal 
Bank of Canada in Saskatchewan are escalating very rapidly. 
And I suggest, Mr. Minister, that the losses  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1245 
 

on their home mortgages haven’t changed at all. What has 
changed is the losses to farmers and the losses to business 
people. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of these tables, which as I 
say, we haven’t seen any other financial institution publish, I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you really believe that the assistance 
which you have given the small business . . . And I realize this 
is not agriculture. We’ll deal with that if the House Leader ever 
has the courage to bring those estimates forward. 
 
But with respect to small business, Mr. Minister, the set of 
tables in the annual report of the Royal Bank, 1985, suggest a 
serious problem. They suggest that the loan losses in 
Saskatchewan are inordinarily high. Whereas the ratio of loans 
is 1:5, the ratio of losses is 2:3. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, in the light of that, if you don’t think 
that the paltry efforts which your government has made to assist 
small business is woefully inadequate. And they really have 
been paltry. They really have been paltry. 
 
You have had a couple of loan programs which are absolutely 
unworkable. Everybody — the business men from the shoe 
shine to the manager of the Royal Bank — said that those loan 
programs were unworkable. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you don’t think it would have been 
more appropriate, instead of spending such an inordinate 
amount on advertising and some other frivolous pursuits — and 
I’m not suggesting all advertising in tourism is frivolous, but 
some of it certainly was — I wonder if you don’t think it would 
have been more appropriate to put some of the money to use 
providing a program which gives some real assistance to small 
business. Because I think those tables suggest what everyone 
knows, and that is that there is a real problem in the business 
community in Saskatchewan. Those loans, Mr. Minister, I think 
prove that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I have no doubt that 
the member has probably accurately read the figures. I haven’t 
seen the publication. We could certainly . . . I certainly have the 
staff available to analyse the numbers and determine how much 
is, in fact, a small-business concern. I think that you would find 
that a significant portion of the difference in the losses is in the 
agricultural sector. I think that points out the problems in that 
area, and I think it’s clear what has been done by this 
government to aid the agricultural component of the provincial 
economy. 
 
And I think that . . . I’m sure the member as he’s travelled the 
province in recent months understands that the agricultural 
sector are relatively satisfied with the efforts made by this 
government. I think even he would have to admit that. 
 
I think when you look at the problems that may face 
government, may face small business, and the problems that 
may lead to defaults, obviously one of the key elements is 
interest rate. 
 
I would remind him that in 1981 and early 1982, when home 
owners and business people province-wide came 

to that government, and said, we need some help, some 
protection from 20 per cent interest rates; they had nothing to 
offer. 
 
Their argument was that that’s not made in Saskatchewan; 
that’s not something there’s anything that government can do 
about it. It’s not even a proper exercise for government to be 
involved in. I think this government clearly made a statement 
that we could and would help. I won’t go into the thirteen and a 
quarter program. That’s well documented. In this department 
we introduced nine and five-eighths. In the recent budget we 
reduced it to 8 per cent and added some other improvements 
that we had received information from business people as we 
toured the province, that they needed some specific changes. 
We introduced those. 
 
That 8 per cent program has budgeted $16 million for this 
coming year to directly provide help to small business who may 
be facing problems with interest rates. So to bring the Royal 
Bank statement in here and infer that somehow nothing has 
been done, I think is fallacious. I think it’s clear that we have 
responded to those problems. I think we’ve indicated that where 
their government was not prepared to look at interest rates, we 
have. 
 
There’s 6,500 — 6,500 — small businesses registered under 
that program and receiving benefits. I think that, clearly, we 
have responded. We have responded in a major way and that is 
only one element. I could go into the venture capital program 
with literally millions of dollars invested in small business in 
equity rather then debt. And those are the types of things that 
business people are saying will help. 
 
I would imagine that when the member suggests that we reduce 
tourism advertising, since it’s only bringing in somewhere in 
excess of $12 to the province for every dollar spent, that he’s 
suggesting that we reinstitute the Main Street program or 
something of that nature which was the type of thing their 
administration had in place. We have no intention of doing that. 
We will continue to work with business and try to provide 
assistance to business in meaningful ways that allows them to 
carry on and do business. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Agriculture, Mr. Minister . . . The figures in 
one sense support your comment. Agricultural loans as a 
percentage of all loans are about 4 to 5 per cent. As a 
percentage of loans in default, they comprise almost a quarter of 
all loans in default. So it suggests there’s some truth in what 
you’re saying. 
 
Except that, Mr. Minister, my point was not that the agricultural 
loans . . . It was not that these figures showed that all business 
men were going to default on their loans. I frankly think, given 
the size of loans to agriculture versus the size of loans given to 
small business, whether they’re in default or not it won’t jigger 
the figures as badly as this has. 
 
What these figures show is contrary to what the provincial 
vice-president of the Royal Bank has said. The agricultural 
industry is in difficulty with loans. And the loans with the 
Royal Bank are in difficulty. It shows, Mr. Minister, a steadily 
deteriorating situation. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1246 
 

(2015) 
 
In 1981 the ration of bad loans in Saskatchewan to bad loans in 
Ontario was 1:30; in ’82 it remained relatively low, 1:10; and 
then in ’83 it went to 1:7; ’84, 1:25; ’85, 2:3. What this 
suggests, Mr. Minister, is that agriculture is in difficulty, and 
that small business must be in difficulty. It follows as the tail 
follows the horse, and every small-business man in 
Saskatchewan would admit that. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I am suggesting is that these figures prove 
there are some very serious problems in the economy of 
Saskatchewan. Small business must be suffering that, Mr. 
Minister, and the programs which your department has 
introduced have been wholly ineffective — have been wholly 
ineffective. You mentioned two programs. There aren’t a bus 
load full of people in the province besides yourself and your 
department officials who can remember them. They just 
couldn’t be made to work. The banks couldn’t make them work 
and nobody else could. And those programs just simply did not 
help the business man who is sharing the farmers’ travail. They 
just didn’t work. 
 
What I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, is that if you’re going to 
provide assistance to farmers, I think that the money could have 
been a lot more effectively spent than it was, but you did spend 
some money on farmers. I wonder why you, as a spokesman for 
the small business, did not speak out in favour of some 
assistance for small business, because I think it is clear from the 
facts, of which these are some of the more recent that I’ve seen, 
that the Saskatchewan economy is in difficulty. If it is that 
growing amount of bad loans, then small-business men must be 
suffering. They must be sharing the difficulties. 
 
Yet, Mr. Minister, your department has come up with no 
programs. You mentioned . . . It’s not quite correct to say 
you’ve had no programs; you’ve had no effective programs. 
You have had a couple of programs which were, as I say, 
unworkable, that provided very little assistance. What you need, 
Mr. Minister, is your need to believe. The problem is that 
nobody believes what you’re saying, including yourself. 
 
You say that you need to make government simple. You talk 
about regulations, some deregulation, under . . . (inaudible) . . . 
And so have the programs. Your programs have been too 
complex and largely unworkable. You need to develop some 
simpler and some more effective programs for small business 
because a goodly number of small-business men are having 
problems. You’ve spent a great deal of money on farmers. As I 
say, I think it might have been more effectively spent, but you 
did spend a good deal of money on farmers. Mr. Minister, you 
should have had something which complemented that for small 
business. You didn’t. 
 
Since you took over this department, there have been no major 
initiatives to assist small business, and their plight has gotten 
rapidly worse since you took over. That’s not exactly your fault. 
It is the government’s fault, in the sense they’ve done nothing 
to assist the Saskatchewan economy. You’ve done nothing 
about it. You didn’t create the bad economic times. I think 
you’re being 

faulted by the public of Saskatchewan because you’ve done 
nothing to solve it. 
 
And symptomatic of the inaction of this government is your 
inaction with respect to small business. Since, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve taken over, you’ve become a virtual do-nothing 
minister. I know it’s grand to traipse off to San Francisco or 
wherever it is you’re going. That’s one of the nice things about 
being Minister of Tourism, is that nobody can really nail you 
for these publicly paid vacations. But with the department, Mr. 
Minister, goes some serious responsibilities which cannot be 
really discharged in San Francisco or Europe or Japan. Those 
responsibilities . . . Yes, we seem to have the Howdy Doody 
Show at the back of the government caucus, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you’ve taken over, you’ve done nothing. 
And the small-business portion of your work takes place on 
Main Street, Saskatchewan. And I wish, Mr. Minister, you and 
your colleagues in cabinet would do a little less globe-trotting 
and spend a little more time on Main Street in Saskatchewan 
talking to people. If you did, you might not be so terrified of an 
election, and this province might have some effective programs 
for small-business people which would work instead of the 
nonsense which your predecessor passed off. And you’ve done 
nothing, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I’ll work backwards 
on that once again. Yes, it’s true, since I have become the 
Minister of Tourism and Small Business I have done a lot of 
travelling. I’ve been to Rosetown, and Radville, and Meadow 
Lake, and I have been to 30 small communities with business 
people and I have listened to their concerns. I have listened to 
what they think will help them, and I have listened to the things 
they’ve had to say. 
 
I can tell you as well, on travel, I’ve been out of the province 
once. I attended a federal-provincial conference in Banff, and 
we’ve been through that in this Chamber. So again: innuendo, 
inaccuracies, totally misleading comments; and I think that that 
should be pointed out. 
 
As I travel the province I don’t get the same doom and gloom 
indications anywhere except from the members of that caucus. 
He says we’ve done nothing in the time I’ve been the minister 
of this department. And I had a great deal of help from the 
member from Regina North. I’ll be the first to admit that. He 
had established a tremendous foundation on which this 
department could operate. 
 
The Saskatchewan-Manitoba director of the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business — and we’ve had an awful 
lot of quotes from their surveys in these estimates — indicated 
that, in his opinion, the recent budget that my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, brought down could be referred to as the 
small-business budget. And I think that suggests that maybe we 
are giving some consideration to business people. 
 
When you consider that we have $16 million for interest 
protection, 8 per cent money in effect, I think that is  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1247 
 

probably more than has been done for small business in the 
history of this province. Fifteen million dollars in venture 
capital tax credits — again, significant improvements. 
 
And I think that when the member stands in his place and 
suggests that somehow the numbers that he has taken out of the 
Royal Bank’s annual report, and has interpreted in his own 
doom and gloom manner, do not fit with the statements of the 
Saskatchewan vice-president, he forgets, of course, not 
knowing the business world very well, that he is in fact 
contradicting the president of the organization that speaks for 
small business in this province. 
 
And I can only say once more that I know that there are 
problems in the small-business sector. Sure there are. We’re 
working together to try to improve the situation, make it even 
better. But small-business people are for the most part 
optimistic. They see a lot of good things in Saskatchewan; they 
are anxious to invest; they’re anxious to do business. 
 
The only place where I get the doom and gloom attitude is 
when I come into these Chambers and listen to the nine midgets 
who sit opposite. And I think that’s not conducive to getting 
this province going. I think that this province is moving forward 
quite nicely. There are obviously other things that we can and 
will be doing. But some of the things we have done have been 
very significant. And I will take the recommendations, the 
suggestions, and the plaudits of the business community, rather 
than the doom and gloom of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Well, Mr. Minister, the reason why you 
only hear negative comments in here is because this is the one 
and only forum where you can be made to respond. The reason 
why you do not hear anything negative when you’re out of here 
is you’re not listening. You just don’t listen. 
 
Mr. Minister, the signs are all over the map, of the most serious 
problems this province has faced since the great depression. I’m 
not suggesting it’s that bad; I don’t think it is. But it is more 
serious than anything we have seen since then. 
 
I gave you one statistic, Mr. Minister: a rapidly deteriorating 
situation with respect to loans and mortgages set out in the 
annual report of the Royal Bank of Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me give you what I think is another indication 
of a deteriorating economy, and that is capital investment. 
Capital investment, which is surely a barometer of business 
confidence, has been decreasing under this government for the 
last two or three years. You are now actually . . . the rate of 
capital investment in 1985, the last year that the statistics are 
available, is actually lower than it was in . . . It’s virtually 
unchanged since 1981. That’s a more accurate way to put it. 
 
In spite of a 30 per cent increase . . . in spite of a 30 per cent 
inflation rate, capital investment is unchanged. And for the first 
year or two years in office, Mr. Minister, it 

increased rather rapidly. The capital investment in this province 
was increasing rapidly when you took over. And it went up, and 
now it’s slid down to the point where it’s virtually where it was 
in 1981, in absolute dollars, never mind in constant dollars. The 
amount of capital investment, Mr. Minister, in 1981 was 5.15 
billion. It’s now 5.24 billion, a figure that is for all practical 
purposes virtually unchanged. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, can you say that the only place you hear 
anything negative about your performance or the Saskatchewan 
economy is in this Chamber, when in fact all the economic 
statistics and indicators suggest there are serious problems, and 
when everyone outside this Chamber is concerned about the 
province’s economic health? 
 
Mr. Minister, if the only place you’re hearing something 
negative about your performance or the Saskatchewan economy 
is in this Chamber, then we ought to keep you here clear 
through until the throne speech, because I assume you’re not 
going to have the nerve to call an election. Then we ought to 
keep you here clear through until the next throne speech, 
because it seems to be the only place in the world where you 
listen. If you’re not hearing something negative outside this 
Chamber, then you’re not listening outside the Chamber, 
because it is simply too obvious and too pervasive and too 
serious to be ignored. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with some of the facts which 
I have given you, which are readily available, and leave the 
fantasy land. 
 
You came into office, Mr. Minister, with some clouds on the 
horizon and pretended they didn’t exist. You spent two years 
after you came into office saying we’re world-class. We 
decided to pass up the recession. A whole lot of silly 
statements, Mr. Minister, which I think made this province, 
particular this province’s Premier, a laughing-stock, because 
sure enough we didn’t decide to pass up the recession. It was 
the recovery which we decided to pass up apparently, because 
in 1983 and 1984 when other provinces began to pick up in 
economic activity, we were still on a toboggan ride. 
 
An Hon. Member:— Ned, you’re getting political. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— There’s not a political . . . The member 
from Prince Albert accuses me of being political. I’ve heard 
some nasty comments, but the suggestion, Mr. Chairman, that 
politics ever ought to be allowed to seep into the Chamber is 
surely unworthy of anyone, much less the member from Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Minister, if, as I say, the only place you’re hearing doom 
and gloom is in this Chamber, then you better stay here 
permanently because it seems to be the only place you’re 
listening. 
 
(2030) 
 
How the minister can maintain, in the face of all the adversities 
which this province has faced, that there’s nothing but 
optimism, I just don’t know. I just don’t know how anyone . . . 
Even the Premier has dropped the silly  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1248 
 

phrases for which he became infamous: we are world-class, we 
decided to pass up the recession. He at least has dropped such 
nonsense from his vocabulary. He admits there are problems. I 
think the public find him wanting when it comes to dealing with 
the problems. He at least is beginning to admit that the 
economic trend-line of Saskatchewan is not straight up, as he 
once suggested it was. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the place to begin this discussion is for 
you to adopt a more realistic attitude. The economy of 
Saskatchewan is facing more adversity than it has since the 
great depression. Something in the way of leadership is needed 
from this government, and you’re not, Mr. Minister . . . you’ve 
got your head in the sand, pretending it’s 1977, and I’m all 
right, Jack. Well the province of Saskatchewan is not all right, 
Jack, and you ought to admit it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, a couple of points. I 
can assure the member from Regina Centre that the Premier of 
this province and this entire caucus do in fact believe that 
Saskatchewan is world-class; we believe that Saskatchewan 
people are world-class; and we are not at all surprised to hear 
you express an opinion that Saskatchewan people are not 
world-class because that is consistent with the attitudes and the 
comments that we hear from the members opposite. 
 
The indication that the only place that I hear doom and gloom is 
in this Chamber because I don’t listen in other places, I will 
only indicate to you that the business community have told us 
that they’ve been listened to more in the last four months than 
they were listened to in 11 months of the previous 
administration. 
 
Some figures, however, that I think are very revealing and 
probably bring this question of investment into perspective. It’s 
my understanding that investment in Saskatchewan actually 
grew by 7 per cent in 1985, which is an interesting change. But 
there is one or two significant facts that members should 
realize. 
 
In percentage of investment by the private and the public 
sectors in the province of Saskatchewan, the member opposite 
would drag out the year 1981. I will go through the percentages 
of private and public investment from 1980 to 1985. I think 
you’ll find it rather interesting. 
 
In 1980 the private sector investment was 68.4 per cent; public 
sector investment was 31.6 per cent. In 1981, the year that he 
likes to use, private sector investment was 59.7 per cent; public 
sector investment, the year before an election, was 40.3 per 
cent, the highest level in the history — or certainly in recent 
history in Saskatchewan of public investment. Since then 
private sector investment has grown from 61 to 60 to 62; and in 
1985, 66 per cent of the investment in the province was private 
sector. On the other hand, the public sector investment has gone 
from that horrendous level of 40 per cent — 40.3 per cent in ’81 
— to 38 to 39 to 37 and finally to 34. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we’re seeing is a change in emphasis, 
a change in the investment patterns in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And clearly we have a trend to the private 
sector. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
 

if there has been any slowing in investment it is because the 
private sector is watching very warily to see what happens in 
the election when it does come up. And I think that that is quite 
reasonable considering the practises of the party opposite. 
 
Mr. Chairman, first of all I would suggest that a 7 per cent 
increase in ’85 is significant. I think that the change in 
percentages with the public sector playing a smaller level of 
importance and the private sector playing a larger, and the fact 
that once the election is over and the government is back in 
power, we will see significant increased private sector 
investment in this province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Mr. Minister, you mentioned listening. 
And I want to discuss with you for a brief moment two areas, 
and talk about two examples that show without any doubt that 
your government has not listened; it has not listened to small 
business in particular, Mr. Minister. 
 
The one thing that business people know very well is the 
difference between good management and bad management. 
And there is every indication that one can possibly find that the 
record of your government has been one of bad management. 
And the business community knows that. 
 
The one thing that the business community knows, Mr. 
Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is that a strong economy is the 
best program for business. When there is a strong economy, the 
tills are ringing and business does well, as it did in the 1970s 
under a New Democratic government. 
 
You will not find a business man in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, who will tell you that he did not do well during the 
time when the New Democratic Party was in government prior 
to 1982, because the economy was strong and money was 
circulating . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
Well, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake speaks from 
his seat again. He has a habit of doing that fairly regularly. But I 
ask him . . . I ask you, member from Prince Albert, go to your 
business people. I know you don’t talk to them lately. I know 
you don’t like to talk to anybody who’s saying, look, your time 
is up; this government is finished. But screw up your courage 
and go to talk to your business community and ask them these 
questions. Ask them the question about the issue which I want 
to bring to the minister’s attention now. 
 
You say you have listened; well I’m saying to you, Mr. 
Minister, that you have not listened, and here’s the example. In 
1985 of January, the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business presented to you, your government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m having trouble speaking, Mr. Chairman, 
because the noise opposite is atrociously bad. 
 
Mr. Chairman:— I think the member’s complaint there is 
well-founded and I would ask for quiet back in the back of the 
House, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate 
that, because this is something important that I want the 
minister to hear. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1249 
 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, in January of 1985 the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business, Saskatchewan branch, presented your 
government with some telling comments in this report. And you 
have it in your office, I’m sure, because I spent a lot of time 
studying and listening to what the business community is 
saying. And here is what they told you at that time. They talked 
about management, and they talked about deficit management. 
And what did they say? I will quote to you what they said. They 
said: 
 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business cannot 
over-emphasize the seriousness of accumulating 
government deficits upon both our national and provincial 
economy. To the business community, swollen deficits 
undermine investment confidence. 

 
Now when you talk about investment, Mr. Minister, you’ve got 
to talk about the concern of the business community; about your 
government’s record on deficit management; and it’s not a good 
record. It is not a good record. Let me continue with a further 
quote, Mr. Minister. It goes on to say: 
 

To all Canadians, bloated deficits also serve to undermine our 
national economic sovereignty and put Canadian government 
at the mercy of foreign lenders and offshore money markets. 
 
Finally, to the youth of this province, a large government 
deficit represents one of the ultimate violations of 
individual rights and freedoms; the freedom of the next 
generation to inherit an economic and social system at 
least as progressive as the one currently enjoyed by their 
parents, with the same degree of fiscal flexibility and 
freedom as the generation before it. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, that’s a very strong concern. And no one in 
our society, in our economy, feels stronger about that concern 
than our business people. And you know that. I’m sure you do, 
because you’ve spoken to at least some of then since you took 
over this portfolio. 
 
Now let me conclude by reading some concluding remarks that 
were made in this brief that was presented to you. Quote: 
 

The budgetary trends in Saskatchewan have been 
disturbing. Whereas several other provinces in Canada had 
succeeded in reducing their annual deficits last year, 
Saskatchewan once again increased its annual deficit to 
$379 million for 1984-85, up almost 15 per cent from the 
deficit of 1983-1984, and yet one year ago the government 
promised (there’s another example of government 
promises, Mr. Chairman) a 20 per cent decrease and 
prided itself that the deficit had been turned around. 

 
Well, when you talk about confidence and investment, Mr. 
Minister, the one thing that government has a responsibility to 
do, and that is create confidence. When you say one thing for 
four years and five budgets and have 
 

the results absolutely contrary to what you say, you cannot 
argue that you’re instilling confidence. 
 
And what do we have in this budget of which estimates we’re 
considering for your department now? We have even a greater 
deficit. An even greater deficit in spite of the big tax increases 
that your government introduced a year ago. 
 
And so I simply say to you, Mr. Minister, don’t you agree — 
and I’ll ask you this so you have an opportunity to respond — 
don’t you agree that this is a valid concern of the business 
community? Don’t you agree that when the business 
community looks at the way that government performs, it’s 
going to influence the kind of investment that that community 
in the business world is going to make in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I must admit some 
surprise too. The member has quoted from a statement in the 
CFIB manual. He has not quoted from anything based on 
survey statistics. He has indicated the Bulloch solution. The 
Bulloch solution, quite simply, is to slash government services. 
That is the position that the member from Regina North East is 
advocating. 
 
We have made it clear that in difficult times, with the problems 
that have been experienced in the agricultural sector, we are not 
prepared to do what the NDP in Manitoba have done, and back 
away from the agricultural sector and hang them out to dry. 
 
And if you talk to business men, if that member would screw up 
his courage and go out and talk to business men in Small Town, 
Saskatchewan, business men will tell you that without an 
agricultural economy, there’s no small business in Small Town, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have made it very clear. The Premier has stated 
publicly that we will open the treasury for the agricultural 
community, that we will save the agricultural economy. And we 
have done that. And it has created some deficit problems, we 
admit that. 
 
The Minister of Finance in his statement, in his budget speech, 
outlined the source of that deficit very clearly, indicated that 
had there been some wise management in the 1970’s in terms of 
resource buy-outs, we’d have no deficit today. In Alberta when 
they were putting money away in the good times, we were 
buying existing potash mines in this province under the 
leadership of the NDP. And I would suggest that he made that 
very clear. He also indicated that last year’s deficit can be 
directly attributed, and dollar for dollar practically, with the 
initiatives taken by this government to aid agriculture. 
 
And if the member from Regina North East supposes that I’m 
going to stand in this Assembly and apologize for what we’ve 
done in the agricultural sector, he is badly mistaken. The CFIB, 
the Bulloch solution, the slashing of government services is not 
something that we advocate. I’m very surprised to hear the 
member from Regina North East espousing that solution. We 
believe that other things have to take place. And if that is the 
member’s position, I’d be very interested to hear him expound 
on it a little bit more and indicate just exactly which 
government  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1250 
 

services he would propose to cut. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Mr. Speaker, I never cease to be amazed 
by how the ministers of this government attempt to put words in 
the mouth of opposition members. If the minister opposite can 
fine anywhere in which I stated anything about cutting 
government services, then I will find some way in which to 
reward him, I’m sure. 
 
You simply reduce the deficit, the member from . . . Lakeview 
— thank you very much — the member from Lakeview, by 
having some decent government management and stop giving 
away millions upon millions, hundreds of millions of dollars, of 
revenue to corporations like the oil companies at $300 million a 
year when they didn’t need it — when they didn’t need it. 
 
You know, the member from Lakeview should understand this. 
And he ought to — he’s had some banking experience. And 
maybe he didn’t do very well, because he decided to get himself 
elected to this House, where he’s done equally as bad. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, when you have, during times when the oil 
industry is doing well, a government which turns around and 
gives it $300 million a year to the tune of almost a billion 
dollars, you’ve done something about creating a deficit. Deficits 
don’t involve only expenditures, Mr. Chairman. Expenditures 
need to be managed, that’s true; and it has to be efficiently 
done. But government deficits are also created by the kind of 
fiscal programs that this government has brought about. 
 
If you take a billion dollars out of the Saskatchewan treasury 
because you want to reward your friends in the oil industry, the 
big oil companies, you’re gong to increase your deficit by a 
billion dollars. I mean, that’s very rudimentary mathematics. 
 
Now maybe the minister doesn’t know very much about 
mathematics, and I don’t claim to be a big expert in 
mathematics, having been a history teacher, but I do know 
enough that, if you take a billion dollars of revenues and you 
give it away, you’re going to have a billion dollars less in 
revenues and you’re going to increase your deficit by a billion 
dollars. I mean, how more simple can you get in the arithmetic 
you provide? That’s what’s happened, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister. 
 
(2045) 
 
I mean, don’t talk about cutting expenditures. I mean, your 
government has increased expenditures of government, 
counting this budget, by something like 45 per cent. So your 
total government expenditures have increased dramatically, but 
you have yet cut programs, essential programs that affect 
people. And that’s what makes your approach to governing so 
unfair and unjust. 
 
You’ve increased government expenditures, if you count this 
budget, by something like 45 per cent. But you’ve cut 
expenditures on the dental program for children. You’ve cut 
expenditures on the mental health services through our 
Department of Health. You’ve cut expenditures and revenue 
sharing to municipalities, because you froze the revenues and 
you let inflation carry it away. So now you 
 

provide a 3 per cent increase, but you’re still behind. This is the 
government that’s cut expenditures, Mr. Chairman. I only refer 
to cutting that because the minister raised it. 
 
But he in his speech failed to answer the question. Don’t you 
agree, Mr. Minister, that the business community is legitimate 
in its concerns about growing government deficit as we have 
seen in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
admits that he is not an expert in mathematics. I will prove that, 
I think, here in a minute or two. He brought up the oil industry 
and brought out that old worn argument that somehow there has 
been a give-away in Saskatchewan to the oil industry; an 
argument, Mr. Chairman, that the members of his party don’t 
even accept. 
 
Let me take you back to 1982, and the member was in 
government in those days and knows exactly what I’m talking 
about. We had 50 per cent of the production in the province 
shut-in at a time when the price was not bad; we had next to no 
drilling by any reasonable standard, something like 4 to 600 
wells a year; we had the government of the day paying the 
service industry not to work through their DCAP program, 
(disruptive circumstances assistance program), and I could go 
on at great length, but that’s the general circumstance as far as 
the oil industry when we came to power. 
 
Then he suggests that in good times . . . Mr. Speaker, we 
introduced some proposals: the oil industry recovery program in 
July of 1982, and that program turned that industry around. And 
this is where his rudimentary mathematics fail him. He suggests 
that that expansion of activity would have taken place anyway, 
and the government would have somehow realized that revenue. 
The fact of the matter is that expansion of activity would never 
have taken place without the program, that we were getting a 
larger percentage of nothing is still nothing, and we had to 
make some changes. 
 
And those changes resulted, Mr. Speaker, in the biggest boom 
in the oil industry that this province has ever seen. We had 
record drilling. We had drilling increasing by 250 per cent 
annually, while it was increasing at 10 per cent in Alberta. So to 
argue that it was a general improvement in conditions is 
absolutely wrong. We had that oil industry increase in terms of 
employment, in terms of taxes, in terms of returns to the 
government, to the point where on a gross basis it was the 
largest single contributor to the provincial economy for the first 
time in history. 
 
And the member will argue otherwise, but he knows full well 
that on a gross basis the oil industry became this province’s 
largest single contributor to provincial coffers. We realized $1 
out of every 4, and for the member to suggest that somehow 
there was some poor management involved in the things that 
happened in the oil industry is an argument that not even the 
members of his own party will accept. And I realize he’s new in 
this House. Had he been in this House and followed the debate 
surrounding that, he would have known that that argument is 
absolutely ridiculous. 
 
However, Mr. Chairman, that takes us to the deficit. The oil 
industry contributed to preventing that deficit from  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1251 
 

going higher. The deficit was the result of the management 
decisions taken in the mid-70s when $550 million was spent to 
purchase the potash mines that existed in this province — did 
not create one job, did not create any wealth. It brought nothing 
to the province except a change in ownership because of a 
philosophical position that was espoused by the government of 
the day. Had that money been invested in the Co-op Trust, we 
would have no deficit today. 
 
The other element of the deficit clearly — and anyone who 
follows the economics of this province knows — is directly 
related to the problems of the agricultural sector, almost dollar 
for dollar. We make no apology for that. 
 
Business men in Saskatchewan — particularly small-town 
business men, but I would suggest all business men — realize 
that without the agricultural economy in this province, small 
business is in a great deal of trouble, and they will tell you that. 
And they have recommended in our tours around the province 
that the help that has been given to agriculture is extremely 
important, not only to agriculture but to small business. They 
suggested to us that we should look at some programs for them 
that were . . . that fit into that. 
 
And we suggested that the budget recently brought down has 
ben referred to as the small-business budget. The venture 
capital extensions, the changes in the interest protection 
program, the introduction of the corporate tax holiday, the 
labour venture capital program — all those things were steps 
toward aiding business in a realistic way. And I think they 
appreciate that. 
 
And I think that when the Saskatchewan/Manitoba director of 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business in fact 
lauded, publicly and privately, the provincial government for 
the steps taken in that budget, it would indicate that the 
opinions expressed there — the Bulloch solution, if you will — 
the slashed services and increased taxes, which apparently is 
now the position espoused by the NDP in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we don’t apologize for the help we have 
provided agriculture, and we will not. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Well, Mr. Chairman, if the minister has 
adopted what he calls the Bulloch solution . . . he obviously has 
adopted it, because that’s exactly what the government has 
done. You have increased taxes dramatically, Mr. Minister, and 
you have slashed services. I mean, we have been through — is 
it three departments now? You’re the third one? And in every 
single department we have seen examples of slashed services — 
in some cases, rather massive slashed services, and in the 
Department of Health, in particular, slashed services. 
 
I saw today a letter that’s being circulated, I think, in the city of 
Saskatoon which announces a new lottery. You know what the 
lottery is for? It’s to fund our hospitals. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you talk about slashing services, your 
government should get a reward for doing that. If you talk about 
increasing taxes dramatically, your government should get a 
medal, because you’ve shown the public of Saskatchewan that 
you are very good at it. 
 

Now I agree, Mr. Minister, that if the agricultural economy is 
strong, then the small-business community is going to do well. 
And that’s why it is really quite unbelievable — knowing that 
as you obviously do, because you have just said it — that your 
government, when the members of the opposition proposed an 
amendment into this legislature about two weeks ago urging 
this government to join us in telling the federal government to 
provide deficiency payments for farmers, that the members of 
the Conservative caucus stood up, everyone that was here, and 
voted against it. 
 
Every farm organization in this country is asking for deficiency 
payments. The wheat pool is asking for it. The National 
Farmers Union is asking for it. The Palliser Wheat Growers is 
asking for it, and yet when a resolution is proposed in this 
House, this caucus of the Conservative government stands up 
and votes against it. Another example, Mr. Minister, of what 
you say is not what you do, and that’s why there is lack of 
confidence. 
 
You mentioned that the oil industry became the largest single 
contributor of the coffers of Saskatchewan. Well let me tell you, 
Mr. Minister, why that’s happened. That’s not happened 
because the oil industry has been contributing that much more. 
It’s happened because other revenues have gone down so much 
more because of the policies that your government has had on 
the whole question of the economy and fiscal management. 
 
Oil revenues may have gone up in total. But the reason, Mr. 
Minister, why the oil revenues, as you argue, have increased to 
be a greater part of the total treasury is simply because other 
revenues have been undermined. There is no change at all. That 
has always been the case, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let me give you an example; let me give you some facts about 
what’s happened. In 1978-79 personal income taxes gained for 
Saskatchewan, $310 million; oil revenues were $350 million — 
pretty close. What’s happened over time is that that ratio has 
not improved a great deal. As a matter of fact, the ration has 
gone the other way. 
 
Now I will find — I don’t have it right here; I thought I would 
have it — but I wanted to talk to you . . . Oh yes, here it is. I 
want to tell you what’s happened to oil revenues. In 1979 the 
production in millions of cubic metres of oil was 9.4 millions of 
cubic metres. The value of that production was 729 million; the 
revenue was 396 million, or 54 per cent. In 1985 after your 
boom, after the so-called boom, Mr. Minister, the production in 
millions of cubic metres was 11.9 millions of cubic metres; the 
value was 2,400 million or 2.4 billion cubic metres; revenue 
was 655 million; the percentage of revenue over value of 
production, 27 per cent. That’s what’s happened to oil revenues, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And let me tell you further why the production has increased 
the way it has. Most governments, including our former 
government, would not argue that oil companies, drilling to find 
new oil, deserve some incentive. That’s nothing new, that’s 
nothing new. What we object to, Mr. Minister, and what the 
Saskatchewan  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1252 
 

taxpayer object to, is the whole question that your government 
established a policy of tax-free holidays or royalty-free holidays 
for oil and new wells drilled on existing oil fields. 
 
Oh well, you roll your eyes and you look up. But the fact . . . 
That’s the fact and you know it, and that’s what the public in 
Saskatchewan believes because they know that to be the truth. 
 
How difficult is it to increase production by plopping another 
well in an existing oil field? And your government, at the 
expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer, provides them with a 
royalty-free period — no exploration involved, no expense for 
exploration involved. You gave them a royalty period free. 
That’s where the $300 million a year comes from, Mr. Minister. 
And that’s what’s been wrong with your oil policy. 
 
You know, as well as everyone else who knows anything about 
the oil industry, that the biggest problem with the exploration 
for oil in Canada in the period in which there were those 
difficult times was the national energy program . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, we did not have anything to do with that. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had not provided this holiday period, your 
deficit would have been less, and I submit to you that the 
business community would have had a lot more confidence in 
your government than it has today. 
 
Now you stand up here and talk about the great boom in the oil 
industry. Well, I’ll just invite you to take a little trip from 
Estevan to Swift Current along the west side of the border to 
Lloydminster, and I tell you, Mr. Minister, you will run into 
literally thousands of people who used to work in the oil fields 
who are now laid off. And I simply ask you, where’s the boom? 
Where’s the boom? 
 
When your friends in the big oil corporate sector came to you 
and said, look, we helped you get elected, now give us a 
reward. And times were good, and the price of oil per barrel 
was high, you said, here’s $300 million a year. Now . . . and 
they said: get out of our hair, don’t touch us, we don’t want 
regulation, we’re going to be able to look after ourselves. 
 
Now when the price of oil is down, they come to you and they 
say, oh, look, we’re going to help you get re-elected. They’re 
going to have to try pretty hard. We have a problem. We no 
longer believe in hands off by the government. Come on and 
give us some more money. So you bring in another program. 
 
At least, Mr. Minister, try to be consistent. Because if there’s 
any evidence anywhere in the most recent case where your 
policies have been a failure, only look to your neighbour 
government in Alberta. And for the first time in a long time in 
that province there is an opposition. And I’m sure every person 
who believes in the democratic system will welcome that. But 
the tradition of Alberta has not been such. And the reason that 
there now are 22 members in opposition in Alberta is because 
that oil policy, which is like your oil policy, has been a failure. 
 
It has been a failure as it applies to how it benefits the 
 

people who own the oil, and that’s the people who live in each 
of those provinces. You’ve given it away. You can’t get it back. 
It’s a non-renewable resource, and the taxpayers had to pay the 
price with a flat tax, which is going to double this year over last 
year with a temporary . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Please be seated. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is there a problem, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Mr. Chairman:— There is no problem when I’m in the Chair. 
Please be seated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I can fully appreciate that somehow, some 
way, oil has entered into this discussion. However, I want to 
remind you, and I know you’re all aware of it — rule 494 
regarding the topic at hand. And as chairman, we will focus 
back on Small Business and Tourism. If you have any questions 
in that realm I’ll entertain a question. Otherwise I will move on 
to the next topic. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we change 
chairmen, the whole tenor of the debate and what’s allowed and 
not allowed changes. Difficult . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman:— Order. Order. You know full well that any 
time there’s a ruling from the Chair that it’s not open to 
discussion or debate. If you have a further question on Tourism 
and Small Business, please get to it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not questioning your 
ruling. In fact, I intend to abide by it. And I will be watching 
very carefully to see whether the minister abides by the ruling. 
Mr. Chairman, previous to your taking the Chair, I just want to 
remind you that the debate was quite wide-ranging, and the 
chairman understood that, but all of a sudden things have 
changed when the minister is under some pressure as he is right 
now. 
 
I simply ask the minister again, because twice he’s got up and 
he hasn’t answered the question. He chose to make a speech. As 
long as he wants to make a speech, I am quite prepared to stand 
up and make a speech. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you one more time and then I’ll move to 
another topic because at some point in time, there’s no sense 
repeating the same question from the same minister who 
continues to do nothing but stonewall. The question is this: 
don’t you think it’s legitimate on the part of the business 
community to be concerned about the kind of growing deficit 
that we have seen in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, just a couple of 
comments relative to the rather lengthy preamble. I promise to 
be very, very, very, very, brief. The member presented in his 
discussion . . . And I will refer directly to the point he made. He 
suggested that somehow the policy in place allowed an oil 
company to come and stick a well in existing . . . Obviously that 
is incorrect, Mr.  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1253 
 

Chairman, and I simply have to point out that the conservation 
rules for the most part have not changed. There was nothing 
wrong with the conservation rules; there was simply a whole lot 
wrong with the economic policies of the previous government. 
 
In terms of small business, the member again is completely 
failing to recognize the structure of the Saskatchewan oil 
industry where 85 per cent of our industry is, in fact, small, 
independent oil companies and about 15 per cent is what he 
likes to refer to as the large multinationals. It’s important to 
realize that difference and because the policies that he talked 
about, the problems . . . He likes to blame the problems that 
they faced on the energy policy, the Trudeau-Blakeney solution 
that was introduced by their friends the federal Liberals. There 
is some truth in that. However, they have to take some of the 
blame. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I cannot believe that I heard the member from 
Regina North East stand in his place and literally brag, brag 
about the take that their government got from personal income 
tax; arguing that when you raise the percentage income tax in 
the province from 34 to 51 per cent, as they did, or that 
somehow they have done such a tremendous job because of all 
the money they have sucked out of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I find that, Mr. Speaker, to be less than 
something . . . it’s certainly something that I wouldn’t be proud 
of, and I’m very surprised the member opposite is proud of that. 
 
In terms of the deficit, certainly the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business is concerned about the deficit. I think 
most businesses are concerned. I think that we’re concerned. I 
think everyone’s concerned about the deficit. It’s something 
that obviously has to be controlled. I think that the size of our 
deficit on a per capita basis, compared for instance to Manitoba, 
where it’s much smaller, much more in control — clearly we’re 
in far better shape and I think that that point has to be made. 
However, it is a concern. It’s something that we’re concerned 
about, and I think the Minister of Finance in his budget address 
very clearly stated the concerns, and very clearly indicated that 
his projection was that within four to five years we would see a 
balanced budget in the province. And we will do that without 
slashing services or without increasing taxes. We will do that 
without backing away from the agricultural sector, something 
that the NDP in Manitoba have clearly done. They have 
indicated they’re not prepared to help the agricultural sector in 
Manitoba, and I think that’s clearly something that we’re not 
prepared to do in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Mr. Chairman, if the minister had tried to 
avoid the issue until he was pressed to dealing with it, we could 
have been on to another subject at least 20 minutes ago. I mean, 
him and I will both agree — we obviously have now; we’re 
limited in what we agree on, but we both will agree on this — 
that the business world is concerned about growing deficits and 
governments that allow these kinds of deficits to grow because 
of strict political decision-making that decide on what budgets 
and fiscal management are going to be. It’s got nothing to do 
with good economics, nothing to do with good fiscal 
management, Mr. Chairman, but simply a government 
 

that plays politics with the future generations of this province 
and this country. So I’m glad the minister has finally got up 
after a long debate about all kinds of things, including oil, and 
admitted that that’s a legitimate concern. And I agree. I only 
wish that this government would go beyond agreeing with that, 
and do something about it, which it has not done. 
 
The previous minister of Finance talked about getting a 
balanced budget in 1983. Now we’re in 1986 and the new 
Minister of Finance has now got a new timetable in order 
through which he’s going to now somehow magically balance 
that budget, although the government is not prepared to tackle 
the issues that are necessary to bring that about. But we’ll leave 
that issue for a while. 
 
I have one more question to deal with this manner of how this 
government listens. Mr. Minister, in the 1982 election and since 
then, your government has said a great deal about provincial 
government regulation and paperwork and red tape. Can I ask 
you: what steps are you now taking, because I assume you’re 
the minister in your department who would be responsible for 
this, what steps are you talking to deliver on that promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, a rather topical point 
he brings up. We have eliminated over 1,600 useless, 
meaningless, out-of-date regulations that existed in the books of 
this province when we came to government. In fact it’s 
interesting to note that the director of the 
Saskatchewan-Manitoba federation of independent business 
men, when he was working for government, was one of the 
leading proponents and did an awful lot of work in that 
regulation clean-up activity that has gone on. In terms of further 
steps in red tape decrease, in regulatory reform if you will, as it 
applies to business, we will have some very specific 
announcements to make in the very near future on some things 
that we propose to do that will take us a step further and will 
hopefully help the small-business community deal with some of 
the problems that they face. And when we toured the province 
again, that was one of the things that was brought up, not near 
as often as I had anticipated it might be from what I had heard 
— I think that the business community appreciate the 
elimination of those 1,600 meaningless regulations. However, 
there is some work that can be done on the 
information-gathering forms that they are forced to fill out, 
some of the things as they apply to various taxes that deal with 
their business. And we have some very specific plans well 
down the road, and we will be making announcements very 
shortly on that very important issue. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Mr. Minister, I hope you will. I’m 
surprised you haven’t done it already, because through your 
own admission, all that you have done up to now after four 
years, going on to five, is did away with some useless 
regulations and other kinds of things. 
 
Now can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how did doing away with 
useless and outdated regulations and requirements that the 
business community no longer had to comply with, how did that 
assist the business community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I think the more 
interesting question is: why were those 1,600 useless,  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1254 
 

bothersome, pointless regulations on the books? I would have 
thought that the government opposite, after 11 years of adding 
regulations, of getting more and more involved in the daily life 
of this province, and most particularly in the daily life of the 
business men of this province, would have looked to remove 
those. 
 
I think business men indicated to us that they appreciate the 
reduction of those regulations. I think that we have worked with 
the business community very carefully, very closely, in trying 
to deal with the further steps. And I think that business people 
and anyone who truly understands the paper load will 
understand the things that we will be announcing and will be 
appreciative of them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Once again, Mr. Minister, you didn’t 
answer the question. You have not done anything meaningful. 
You’ve gone through a public relations exercise — I’m not sure 
whether you have an advertising agency sell this one too so I 
won’t accuse you of that — but you’ve gone through a public 
relations exercise in which you tried to proclaim to the public of 
Saskatchewan what a great job you’ve done about reducing the 
amount of red tape and regulation and paperwork and so on. 
You have done exactly nothing in that respect in your four years 
as government, dealing with one of your high priority items. As 
a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, there is now more regulation, and 
there is now more red tape that the business community has to 
deal with than it did in 1982. Because every time this 
government has passed legislation, along with that legislation 
came regulation and red tape. 
 
Now I’m quite interested that you mentioned that the former 
director of this work is now working for the Canadian 
federation of independent business men, because I’m sure he 
helps to write the kind of submissions that come to your 
government which tells you what they think about the success 
you’ve had. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, as recent as January 1986 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business told your 
government that there has been an increase in the number of 
businesses that are concerned about provincial government 
regulation, paperwork, and red tape. That survey was taken by 
the Canadian federation of independent business men in 
Saskatchewan, and it’s the change from October 1984 to May 
1985. And that concern still grows, because, Mr. Minister, your 
government never seems to learn. And I wish it would, because 
you’d do yourselves a favour and you’d do the public of 
Saskatchewan a favour. Don’t try to fool them. 
 
You know what the Canadian federation of independent 
business men think of your so-called doing away with 
regulation, paperwork, and red tape? I’ll tell you. On their 
behalf I’ll tell you. Here’s what they say . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, the often absent member from 
Cannington has arrived and speaks from his seat, Mr. 
Chairman, saying nothing particularly intelligent. But if he 
would listen he might learn something intelligent because I 
happen to have some respect for many of the things that the 
Canadian federation of independent business men have to say. 
And here’s what they say about the provincial government 
regulation, paperwork, and red tape: 
 

Following a slight decline in 1983, concern over 
provincial government regulation, paperwork, and red tape 
has continued to rise steadily in our annual provincial 
surveys  

 
Which supports what I have just said, Mr. Minister. You have 
increased regulation and red tape. And that’s what the business 
community is saying to you. 
 

 . . .  and is now identified as the third most important 
problem by 29.1 per cent of all business owners. 
Announcements made at the open for business conference 
(remember that famous open for business conference, Mr. 
Chairman? I continue to quote:) in the fall of 1982 held 
great promise, yet the government has done little to 
publicly demonstrate any easing of the red tape burden 
other than to periodically announce the number of 
antiquated, obsolete or redundant regulations that have 
been removed. 

 
Now, that’s not an arguable point. The minister admitted to that. 
He said that the regulations that have been done away were 
antiquated, obsolete, or redundant regulations. 
 
Now, the business community continues to say, and I want the 
minister to listen because this is a very telling statement: 
 

While a general housecleaning of obsolete statutes and 
regulations may facilitate easier access to more active 
legislation in the law books, the repeal of old regulations 
such as those governing the construction of horse stables 
by school boards really do nothing to affect the current 
business environment. The Saskatchewan small-business 
community is still waiting to receive a more meaningful 
demonstration of real policy change. 

 
(2115) 
 
The minister said a moment ago that he is going to soon make 
some more further announcements. All I can say, Mr. 
Chairman, is I hope that they’re not announcements about the 
regulations dealing with the building horse stables by school 
boards, or something similar to that. I welcome to hear the 
minister say that there will be further announcements. The 
business community is waiting. They’ve been waiting for four 
years, Mr. Minister. 
 
I ask you this question: why has it taken you four years to get 
around to the point where you may now — and I’m not sure of 
that yet because there may be an election intervening — why 
has it taken four years to get your government to the point 
where you are now possibly going to deal in a more substantive 
way than you have in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the very simple 
answer is that things were in such a mess it took a lot of time to 
clean it up. I think when you look at regulatory reform, if you 
are going to institute meaningful reform, the first thing you 
have to do is go to work and become  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1255 
 

familiar with all the regulations that exist; get rid of the ones 
that don’t play a role. That is clearly the first step in regulatory 
reform. 
 
When the Department of Tourism and Small Business was 
established we then took on an advocacy role which allowed us 
to become even more aware, if you will, of the problems facing 
the small-business community. And we have worked with the 
small-business community — and I know that that is a concept 
that slows down the process — and it’s something that the 
previous administration did not partake in. However, we have 
worked with the small-business community and we have some 
very meaningful steps ready that will take this process even 
further. 
 
However, I want to make one more comment and I think that 
this is probably more pertinent then anything else. The member 
indicates from the results of a survey, I believe it was January 
of ’86 — I’m not exactly sure — it’s basically irrelevant. The 
fact is that regulatory red tape concerns has been identified as a 
larger problem. Of course what happens in those surveys, Mr. 
Chairman, is that the business community is asked to list the 
things that are concerns to them. What has happened, of course, 
is that the actions of this government have eliminated interest 
rate problems, in terms of its importance as a concern. 
 
If you had done that previously interest rate protection would 
have been a major, major concern. That has obviously dropped 
because of the programs we’ve introduced. So consequently this 
secondary program rises a little bit. 
 
Inflation would have been a major concern back when things 
were so good under their administration. Fact of the matter was, 
they weren’t good because of the facts of inflation. Now that 
would have been a concern. There are any number of concerns 
that may have moved up or down the poll, and to simply 
indicate that regulatory reform has not been carried out because 
of the positioning is to say that all the other programs, all the 
other concerns, remain constant. And that’s clearly not the case. 
 
The member . . . well I don’t know whether I think he 
understands that or not, but possibly. He talked about intelligent 
comments from my colleague, the Deputy Premier. Maybe he 
should have been more interested, instead of making smart and 
arrogant comments in the House, in actually understanding 
what those statistics do and do not say. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Well, Mr. Minister, I am not going to 
pursue this further but you have prompted me to make another 
comment because of what you have said. 
 
I only relate to you, Mr. Minister, the concern of the business 
community with respect to doing away with regulations and red 
tape, what the business community has said to you and is saying 
to you in growing numbers, because that’s what the survey 
shows. And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that that’s third in 
the list of concerns that the Saskatchewan business community 
has in this survey; number three out of 10. And the numbers of 
 

people in the business community concerned about that issue is 
growing. And put aside the total number that’s involved. let’s 
talk about the trend. And the trend, as you know because you’re 
so involved in taking polls, you will know that the trends are 
more important sometimes than what the polls say. The trend is 
that the concern among the business community about this issue 
is growing. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other two items that lead the list which reflect 
your government’s failures in management are the following: I 
remind you again that provincial government regulation and red 
tape is number three in Saskatchewan of concern; number one 
is cost to your operation of municipal government. Now that’s 
quite understandable, 58 per cent of the business community in 
May of 1985 was concerned. And so they should be, because 
that was right after your provincial budget, which froze revenue 
sharing to municipalities and put the greater burden on 
municipalities to raise their revenues from property taxes. Not 
only that, but after the municipalities had to raise more taxes 
from property taxes, you took away the property improvement 
grant so that the home owner and the business man even had 
less benefit from that. No more property tax relief. 
 
And you know what number two on this lists of concerns is, 
Mr. Minister, since you raise it? Well I want to tell you that the 
third item of concern by the Saskatchewan business community 
is total tax burden imposed by provincial government. That’s 
number two, sorry. In fact, your taxation policies has even put 
that above that regulation. 
 
So the first two items, Mr. Minister, of concern, are taxation. 
And the reason that is so is because your talk about reducing 
taxes is nothing but a bunch of hot air. The effect of what it’s 
had on individuals and families and the business community has 
elevated taxation to the first two items, and the third one is your 
provincial government regulation, paperwork, and red tape. 
And I would have thought that after the amount of noise you 
made about doing about regulation, that shouldn’t have even 
showed up on the list of 10. 
 
If there’s anything that’s absolutely clear here is that your 
whole reliance on the polling and on the advertising, and 
everything else to try to build an image for the government 
instead of dealing with the substantive issues, has failed. It’s 
failed. The business community is telling you it’s failed; the 
voters in Prince Albert-Duck Lake are telling you it’s failed. 
 
An Hon. Member:— How do you know? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Because I’ve been there, Mr. Member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. They say they will have no 
more of a government that spends more time of public relations 
than it does on governing. 
 
Mr. Chairman, you see there is one very important fundamental 
of government, whether it applies to this department or any 
other department, and that is that you have to have people who 
are elected on the treasury benches who want to govern. And 
that’s the problem. We have had a government that got elected 
because they  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1256 
 

wanted power. Having got power, they have refused to govern. 
They have ruined our economy; they have created a massive 
deficit. They’ve cut programs that affect people the most. 
 
And even the community that had a lot of faith in this 
government, and in this party that sits opposite — the business 
community in 1982 I will admit had a lot of hope that this new 
government would change things for the better — even that 
business community when it looks at the no tendering of 
government work, when it looks at the facade that is created 
with regard to regulation, when it looks at growing taxation, has 
now decided that they can no longer have faith in this 
government. And do you wonder why that’s the case? We’ve 
seen that day after day after day; we’ve seen it budget after 
budget after budget. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, your comments about deregulation are only 
comments. And I only hope, and I will not pursue this any 
further, that when you make your so-called announcement . . . 
and I hope you make it before the election, because after the 
election the public knows nothing you say means anything. I 
hope that when you make it, you make it before the election, 
and you make it soon, and I urge you that it be meaningful as 
well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, just a very brief 
comment. I find it amazing, amazing that the member from 
Regina North East could stand in his place and suggest that 
when business people identify the cost of municipal taxes as the 
number one issue, that he would suggest that somehow that was 
the fault of this government. Every business man in 
Saskatchewan knows exactly where that came from. That came 
from that insidious reassessment manual that you people put in 
place. It comes from that business tax that you people put in 
place. 
 
You specifically set out, in a rotational manner, to shift the 
burden of taxation onto the business community. And there is 
not a business man in Saskatchewan that does not understand 
that more clearly than the comments I’ve just made. 
 
And to stand there and suggest that somehow revenue sharing 
leads to business men being concerned about municipal 
taxation, demonstrates either a complete lack of understanding 
of that issue or is clearly an attempt to mislead this finance 
committee. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Chairman, discussion on some of the concerns of 
provincial government taxation. We have responded to several 
of those. The tax holiday on new business that was announced 
in the budget; the elimination of the corporate tax on processing 
and manufacturing. Several things have been done in attempts 
to respond to that concern. 
 
But I would suggest once more that the member lines up those 
top three concerns; that if he had done that survey a year earlier, 
he would have found that interest rate protection, interest rate 
uncertainty, was the number one concern on the minds of 
business people. And the fact that it does not appear any longer 
in the top three is a direct result of the actions of this 
government. The nine and five-eighths program that my 
colleague from Regina 
 

North introduced a year ago that we have reduced to 8 per cent 
and improved in this budget, clearly has eliminated one of the 
major concerns of small-business people in this province. 
 
The changes in inflation, obviously a concern to business men, 
those are no longer there. There’s been any number of moves 
and I believe that small-business people, after the initiatives that 
we have started and that we will continue to work on regarding 
regulation, red tape and those concerns, we will see that concern 
also drop off the end of that list, and we will see some other 
concerns move into third place. And it will not mean that it’s a 
bigger bother today than it was then; it will simply mean that 
relative to the other concerns, that one has moved up because 
others have moved down. 
 
But I can’t express clearly enough my amazement that that 
member would stand up and introduce those misleading 
comments about municipal business taxation, because every 
business man knows that the NDP are clearly the perpetrators of 
that, and they know that we will go to work and clean it up. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask the 
minister responsible for Tourism and Small Business, with 
regards to your northern revolving fund, Mr. Minister, what are 
the terms of reference? Do you have the terms of reference with 
you? And if you have, could you outline them to me so that the 
people, my constituents and the people of the province, would 
know what type of public participation, public involvement, and 
local decision-making is involved in that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the criteria that are 
used are here, they’re in abbreviated form, so I’ll try to get you 
the key points out of each one. 
 
First of all, applicant experience in activities related to the 
project — I think that’s clear enough; (b) is residency; (c) is full 
disclosure of personal and corporate assets and liabilities; (d) is 
adequate market — that is viability of the project; (e) is equity 
contribution towards the project, not less than 10 per cent. In 
other words, the person must have 10 per cent equity in the 
project in case of low-risk loans; and from 10 to 25 per cent in 
the case of higher-risk loans. So there are two categories there 
with different levels of equity; must have demonstrated 
business experience or arranged for and successfully complete a 
period of education. 
 
(2130) 
 
And I think those six items are basically the criteria that are 
applied, or the terms of reference in applying for a loan under 
the northern revolving fund. 
 
Mr. Yew:— In terms of the committee itself, the make-up of 
the committee, Mr. Minister, could you outline to me how the 
committee is made up with regards to the involvement of 
people at the community level. I did take mental note of the fact 
that you don’t get yourself involved in the decision-making 
process, but that the senior civil service people in your 
department do, in fact, process and make recommendation and 
approve loans and/or grants in this respect. And I’d like to 
know what the  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1257 
 

make-up of the committee is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, as far as the approval 
process, once again, the minister may appoint a district loans 
committee consisting of six persons, three departmental 
employees, and three with demonstrated business experience. 
 
The district loans committee may approve fishing and trapping 
loan applications to a maximum of $25,000. The district loans 
committee shall make recommendations, and it says in the 
regulations, “to the minister.” In actual fact those are made to 
the department. The deputy minister is the final step in that 
process respecting all commercial loans regardless of the 
amount. And as I indicated, the minister is no longer part of the 
approval process. No approval goes higher than the deputy 
minister. But that is the make-up of the committee, and that is 
the process that goes through in terms of the approval process. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Mr. Minister, thank you for that information. How 
many times per year, annually, does that committee meet? And 
what form of interim financing do you provide, if you do 
provide interim financing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, that committee meets 
every fourth Wednesday, and we provide all forms of interim 
financing that any other banking institution would. 
 
Mr. Yew:— I’m somewhat confused here. Just the other day I 
attended a northern development advisory committee meeting. 
And at that particular meeting a well-known construction 
advocate, and a very well-respected, local person in the La 
Ronge area, Knudsen Construction informed the committee that 
she had problems getting interim financing, and she has been a 
well established business person who has been involved in a 
broad range of construction ventures. I am somewhat 
bewildered as to why she may have had problems. I can’t 
understand that. But I’ll take your word for it, Mr. Minister. 
You do provide then, interim funding. 
 
The next question I’d like to get on with is in regards to the 
maximum amount available to local contractors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I certainly don’t want 
to get into discussion in this Chamber about the financial 
transaction of any individual. However, the individual 
mentioned does have a loan with our northern revolving fund. I 
believe that if you check closely you will find that the problems 
that she was expressing on interim financing had to do with 
banking institutions, not the northern fund. But again, if you 
want to come in and chat about that, I’d sooner do that in a 
private area. 
 
The question was the maximum for construction; it’s $300,000 
per application or per loan, so that’s the maximum. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Three hundred thousand is the maximum that any 
business venture, whatever it may be related to, that is the 
maximum amount that your department is prepared to issue as a 
loan or a grant. Is that maximum amount that you mentioned, 
Mr. Minister, at 300,000; is 
 

that given out as a loan, or is that given out as a partial loan and 
a partial grant? And what is the interest rate on that maximum 
amount, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the point I’m making 
is that a particular business man may get a maximum loan of 
$300,000 for a specific application. If a construction work 
project for instance has two different projects, it’s conceivable 
that if all the criteria were met and were satisfied that they 
might get a second loan applied that was above and beyond the 
$300,000, the first one, if I’m making myself clear. 
 
There are no grants. We’re talking loans. Banking procedures 
and all the interest rates are 10 per cent on all of them. We have 
not changed that. When interest rates were higher — interest 
rates are now coming down; maybe that’s something that has to 
be looked at, but the interest rate is 10 per cent. 
 
Mr. Yew:— The interest rates is 10 per cent, Mr. Minister? 
How many maximum loans and/or grants have you approved, 
Mr. Minister? You say that the maximum is 300. I’d like to 
know how many applications have been received and how 
many have been approved to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— While we’re looking those numbers 
up to see if we have those, let me clarify the interest rate 
question. On commercial loans, it’s 10 per cent; for fishing and 
trapping, it’s 6 per cent. Just to make that clear. I’ll get that 
number in a second. 
 
For all types of loans — I haven’t separated here in commercial 
and fishing and trapping, the number approved was 93, which is 
51 per cent of the applications; 14 were withdrawn by the 
applicant; 66 were declined; 9 are pending, so in total in ’85-86 
we’re looking at 182 applications for loans under this fund. 
 
Mr. Yew:— In terms of plans and proposals submitted by 
native groups and organizations, and I may mention the two 
parent native organizations here, AMNSIS (Association of 
Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) and FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), Mr. Minister, 
what type of support encouragement initiative have you 
provided if, in fact, your department has been involved? I 
would like to know, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, when I indicated the 
terms of references — the terms of reference, the criteria — the 
reference was to residency, not ancestry. 
 
Mr. Yew:— Well getting to the other question, Mr. Minister, in 
terms of the parent native organizations, has your department, 
Tourism and Small Business — does your department have any 
involvement with the parent native organizations in a joint 
undertaking, a major undertaking of bringing about, you know, 
a major economic effort with the parent native organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, the question of the 
native organizations, I think, is . . . Those organizations are 
dealt with by the native secretariat. As a department we don’t 
deal directly with them. However, on occasion, through 
NEDSA, through the revolving fund  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1258 
 

on occasion, various groups from a business standpoint could in 
fact be involved in proposals or projects that would be 
considered by these funds. But in terms of the associations 
themselves, that would be a question for the native secretariat. 
We deal strictly with the business proponent — business 
concept. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, the 
primary complaint that small-business people have about this 
government is that it is so unbusiness-like. Mr. Minister, given 
the way in which you approach government, there are simply no 
way it could work. I say, given the way you approach 
government, there was just simply no way you could make it 
work. You were neither fish nor fowl. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I say you’re unbusiness-like, I want to point 
to a couple of things, and then I want to make some comments. 
I want to point to the total debt of the province, which has 
increased by about two and a half times since you’ve taken 
office. It was $2.4 billion when you took office — it’s now $6 
billion. Your deficits, Mr. Minister, have grown by arithmetic 
progression, if not . . . each year you’ve estimated them to drop, 
and they have yet to drop. And they’re now up to what should 
be regarded as a very serious problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I say that the government is 
unbusiness-like, I refer to your whole approach to government. 
You came into office with an unrealistic campaign, promising 
to cut taxes, and you did. But while you may have been fiscal 
Conservatives when it came to taxing, you were freebooting 
Liberals when it came to programs. 
 
If you were going to cut taxes, you either had to cut 
expenditures or run a large deficit. You did not cut 
expenditures. This government’s expenditures have increased 
by 33 per cent during the period of time you’ve been in office. 
Your revenues have increased by 32 per cent. The difference, 
Mr. Minister, in the deficit, which has grown alarmingly, is that 
you have . . . you reduced the revenue, but the government kept 
on going without any real change in course. 
 
Your revenues continued to grow at the same rate. Your 
expenditures continued to grow at the same rate. You are 
neither fish nor fowl. If you had stuck with a Conservative 
philosophy and cut taxes and programs, that might have 
worked. If you had left taxes alone and had continued with the 
social programs, that might have worked. But instead you are 
neither fish nor fowl. You’ve cut taxes and left it at that. 
 
As I say, Mr. Minister, it is a most unbusiness-like approach. 
And that is really I think the reason why there is the degree of 
disenchantment with this government in the small business 
community that there is. I am often surprised at the extent to 
which the small business community has given up on this 
government. Many of the people who were the government — 
the more competent managers who would consider themselves 
the natural philosophical allies of the government — have 
simply given up. It is while there have been other problems, the 
Pioneer Trust and so on, the main problem the small business 
community have with you people is you run the 
 

world’s most unbusiness-like government. You should have, as 
I say, either been fish or fowl. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know it is going to be difficult, because you 
don’t have a timetable. But I think many in the small business 
community want to know what your timetable is for eliminating 
the deficit. Before the minister says we’re going to continue to 
make progress, I want to point out that every deficit — every 
budget has increased the deficit, including this one. And that 
hasn’t been because your expenditures have fallen 
precipitously. Your expenditures have been increased by almost 
exactly the same percentage that your revenues have increased. 
Your revenues have kept pace with your expenditures. The 
problem is, in 1982 when you came into office, you created a 
gap; you’ve never bothered to fill it. And now you have the 
original gap, plus interest payments. 
 
(2145) 
 
And I expect people such as the member from Lakeview, and 
the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, who were bankers, could 
understand that. I expect they could read a balance sheet. You 
cannot, Mr. Minister, decrease your revenues below the level of 
your expenditures and do nothing else. While governments may 
last longer than private businesses, eventually anything, public 
or private, will go broke doing that. So, Mr. Minister, I wonder 
when you’re going to: (a) admit that your election campaign in 
1982 was unrealistic; (b) correct course; (c) when do you expect 
to get a handle on the deficit? When do you expect to be 
running a balanced budget? That’s the question I get asked most 
often by small-business people. I think, Mr. Minister, 
small-business people would like to know from this 
government, in the unlikely event you’re re-elected, when do 
you expect to run this government in a more business-like 
fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:— Mr. Chairman, I must admit a certain 
amount of humour at hearing the member from Regina Centre 
talk about being fish or fowl. It’s very clear in this legislature 
which one he is. 
 
However, I will not stand and suggest that interest rate 
protection for home owners was a bad campaign promise, and I 
will not suggest that it was a bad program to initiate. I think it’s 
a program that the residents of this province who were in grace 
danger of losing their homes, appreciated; they understood; it 
was something that had to be done at the time. Your party 
clearly said no, that’s not something we want to get involved in. 
That’s not a role for the provincial government. I note as well 
the desperate moves of the last few weeks when we get to 7 per 
cent solution being announced, clearly when interest rates are 
not a big problem to home owners, but simply an attempt by 
your party — a desperate attempt to attempt to buy votes. 
 
So no, I’m not going to apologize in any way for the platform 
of ’82. I think it was a well thought out platform. Some of the 
tax reductions, particularly on gasoline, was a reduction that the 
people of this province believed was reasonable. And I think it 
has proved to be that. In terms of the deficit, I have been 
through it in some detail with your colleague from Regina 
North East. The Minister of Finance in his budget address 
clearly laid out the source  
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1259 
 

of that deficit: the unfortunate decisions made in the mid ’70s to 
change the ownership of the potash industry without any 
creation of jobs or wealth or anything of that nature. And again 
the moves that we have had to make. 
 
We would have far sooner had a buoyant farm economy. But 
we don’t control grasshoppers. We don’t control drought. We 
indicated that we were . . . that in our opinion, the agricultural 
community was the backbone of this province. That some 
viability had to be maintained, and I think that the agricultural 
sector recognized that the things we have done were necessary. 
Possibly there are some who would like more. I think what 
we’ve done have been reasonable, and have been accepted. And 
those two factors are clearly the source of the deficit. 
 
I think your question was, and I also indicated this to the 
member from Regina North East, that the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business can hardly be accused of being the 
department that controls the deficit and when it will be 
balanced. The Minister of Finance indicated in his address, once 
again, I believe, to my recollection, that it would be five years 
you would see a balanced budget in the province. I think that’s 
realistic. I think that can be accomplished, given some 
assumptions on average agricultural output and average 
agricultural successes that that can be reached. That is 
reasonable. That will not lead to the large tax increases that 
your leader has suggested would be necessary; would not lead 
to that drastic cuts in services that I understood the member 
from Regina North East was advocating when he cited the 
comments from the CFIB manual (Canadian Federation of 
International Business). So I suppose the answer is five years. 
 
Mr. Shillington:— Five years after what? There’s been no 
corrective action taken. 
 
Mr. Minister, the comments of the Minister of Finance, since 
you raised that, are really worthy of some comment. His 
argument, stripped of all its complexity, was: we want to run a 
deficit; we’re angry at you people for not leaving a savings 
account around that we could run down. That’s his arguments 
stripped of all its complexity. 
 
Mr. Minister, even if we had not spent a nickel, even if every 
nickel had gone into a savings account, you’d have spent it a 
long time ago. There never was what now is close to $2 billion. 
It never was that big. 
 
Mr. Minister, the solution to this government’s fiscal problems 
is not for someone to have left a savings account that they could 
squander. Your approach in cutting taxes and not cutting . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you’re going to have to wait 
till 10 o’clock. I persist in the unlikely hope that this minister is 
going to deal with the real problems and stop trying to avoid 
them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you cut . . . Your budgetary problems stem, not 
from your promises, because in the end result the mortgage 
interest reduction program didn’t cost you very much. It was 
your good fortune that the interest rates fell precipitously once 
you took office, through no fault of your own, and through no 
success of your own. 
 
Your budgetary problems were caused fairly and squarely 
 

by cutting taxes. You cut the gas tax and you cut the oil 
royalties, and those two together combined to produce a 
problem which appears to be of concern to everyone but you 
people. 
 
As I say, Mr. Minister, it’s not that your revenues have dropped 
in bad times. Your revenues have been increased by the same 
percentage as your expenditures have. Your revenues have 
increased by 32 per cent; your expenditures increased by 33. 
There’s about a half a percentage point difference. 
 
So the other myth which you try to peddle, and I think 
unsuccessfully, is that your revenues have dropped in hard 
times. They haven’t. They’ve increased by the same percentage 
as your expenditures. Your fiscal problems are caused by the 
fact that there’s a gap, and added to that gap is a growing 
weight of interest — this year in the neighbourhood of $300 
million — which wasn’t there in ’82. You’ve got that to add to 
the original gap, which you’ve done nothing to close. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, when are you going to recognize the 
problem and stop avoiding it? You say five years. Five years 
after what? Because there has been no corrective action taken to 
this point in time except to avoid the problem, except to wander 
off in a whole lot of fantasies and a whole lot of fantasy lands 
about how the problem arose. 
 
The problem, patently, Mr. Minister — and I think business 
people are going to be the most difficult to convince of this — 
the problem didn’t arise because somebody didn’t leave you a 
savings account to squander. Even if you think the savings 
account should have been there to squander, that wouldn’t have, 
in fact, dealt with the main problem of the deficit itself, by 
definition. 
 
Your problem arose because you cut taxes without taking any 
other action. It was unrealistic, and it was bound to get you into 
difficulty, and it has. At a time when there are real pressures to 
assist — assist farmers, assist small-business people, assist 
those growing numbers on welfare — you people are not 
responding. 
 
One of the reasons you aren’t responding is because your hands 
are tied tight with the mistakes of 1982 because you don’t have 
any running room now, and no means by which to respond. 
Your hands are tied by a deficit which you can’t control and 
which you refuse to control. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you now or ever going to admit 
that your problems were of your own making; that the deficit 
exists because you people — not you exactly, since you were 
not in the opposition — but because your colleague from 
Kindersley, your colleague from Meadow Lake, your colleague 
from Indian Head-Wolseley, and so on, took an approach to an 
election which was bound to get them elected once, and I think 
bound to get them defeated the next term. 
 
The seeds of your present-day problems were sown in that 
election. In the end result, if you’re not prepared to be realistic 
with yourself and the public, you’re going to come to grief. 
  



 
May 12, 1986 

 

1260 
 

 
Governments don’t operate any different than business does. 
The law of gravity applies in this legislative Chamber just as 
much as the law of gravity applies in the offices of the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce; just as much as the law 
of gravity applies in the business which I run, and the business 
which other people run. 
 
Just as the law of gravity applies, so does the law of economics. 
You spend more than you take in in my business, you’re going 
to come to grief. Well, Mr. Chairman, an employee of what is 
the epitome of Canadian power, prestige and money — the 
Royal Bank of Canada — the same rules apply to the Royal 
Bank of Canada. If you spend more than you take in, you’re not 
going to be around for ever. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, those same laws of economics apply 
equally well to government. If you are not . . . If you insist on 
taking in more than you’re spending, you’re going to come to 
grief. And you’ve come to grief. You’ve met hard economic 
times. You’ve had some bad luck with oil prices and grain 
prices, and the public I don’t think fault you for that. What they 
fault you for is not your bad luck but your bad management — 
bad business decisions, decisions that you could . . . that 
somehow or other governments were different than something 
as simple as a law office or complex as a chartered bank. While 
one is much, much simpler than the other, the same laws of 
economics apply. You’ve got to take in at least as much as 
you’re spending, or you’re not going to be around for long. 
 
For a period of time, people . . . Whether it is a law office, a 
bank, or a government, people will lend you money to carry on. 
But eventually the interest payments begin to catch up to you, 
and people start getting nervous about lending you money. And 
lo and behold, you’re running into that. Lo and behold, not only 
are the interest payments becoming a serious problem here, but 
people are getting increasingly reluctant, people get 
increasingly reluctant to lend you money. Your credit . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I wouldn’t have laughed, except the 
member took himself seriously with that. I will let the member 
from Shaunavon do his own apologizing. Suffice it to say, I will 
be waiting to hear the member from Shaunavon apologize for 
that comment, because it doesn’t merit apologies. And the 
member from Shaunavon is not the sort who apologizes for 
something that doesn’t requiring apologizing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder when this government is going to admit 
that the laws of economics apply here in this Chamber as they 
do in my office or the head office of the Royal Bank, just the 
same as the laws of economics do  
 
Mr. Chairman:— Order, order. It being near 10 o’clock, we 
shall now rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 
 
 


