













































December 12, 1986


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 December 12, 1986 

 

 

195 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

PCS Lanigan Dispute 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was to 

be to the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, but in his absence I’d like to direct the question 

to the Premier. And, Mr. Premier, it has to do with the dispute 

at PCS Lanigan. 

 

It’s the longest strike in the history of a Saskatchewan Crown 

corporation; 290 workers at PCS Lanigan division have been 

off the job since March 10th – 10 months this week. They’ve 

been without a contract since January 31, 1985 – almost, in fact, 

two years next month. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier, when is your government and the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan going to quit playing 

games with the lives of these potash workers and get back to the 

bargaining table and make a serious effort to arrive at a fair and 

reasonable contract? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my hon. 

colleague knows, I met with the potash employees this summer; 

I believe it was in Watrous. And on more than one occasion I 

met with them and they, for example, asked if I would help get 

both sides back to the table. And I did that, Mr. Speaker, I put 

them back to the table, and I said we will make sure that there is 

a good offer for the employees. 

 

And I don’t recall what it is but I’m sure the minister would. 

But it was something like 3 per cent over the first year and 3 per 

cent over the next year. It was definitely a raise. If not 6 per 

cent, it was 5, over the two- or three-year period. And it was 

employment and it was an increase. And as I understand it, Mr. 

Speaker, it was rejected by the employees. 

 

Now I can understand why they might want 10 per cent or they 

might want more than that. But, Mr. Speaker, under these 

general economic times, if you can have your work and you can 

have a raise in line with generally what’s going on throughout 

the economy and the industry, that’s . . . I believe the public see 

that as fair. 

 

So when we went back to the table on the request of the miners 

who visited with me while I was on my summer tour, I said, we 

will give you a fair offer, and I mean that. And they received 

what I believe is a fair offer. And they voted to reject the raise 

and to reject the offer, and as a result they’re still not working. 

 

Now I’ve talked to many people in the community and 

surrounding areas, and I’m sure that the member has, and at 

some point the point are going to say, look, we know that prices 

are down in potash and prices are down in wheat and prices are 

down in this. I believe that you’ve got to be reasonable. 

 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that that offer has been there and 

it’s been rejected. I point out again, it was a raise and it was for 

over more than one year. I can get the information – I don’t 

have it with me – and it was as a result of them meeting with 

me and asking them to do it again. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I do 

want the details of what you have in fact offered the miners, 

because certainly the impression that you have given to this 

House is a far cry from what the miners indicate in Lanigan. So 

I ask you: one, are you satisfied that what you have placed 

before the miners of this province is fair and reasonable, and is 

it the last offer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I, and I’m sure the 

hon. member knows, I don’t know or can’t recall right now all 

the details of that offer. Okay? 

 

An Hon. Member: — But you leave the impression . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I leave the impression that I visited 

with the miners, and I did, and I asked the potash corporation to 

go back to the table and present a reasonable offer. And from 

my recollection, they did. And obviously, or I guess history will 

speak for itself, the union, or the members, or the miners, or 

whatever, voted on it and rejected it. Rejected the offer, and it 

was a raise. I know that it was a raise . . . And it had over some 

period of time . . . And I will get those details. 

 

Obviously as well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 

we don’t negotiate on the floor of the legislature with respect to 

whether it’s public employees. I mean we have free collective 

bargaining. They want the confidentiality and we want the 

confidentiality. That’s the way it should be. But I can say that it 

was a raise, and it was a reasonable offer. The percentages I 

don’t recall exactly, but it was certainly within reason, given 

what the industry is doing and what the rate of inflation is, and 

given the prices in the potash industry, and given changes over 

the last six months and six months before that and so forth, 

from the information that I have received. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental. Mr. Premier, you indicated that 

you got involved, as you indicated when you spoke to the 

miners either in Humboldt or Watrous. I want to ask you: was 

the rejection by the union on the basis of the monetary package, 

or was it in respect to job security? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was not there when they 

voted on their package. I can take notice of that question and I 

can get the minister to provide me with the information. But 

they rejected it, and for whatever reason, their reasons are their 

own, I would guess. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, are 

you aware of the kind of hurt that the long strike has brought to 

the community of Lanigan and surrounding municipalities, the 

small-business people in that community? As one 

small-business man told reporters recently, “We’re struggling, 

we’re bleeding.” I ask you:  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

196 

 

 

what hope can you hold out to the people of the community of 

Lanigan that this very important source of revenue will be 

restored by a reasonable and fair settlement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the word is 

“reasonable.” That’s what it is, and if you walk through the 

streets of Lanigan, that’s what they’re asking for – reasonable 

people – reasonable. And the business men that I talked to, and 

the farmers in there, and the miners, and . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’ve talked to a lot of them, and they’ve talked 

to me, and they want to see people, they want to see them 

spending the money in the stores, and they want to see them 

buying Christmas presents. And they say, here is an offer with a 

raise and longevity, and it’s been rejected. Now you can talk to 

people across the province of Saskatchewan and say, I believe 

we should be reasonable. Well there was a reasonable offer on 

the table and it was rejected by the union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak for the people who rejected it. They 

turned down a raise, and they turned down a contract when 

other people across the province have signed. Now that’s their 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. It will be unfortunate, obviously, 

for the community, for stores, shopkeepers, small businesses, if 

the money isn’t spent. 

 

Campus Employment Centre Funding Cut-backs 

 

Mr. Prebble: — My question is for the Minister of Advanced 

Education and Manpower. The minister will be aware that the 

Mulroney government recently implemented major cut-backs to 

Canada employment centres across this country, including a 30 

per cent cut-back to the campus employment centre at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And that’s meant, Mr. Minister, 

that 22 large employers over the last two months have either 

had great difficulty or have not been able at all to conduct job 

interviews on the campus. And there have been dozens and 

dozens of lost job opportunities and lost interview opportunities 

for students. 

 

My question is: what action has the minister taken to try to 

convince his federal counterpart that the funding cut-backs at 

the campus employment centre at the University of 

Saskatchewan are short-sighted and unwarranted? Have you 

asked the minister to reverse those cut-backs, and if so, can you 

table the correspondence that indicates that you’ve done that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think it was just two 

days ago that I met with the members of the students’ union at 

the University of Saskatchewan. This issue was raised with me 

by them. It’s one that concerns them; it’s one that concerns me 

and our government. And I gave them my undertaking that I 

would raise it, not only with the appropriate minister in Ottawa, 

but as well, with others of our colleagues in the federal caucus. 

 

What will come of that—and I have no letters or anything like 

that to be tabled for the member at this point in time – what 

comes of that, I cannot say. But clearly we’re  

interested in having job opportunities and knowledge of 

possible job opportunities made available to those students on 

an equal basis, and fairly, as they might be made to those living 

in Ontario, for example. 

 

I recognize that in an office where you had 10 people, a 30 per 

cent cut-back, if in fact the hon. member’s numbers are right, 

the removal of three has a more serious implication than if you 

have an office of 100 and you eliminate 30, because you’ve still 

got 70 people to pick up the task. And I suspect when the 

cut-backs were made, if in fact they were to the degree the hon. 

member states, then that eminent sense of fairness the 

government often employs . . . We tend to do these in a 

horizontal basis and not always look at individual staffing 

requirements in individual offices, and it’s the smaller ones 

sometimes that get hurt. Now that may not be the case, but it 

may well be the case, and it’s something I will be raising with 

my federal colleagues. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 

minister about a troubling comment in the throne speech which 

seems to suggest further cut-backs at our universities and 

technical institutes. The speech says, and I quote: “Because 

resources are scarce, this will involve determining areas of 

specialization and avoiding unnecessary duplication.” I’d like 

the minister’s assurance that this statement does not foreshadow 

cut-backs in funding to our universities or cuts in financial 

support for our technical institute programs. I’d like to ask the 

minister just what is meant by those words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I can best 

answer the question by restating some of what I said last night 

in my throne speech remarks. Because really the question asks: 

what are our goals relative to post secondary education? As I 

said last night, our goal is simply this, to provide the best 

quality, period. And I think our track records speaks for itself, 

Mr. Speaker, because between 1982 and ’86 this government 

increased total funding to the post secondary education sector 

by a greater percentage than any other province in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. The record speaks for itself, as it has in the past and it 

will in the future. 

 

Now if the hon. member is suggesting that if there’s duplication 

in the system that we should let that continue, the public of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and we, as the 

public trustees of the public purse, would have difficulty with 

that. 

 

So I’m never in favour of unnecessary duplication. And 

certainly in the economic realities that we live with, we must 

never, ever have unnecessary duplication, nor must we commit 

the error of omission, Mr. Speaker. That is our goal. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

may say that things are fine at our universities and technical 

institutes, but that’s simply not the case. We had a day of 

protest this week, Mr. Minister, at the University of 

Saskatchewan. The faculty there were expressing their 

frustration with the fact that, while there’s been record 

enrolment increases, there has been no additional money to hire 

permanent new faculty or permanent new staff. The libraries at 

the universities are  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

197 

 

 

in a desperate situation and have been ranked 98th out of 104. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — My question for the minister is: do you not see 

that this kind of protest, like the one on Wednesday at the 

University of Saskatchewan, is more evidence that, rather than 

further tight budgets at our university, what’s called for 

urgently is improved funding by your government for 

post-secondary educational institutions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The demonstration the hon. member 

refers to, I really have no comment on except to say that the 

university administration, who I have a great deal of confidence 

in, and in fact had a chance to meet informally with the board of 

governors on Wednesday night, and I leave that matter in their 

hands. I merely reiterate that, despite the sweeping statements, 

no other jurisdiction in the country increased funding like our 

government did this past four years when it comes to 

post-secondary education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PCS Lanigan Dispute 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. A group of concerned citizens from Lanigan has asked 

for a meeting with you to discuss the impact of the strike. 

Because of the very urgency of this situation, Mr. Speaker, have 

you agreed to meet with the Lanigan committee? And, if so, 

when is that meeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have not agreed to meet, 

as I recall, with anybody from Lanigan specifically in the last 

few days. If there’s correspondence on the way to me or letters 

or something else, I’d be glad to take notice and respond to it 

when it gets to my desk. I won’t say I wouldn’t meet; I may, but 

I have not agreed to meet with a specific group in recent date. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Final supplementary, Mr. Premier, when the 

doctors of this province were recently involved in a current 

contract dispute with your Minister of Health, you personally 

intervened to help get the dispute settled. You were prepared to 

come to the aid of Saskatchewan doctors. Will you now come 

to the aid of workers in this province and personally get 

involved in bringing the PCS Lanigan dispute to quick and fair 

settlement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was involved when we 

made the move to remove extra billing in the province of 

Saskatchewan, not because of any particular profession but 

because of the public of Saskatchewan. And I did become 

involved, and with the former minister of health we struck a 

deal with the medical profession which they’re happy with and 

we’re happy with, and there’s no more extra billing in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s removed. And it was about time. 

With respect to the Lanigan potash people, I have met with 

them and I’ve put the potash corporation under a directive to go 

back to the table and present a reasonable offer, and they did 

that. And the union rejected it – rejected it. Now they voted to 

reject an offer that was there, and the people of Lanigan and 

those that I talked to say: well, as long as it’s reasonable, we 

could all be going on with our life; money could be spent in the 

stores; Christmas could be a lot better. But the union will not 

agree to a raise; it will not agree to the contract. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been involved. I asked them to go back to 

the table, and they did, and they rejected the offer. 

 

Building of Power Transmission Line in Northern 

Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 

question to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, and it deals with the announcement last 

March and the re-announcement in September of plans to build 

a power transmission line in northern Saskatchewan. In March 

you said the project would employ 150 people during 

construction; that construction would begin immediately and 

take two years. 

 

Can the minister explain why there are now crews working this 

winter along the route and why some contracts for the clearing 

of trees and bush along the power line right of way have been 

cancelled or postponed in recent months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is right. 

We have announced a power line that will go from Beaver 

Lodge and take in eight communities along the way, plus the 

Rabbit Lake mine, all the way to Wollaston Post across 

Wollaston Lake through, island hopping, to get that additional, I 

think about five or six kilometres, to get to Wollaston Post. 

 

I don’t recall the total capital cost or the total number of 

employees during the project. And as it relates to current 

activity, there is no doubt we’re committed to completing the 

line within the two year period. I believe that Camsell Portage 

is . . . the work has already been done to get the line through 

there, the surveying and the clearing. And that’s my belief. 

 

If that’s not accurate, I will take notice of the question and get 

the information that I know the hon. member sincerely wants. 

And I’ll get that information for the hon. member, and if he 

wants he can share it with the member for Quill Lakes to see if 

that will settle him down. 

 

High-Tech Strategy 

 

Mr. Koenker: — My question is to the Acting Minister for 

Science and Technology. During the recent election campaign, 

the Premier announced what he called a new high-tech strategy 

and committed $50 million over the next five years to high-tech 

firms in Saskatchewan to develop new products and to do 

research. 

 

During the throne speech, however, we learned that this $50 

million will not go to high-tech firms but will rather be some 

sort of grant to help businesses buy small  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

198 

 

 

computers and other equipment. Can the minister confirm that 

this will, in fact, be the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question posed 

by the hon. member will be addressed over the next four years, 

and that type of policy being developed is generally found when 

the budget is announced and the minister responsible for 

science and technology outlines the new initiatives that he and 

his department and this government will pursue in the field of 

science and technology. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the new 

policy in fact be for small business purchase of high-technical 

equipment, or will it be direct assistance to high-tech firms 

themselves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the way the policy will be pursued 

is a round of consultation with the industry with people 

involved in science and technology. It is not the view of this 

government that we should somehow simply superimpose 

policies on small business and tell them to like it or lump it. We 

will consult with them. We believe in that process of listening 

and co-operating with the industry. You can get the best 

mileage out of the dollars that are going to be allocated to that, 

and we have a great deal of faith in the high-technology 

industry both in Saskatoon and the rest of the province. 

 

SaskExpo Tower 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for the SaskExpo ’86 Corporation, and 

it deals with the decision to junk the Saskatchewan pavilion at 

Expo. Mr. Minister, a few days prior to the election, October 

10th to be exact, the head of SaskExpo ’86, Gord Staseson, told 

the news media that it would cost a half million dollars to 

relocate the pavilion to Saskatchewan. 

 

A month later, 30 days later when you announced that 

relocation would be too costly, you said the cost would be more 

than $1 million. Four or five days prior to the announcement, 

Saskatchewan Expo Corporation ’86 officials met with the Park 

Place group, one of the groups that made the bid from Moose 

Jaw on the tower, and according to officials there, there was no 

indication that the decision was contrary to what they believed 

it to be. 

 

Mr. Minister, what changed between October 10th and 

November 14th to more than double the cost of relocating the 

Expo tower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I guess one thing positive 

that flows from this discussion is that I can admit now that it 

was a tough decision, but it was a decision that would never had 

to have been made had members opposite been sitting on this 

side when the decision was made to go to Expo in the first 

place. 

 

And I know, I’ve talked to some of the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that were out to Vancouver and visited our pavilion at 

Expo and every one of them talked about what a great 

monument it was. 

I don’t remember precisely the dates that were set out by the 

hon. member in the question as it relates to an announced cost. I 

don’t accept at face value the comments that he attributes to the 

commissioner of SaskExpo, Gord Staseson, who I might add 

did a very, very good job in representing Saskatchewan to the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Would the minister please. . . 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I have a Leader-Post article which says on 

Friday, October 10th, it’ll cost $500,000 to bring the SaskExpo 

tower to Saskatchewan. 

 

In a news release dated November 14th the minister says it’s 

going to cost $1 million. And I’d like to ask the minister why 

there was a discrepancy, and what was the basis for the increase 

in that period of time from $500,00 to $1 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 

confidence in the people at SaskExpo, including Gordon 

Staseson and Jim Ebbels, the architect and project manager. I 

kind of suspect that the original estimates had to be adjusted 

somewhat when the bids came in for dismantling and 

transportation. I’m not entirely sure of that, but I do know that 

the final estimate of dismantling and transportation and 

re-assembly and all of that was in the neighbourhood of $1.2 

million. 

 

Based on that information, Mr. Speaker, and in consultation 

with the people in Moose Jaw, including His Worship, Mayor 

Scoop Lewry, they agreed with us that we ought not to try and 

bring it back. You can build an exact replica for less than that. 

Our preference would have been, Mr. Speaker, to have the 

Saskatchewan pavilion stay where it was as a monument to 

Saskatchewan at the gateway from the Pacific rim, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That wasn’t to be the case. The people in Vancouver and the 

new government in Vancouver decided they were going to 

redevelop that area. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 5 – An Act respecting the Organization of the 

Executive Government of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting the Organization of the Executive Government 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, yesterday the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale rose on a point of order 

stating that the Minister of Health, during oral question period, 

had referred to a letter, and that the minister be required to table 

the letter. I deferred my ruling at that  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

199 

 

 

time. 

 

I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 

and Forms, Fifth Edition, pages 115 to 116, paragraph 327(1), 

(3), and (5) as follows: 

 

A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or 

quote from a dispatch or other state paper not before 

the House, unless he be prepared to lay it upon the 

Table. This restraint is similar to the rule of evidence 

in courts of law, which prevent counsel from citing 

documents which have not been produced in evidence. 

The principle is so reasonable that it has not been 

contested; and when the objection has been made in 

time, it has been generally acquiesced in. 

 

Subsection (3): 

 

A public document referred to but not cited or quoted 

by a Minister need not be tabled. 

 

And subsection (5): 

 

To be cited, a document must be quoted or specifically 

used to influence debate. The admission that a 

document exists, or the reading of the salutation or 

address of a letter does not constitute citing. 

 

I have had an opportunity to review the Debates and 

Proceedings for yesterday. I note that the minister did refer to a 

letter he wrote, but he did not quote from the letter. I rule, 

therefore, that the minister need not table the letter referred to. 

 

Further, I want to refer all hon. members to rule 35, subsection 

(3), which states: 

 

Mr. Speaker shall not entertain points of order during 

the Oral Question Period. Points of Order may be 

raised later on Orders of the Day. 

 

I would ask all members to remember that points of order 

arising out of the oral question period should be raised before 

orders of the day. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Before the orders of the day, I rise on a point of 

personal privilege. Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from 

Regina South was concerned about the use of my own 

aboriginal language, which is Cree, and was wondering about 

the translation. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read what I said on 

both days, so I could set the record straight. 

 

On December 10, Mr. Speaker, I said: 

 

I will therefore, Mr. Speaker, (and I quote) deal with 

the issues of the throne speech and also of the North 

and also of aboriginal people, in my own language. I 

will provide the translation for it, right after. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I proceeded to do the oral translation of it right 

after. 

 

On the second day, Mr. Speaker, I said, and I quote: 

 

When I talked in Cree, I mentioned that I would be 

presenting the translation in English. So the 

presentation that I am making right now is a 

translation of yesterday’s talk in Cree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore stand to pay due respects to the 

language of my people and the language of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder if perhaps the hon. member 

could clarify more succinctly for us exactly what is the point of 

order that he raised. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member has raised a point of privilege, 

the way I recall it, not a point of order. 

 

The member has raised, in my opinion, not a real point of 

privilege, but an explanation of what happened in the House the 

previous day. Under those circumstances, I feel that the House 

accept the member’s explanation, and I don’t see at this time a 

specific ruling on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I think I may not have made 

myself clear. I raised the point of privilege basically because the 

member from Regina south, in regards to the situation, accused 

me of misleading the House to the legislature by not providing 

the translation. But, Mr. Speaker, I did provide the translation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, order! Order, please! I thank 

the member for clarifying his position. And having done that, I 

now refer hon. members to paragraph 19, page 12 in . . . Order, 

please, order! Order, please! I thank the member for clarifying 

his position. And having done that, I now refer hon. members to 

paragraph 19, page 12, in Beauchesne’s which reads as follows: 

 

A dispute arising between two Members as to 

allegations of facts, does not fulfil the conditions of 

parliamentary privilege. 

 

And I feel that we will have to now leave that issue at this point. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we could on 

Motions for Returns (Not Debatable), 1 through 43, if we could 

make those debatable. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Debate. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

200 

 

 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 

thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 

opportunity to congratulate you in your new position. I know 

the people of Saskatchewan hold your Chair and your position 

with a high degree of respect and the people that sit in that 

Chair. I want to congratulate you for having the opportunity to 

serve the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to take a few moments to elaborate on a few things that 

were in the Speech from the Throne. And I will certainly be in 

support, Mr. Speaker, of the Speech from the Throne and will 

be obviously voting in favour of it when the appropriate time 

comes. 

 

I want to point out to the members of the legislature and to the 

people of Saskatchewan that this government has received a 

new mandate – a new mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan – a mandate to build, to diversify, manufacture 

and process, to create new businesses, to invite people into the 

province of Saskatchewan to make their home. 

 

We have a mandate as well, Mr. Speaker, to protect people, to 

make sure that we protect families, particularly our growing 

families; and senior citizens – senior citizens across this 

province who have built this great province of Saskatchewan; to 

protect women and to protect children; farmers; to make sure 

that the government can stand there to protect them against 

international events or climatic events or others when they need 

to be protected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan, a new mandate to manage the province’s 

resources and the taxpayers’ dollars well. And that mandate 

says to us that we should be as efficient and as effective as we 

can as we build this province and as we protect families and as 

we carve out a future. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 

given this government a mandate to lead – to lead this province, 

provide leadership to the country where possible, and provide 

leadership on an international plane where it has Saskatchewan 

interests at stake. 

 

We have developed, for example, a local agricultural strategy; 

it’s been extended to a national agricultural strategy. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, one of the responsibilities we have in the 

mandate we have is to do our part in designing a rural 

agricultural strategy. Our pension legislation, Mr. Speaker, is an 

example of where leadership is needed. This jurisdiction in this 

province has provided that enabling legislation which is 

pioneering, not only in Saskatchewan and in Canada but in 

North America, trade relationships, public participation in 

Crown corporations, that kind of leadership I believe that the 

people of Saskatchewan have given this government in its new 

mandate. And I want to  

refer to those four mandates – to build, to protect, to manage, 

and to lead – in a little bit more detail in the next few minutes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to building, the people of Saskatchewan want their 

government to build and develop this province. And frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, any politician who doesn’t want to build and 

doesn’t want to see Saskatchewan communities develop is out 

of step with Saskatchewan people. What the people have told 

us, from the north, south, east and west, rural and urban, is to 

develop our communities, build on the strengths of the 

resources and the energy of the people in the towns and the 

villages and put them together and create an environment here, 

not only for tomorrow, not only for next year, but for 

generations to come. And I want to give some examples that the 

people have suggested to us. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, is becoming increasingly evident. In the 

whole area of agriculture we find Saskatchewan in a leadership 

role, partly because we have almost half the farm land in 

Canada, but partly as a result of our very productive agricultural 

community. We know now that farmers spend something like 

$250 million every year on farm chemicals. And the people of 

Saskatchewan have said to me and have said to this government 

and said to the members of this Assembly: we should be 

manufacturing the farm chemicals here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We import $250 million worth of farm 

chemicals every year from Ontario, from Germany, from the 

United States. The jobs aren’t here, the jobs are some place 

else. We pay for the transportation costs, and, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t create the jobs here as a result. 

 

People have said to me and they’ve said to the members of this 

government: wherever possible we should be manufacturing 

those farm chemicals here; we should make sure that wherever 

possible, cut the costs to farmers. And I’ve talked to people 

across this province and, Mr. Speaker, everyone agrees – the 

farmers agree, the people in towns and villages agree, the 

people of North Battleford, Regina, Estevan, the small 

communities on the east and the west side of this province agree 

that we should be manufacturing farm chemicals in this 

province. It’s diversification, it’s processing, it’s manufacturing 

and it’s creating the jobs here. You’re taking that natural 

demand in agriculture, combining it with the talents and the 

energy of people in towns and villages and cities, putting it 

together and creating jobs, creating jobs right in the province of 

Saskatchewan, cutting the cost to the farms, and we’re breaking 

that dependency on Ontario and Quebec. 

 

And for an awful long time this province, Mr. Speaker, and in 

western Canada, have had to pay the freight both ways from the 

central part of this nation, pay the transportation out, pay the 

transportation for goods back and forth. Somebody in Ontario 

would manufacture a farm chemical or some other good, add a 

certain margin; we’d pay the transportation freight out here. The 

next year they’d add another 15 or 20 per cent. We’d pay the 

transportation out here and people in Saskatchewan are saying, 

why don’t we manufacture it here and break that dependency? 

 

Ontario may want to live behind tariff walls. Ontario may  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

201 

 

 

like to see Westerners pay that transportation both ways, but 

that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s good for us. And the mandate 

that we have received, Mr. Speaker, in this last election is to 

manufacture farm inputs – whether they’re farm chemicals or 

farm fertilizers – right here in the province to save the 

transportation costs, create the jobs here and to break that 

dependency on either international firms or central Canadians, 

or in fact whole parts of national firms like those we see in 

Germany or France and the United States and others that sell 

products here. 

 

What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is everybody in Saskatchewan 

agrees with that. Nobody disagrees. They’re all saying that we 

should manufacture those goods and those services right here. 

They have a little question mark in their mind. Why wasn’t it 

done before? This province was started in 1905. Why wasn’t 

this manufacturing and this processing encouraged before? 

We’ve had other administrations. We’ve had other 

governments, but always we were left dependent on Ontario 

and dependent on Quebec. Why couldn’t we manufacture 

agricultural goods and services here to a very large extent? 

 

We spend the money every year. Farmers religiously year after 

year after year spend $250 million in Saskatchewan alone 

buying farm chemicals, and not one drop was manufactured 

here. And not one administration ever gave any incentives to 

have it manufactured here. Well, Mr. Speaker, the mandate that 

we have received from the people of Saskatchewan, rural and 

urban, is to manufacture and process here and break that 

dependency. 

 

(1045) 

 

Let me give you a second example, Mr. Speaker. In this 

province we spend in the neighbourhood of a billion dollars 

plus – I believe it’s close now to $1,200 per man, woman and 

child – on health care. Every year! It is an annual megaproject 

in its own right. Every year the taxpayers of this province spend 

over $1 billion –over a thousand dollars per man, woman and 

child – in health care provision. And, Mr. Speaker, do you 

know how much of the goods that we use in the health care 

system are manufactured here in Saskatchewan? Virtually none. 

Whether it is the supplies, whether it is the medical equipment, 

whether it’s the linen, whatever it is, all that money – hundreds 

of millions of dollars – we buy from somebody else. We buy 

from Ontario; we buy from the United States; we buy from 

Germany. 

 

And when you ask people, should we manufacture health care 

equipment and supplies in Saskatchewan? Everyone agrees. 

They all agree, whether they’re in Prince Albert, whether 

they’re in Moose Jaw, Estevan, Weyburn, it doesn’t matter. 

They all agree we should manufacture those health care 

supplies here. 

 

There’s a manufacturer’s intravenous solution being 

manufactured in Wolseley, Saskatchewan, and it just developed 

recently. That plant will mean 50 new jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan with an infinite demand here in the 

Saskatchewan because we spent a billion dollars. It will save 

the hospital in Melfort a  

quarter of a million dollars over the next five years because it’s 

manufactured here. A quarter of a million dollars in health care 

and we get the jobs and we’ve broken the link with eastern 

Canada – central Canada. The people agree, whether they’re in 

Melfort, or in Swift Current, that we should be doing this. They 

have a question. Why wasn’t it done before? Where was the 

vision? Where was the leadership? We’re spending all this 

money on health care. Why wasn’t there the incentives? Why 

weren’t there incentives to manufacture and process and 

diversify and build here at home? 

 

Well the vision wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll say this. As a 

result of the last election we have a mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan – a new mandate – to manufacture and process as 

much health care equipment as we can in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to make sure that we do what is good for this 

province, not just what’s good for Ontario, or not just what’s 

good for Quebec or some other country. Keep the jobs here. 

Take the strength of our huge demand in health care, the talents 

of people in towns and villages, put them together and say, we 

can manufacture here. We can manufacture the linen in Swift 

Current. Why not? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is another benefit to these. Why can’t 

we manufacture and process and export into the United States, 

or to the Pacific rim, or to central Canada if we build the 

economies of scale in intravenous solution manufacturing and 

packaging right here? We have now got contracts in many other 

countries – more contracts – that we are now manufacturing for 

the rest of the world, and it started here in health care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t want to be tied to the whip-saws 

of prices of oil or timber or wheat or international speculators or 

interest rates or whatever, we need to diversify and broaden and 

deepen our economy so that we can be here protecting ourselves 

against those kinds of conditions and manufacturing here. 

 

Let me give you a third example, Mr. Speaker. Tourism. For the 

longest time people in this province never heard much about the 

beauty of Saskatchewan. And certainly people outside the 

province didn’t hear about Saskatchewan. It’s been said in 

various parts of Canada, Saskatchewan was the best kept secret 

in North America. People did not talk about Saskatchewan as a 

place to go to visit, to see the lakes, to visit the people, to see 

the beautiful scenery, to experience the outdoors. Tourism is a 

very, very powerful industry, Mr. Speaker. Some say it could be 

the largest renewable industry in the world by the year 2000. 

 

And when we talk about promoting Saskatchewan, and when 

we see what we could do at Expo, letting the whole world know 

about us, and when we talk about doing that in community after 

community after community across this province, everyone 

agrees. Nobody disagrees. 

 

They say let’s take Lloydminster and show the world what 

Lloydminster’s about. We’re proud of that heritage. Let’s take 

Maple Creek, and the community there wants to show the world 

what Maple Creek is like – whether it’s the fowl suppers, 

whether it’s the ranch land; whether it’s the oilmen, whether it’s 

the schools, the communities –  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

202 

 

 

whatever it is, they’re proud of their heritage and they’re proud 

of their community. 

 

And if we can build on that, Mr. Speaker, and invite people all 

over Canada and North America and the world to come to 

Saskatchewan and visit us and see us and spend their money, 

it’s hundreds of millions of dollars a year to see and visit with 

the people of Saskatchewan, as we did at Expo. And people all 

over the world ranked us at Expo — Saskatchewan at Expo – 

among the top 10 of any of the people that were or any of the 

countries that were there. They said that spirit of Saskatchewan 

was absolutely magnificent; it was unique. And they want to 

come to this province. 

 

When we say we’re going to diversify and encourage tourism 

here, encourage conferences, encourage skiing, encourage 

golfing, encourage the exploration of our lakes and the 

enjoyment of the fishing – the best fresh water fishing any place 

in the world – people agree. And they say, that makes sense. It’s 

a renewable industry, and no one disagrees with it. No one. 

 

They’ll ask the question, what was going on before? Why 

weren’t previous administrations promoting this beautiful 

province? Why were some politicians saying, don’t go to Expo? 

They’ve even looked at various jurisdictions to our east that 

didn’t even show up at Expo, not wanting to be proud of 

Canada and proud of their province and do the kinds of things 

that we know that we’re capable of. 

 

Well I just . . . I point out, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate. 

People of Saskatchewan have given this government a mandate 

to promote this province, to allow the world to see what this 

province is and what it can be, to invite them in. And everyone 

agrees. The only question they ask: why wasn’t it done before? 

What was holding them up? What was the political philosophy 

that was keeping the people that were running this province 

before from opening up to the world? 

 

Well I’ll give you another example, Mr. Speaker. It was raised 

in question period today. And that is the development and the 

use of technology for Saskatchewan people – not only 

Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan firms, but 

Saskatchewan families. And as I travel across this province and 

people have talked to me, they said, let’s make the best and 

most efficient and effective use of technology that we can. 

 

We are known, Mr. Speaker, for our ability to manage and our 

ability to take technology and use it well. Agriculture is the best 

example that I know. I mean, we’re taken a country and an area, 

a hundred years ago when the average farm would harvest a few 

hundred bushels a day, and today, Mr. Speaker, with 

technology, we can know that a man and his wife and a child, 

sitting in the cab of a combine, can harvest a thousand bushels 

an hour. Technology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chinese are here to see our technology; the Japanese are 

here to see our technology; Europeans are here; the Soviet 

Union is here – people from around the world to watch us use 

our technology. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to be left behind in any  

technology. Communications, management training skills, are 

one of the most important things that we can do and use and 

enforce, so this province will be on the forefront and on the 

frontier of all kinds of new national and international markets 

that are going to be developed. 

 

Our children need to be educated with the technology. Our 

managers need to be able to use the technology. And there is a 

mandate to this government, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we 

help all of society, whether they’re in schools, whether they’re 

in hospitals, whether they’re at universities, whether they’re in 

business, to have access to the very best training and the very 

best technology that we can get hold of. 

 

And do you know who disagrees with that, Mr. Speaker? 

Nobody. Everybody in this province says yes, let’s take the best 

management skills and the best technology we can, and let’s 

train our people so that we can use them wisely. 

 

The only question they will ask, why wasn’t it done before? 

Where were the incentives? And it’s a legitimate question. The 

mandate for this government and the mandate that was read in 

the Speech from the Throne is develop, use our management 

skills and our technology wherever you can find it around the 

world, and don’t be second, or don’t be third. Wherever 

possible be in first place on the world scene. And we will, Mr. 

Speaker, because we can, if we have the leadership and if we 

have the support, as we have now, from the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can go through and I’m going to touch on 

several items that the people of Saskatchewan have suggested 

that they agree with. When we have an opportunity to make 

paper in this province as opposed to fence posts, and selling 

posts nationally and internationally, if we can make fine quality 

paper and sell it world-wide and create more jobs, everybody 

agrees. Nobody disagrees with that. 

 

Let’s take our resources, the rural, the timber, combine it with 

the talents and the strengths of men and women in towns, and 

let’s manufacture and process – make the finest value-added 

product we can and market it all over the world. And no matter 

where you go in this province they say, right on, I agree. They 

may ask, why wasn’t it done before? What was going on 

before? Why didn’t it happen” But they’ll say, its’ time to do it 

now. And we have that mandate. 

 

When it comes to marketing livestock, Mr. Speaker, people in 

this province agree that we shouldn’t just sell hogs and beef. 

We should process that product, sell the finest Canadian bacon 

that you can make – a great quality product, great reputation – 

and market that world-wide. Manufacture that product. Take the 

strength of the agriculture, the talents of the men and women in 

towns and villages, put them together whether in Saskatoon or 

North Battleford and say, let’s create those jobs here and 

manufacture that product and sell it internationally. 

 

And do you know who disagrees with that, Mr. Speaker? 

Nobody. They all say, let’s do it. It makes sense. You’re  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

203 

 

 

taking the rural and the urban and combining them together; 

taking the strength of agriculture and the talents of people in 

towns and villages and putting them together and creating new 

value-added products. Do you know the only question they ask: 

why wasn’t it being done before? Well we now have a mandate, 

Mr. Speaker, to do this. 

 

If you look at turbine manufacturing, everybody agrees that we 

should encourage others to come in here and manufacture as 

opposed to just buying it from Japan or China. 

 

If you look at oil and gas production and marketing, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have said to us, let’s make 

our own diesel fuel. Let’s make our own fuel oil. Why should 

we have to buy it from Alberta or buy it from some place else 

when we have oil here? We could be self-sufficient in oil and 

gas, taking our own refineries and taking the oil from 

Saskatchewan – not the oil form Alberta or the oil from some 

place else, but taking it here and processing it, Mr. Speaker, and 

making our own diesel fuel and our own gasoline so we could 

be in control of our destiny. And we can sell heavy crude in the 

United States; we can sell synthetic crude; we could sell diesel 

fuel if we wanted to. 

 

And when we talk about taking our own refinery or having a 

stand-alone upgrader or various combinations, everyone in the 

province agrees. Nobody disagrees. They’re saying, you have a 

mandate to go build that. They’ll ask, what was going on 

before? Why did it take so long? What did previous 

governments do? Why couldn’t we have been making our own 

gasoline and diesel fuel for years? That’s the only question. But 

everybody agrees that we should be doing it. 

 

When it comes to water management, Mr. Speaker – water 

management – people in this province want to see that resource 

well managed. They see in many cases the water going right 

through on an annual basis into the ocean and we take very little 

use of it. The water on a seasonal basis goes through this 

province. They want to see that water managed, they want to 

see electrical power projects, they want to see recreation 

developments, and they want to see irrigation developments. 

And everybody, and all political persuasions are saying, yes, 

manage those resources to get the most use out of them, 

whether it’s power projects or recreation or tourism or, indeed, 

drought-proofing Saskatchewan so we don’t have to import 

feed in dry years from southern Alberta or southern Ontario. It 

just makes sense. Everyone agrees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the opening of the initial round of Rafferty 

dam, I’ve had a quote and I just want to share it with you this 

morning. This is a quote about water management and irrigation 

and water projects by a former premier of this province. And I 

quote: 

 

The project is multi-purpose. Neither the electricity 

nor the irrigation nor the water supply made available 

would be sufficiently valuable alone to warrant the 

cost of construction, but together they make it worth 

while. 

 

And it goes on: 

 

This project will mean a great deal to Saskatchewan in 

terms of crop diversification through irrigation, the 

generation of hydro-electric power, the provision of 

adequate water supplies, flood control, and 

recreational benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those words were spoken 28 years ago by Tommy 

Douglas about Gardiner dam. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe people in this province want to see 

building. They want to see creation. They want to see 

development, whether it’s in water or whether it’s in paper or 

whether it’s in oil or whether it’s in rural communities – 

wherever it is. And people of all political jurisdictions – and I 

could haul them out, from Jimmy Gardiner to every political 

persuasion – when you talk to the people across this province 

they want to see that strategy developed. 

 

(1100) 

 

And water is one of them. The only thing that they will ask is, 

where have we been? Why has it taken 50 years to develop a 

Rafferty project? Why is it going to take so long to see this 

irrigation development when we can have water available – not 

imposed on people as they want to see it happen. They can use 

it. Drought-proof this southern part of the province. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a mandate. We have a mandate in this 

province to manufacture where we can here, to “Buy 

Saskatchewan” where it’s at all efficient and effective to do so, 

make sure Saskatchewan firms can compete and tender for huge 

projects that we have here. The corporations . . . The major 

public corporations we have in this province spend hundreds of 

millions of dollars, and when we came into power, Mr. Speaker, 

virtually none of that was purchased in Saskatchewan, virtually 

none of it. 

 

We have said, Buy Saskatchewan. We’ve asked the power 

corporation – not asked, we’ve told them – power corporation, 

SaskTel and others, you make sure you source Saskatchewan 

wherever possible to provide the jobs here and make sure that 

Saskatchewan people are allowed to compete for those. And 

people across this province, one corner to the other, agree, Mr. 

Speaker. They all agree. Nobody disagrees with that. The 

members opposite wouldn’t disagree with it. Buy Saskatchewan 

if it’s efficient, if you can cut your costs, and you allow that 

economic activity to take place at home. 

 

The only question they’d ask is: what was going on before? 

Why wasn’t it done before? Why would these huge 

corporations, spending hundreds of millions of dollars, 

managed by the government, not addressing local initiatives, 

not providing local people with an opportunity to compete? 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a long ways to go on that, and the 

mandate we have is, wherever possible allow Saskatchewan 

people to compete for those goods and services, whether it’s in 

health care manufacturing, whether it’s in the . . . whatever 

they’re going to use as motors or equipment or wire or whatever 

it is. In this province we’ve started, but we’ve got a long ways 

to go. 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

204 

 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, the mandate that we have received will 

be taken very, very seriously, and we are going to make sure 

that that manufacturing and that process and that access to those 

hundreds of millions of dollars will take place in the province of 

Saskatchewan and not in the province of Ontario. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to give a couple 

more examples because they’re important – and this is just in 

the “builds” part of our mandate, just building, developing. 

When I travel across the province and I ask people about a new 

agriculture college, everybody agrees we should have one. 

Nobody disagrees with that. A science centre of excellence for 

this province so that we can have the best research and the best 

management and the best varieties, the best kinds and qualities 

and types of animals, we should have it here. And to have that 

centre of excellence is universally accepted, and I suspect even 

by the members of the opposition. The only question again, Mr. 

Speaker, people will ask time and time again: why hasn’t it 

been here before? What’s been the hold-up? What were the 

priorities? 

 

We can go on, Mr. Speaker, and look at expansion of facilities 

for people. And particularly I’d like to point out the massive 

expansion in the development of facilities for senior citizens. 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the televised debates in this 

House is watched by an audience – a very unique audience – 

and to a very large extent by senior citizens. They watch the 

debates in this legislature because they want to know how their 

province is run and they have a great deal of experience, and in 

some cases they have the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate. We had a mandate in ’82, and 

we have a mandate now to provide as many new facilities for 

senior citizens as we possibly can. That mandate, Mr. Speaker, 

is to say, whether the price of potash goes up or down or 

whether the price of wheat goes up or down or whether the 

price of oil goes up or down, our senior citizens are going to 

need increasing, and an ever increasing share of housing and 

facilities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate to make sure that we 

would provide. And we are, Mr. Speaker. We are going to make 

sure. And I’ll tell you, as we’ve developed 1,500 new spaces for 

senior citizens in the last four years in this province, no one 

disagrees with that. Every community I go to, every single 

community as I go across this province would say, I agree. Let 

us create more and more senior citizen accommodations of 

several varieties to make sure that our seniors are comfortable 

and protected and in comfort. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no one disagrees with that. Some would ask, 

why wasn’t it done before? Some would ask, why was there a 

five-year freeze on the development of new nursing home 

facilities? Some would ask. Well the answer’s becoming 

evident, Mr. Speaker. The mandate that we have is to build for 

senior citizens. And I will say to senior citizens, that mandate 

will be taken very, very seriously by this administration and we 

will not put a freeze on nursing home construction in this 

province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The development and the building, Mr. 

Speaker, of a new entrepreneurial spirit to create jobs in this 

province is also very much part of our mandate. Now you could 

take, Mr. Speaker, the classic economic levers of development 

and you can look at them. You can say that they’re land and 

labour and capital, and you can put them together and you say 

you’ll have economic development. 

 

It really, Mr. Speaker, when you look at those three, they 

missed one important element, one important element, and 

that’s that entrepreneurial spirit that will create something new 

– create something new. I’m advised, Mr. Speaker, that half of 

the jobs at the turn of the century win this country, half of all 

the jobs in this country, will be provided by firms that aren’t 

even created yet today – aren’t even created yet today. 

 

New businesses, men and women who will create processing 

and manufacturing, supply health care equipment, supply this, 

supply agricultural chemicals, supply clothing, supply services 

and goods. That entrepreneurial spirit, Mr. Speaker, built this 

province and built this country. Well we have a mandate, Mr. 

Speaker, to encourage and help small business develop and that 

entrepreneurial spirit across this province, and everybody 

agrees. The opposition agrees. The public agrees. 

 

Help those people create new businesses and new jobs and new 

processing and new manufacturing and new, services linked to 

tourism – that entrepreneurial spirit needs to be developed and 

encouraged. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do that: 

an entrepreneurial institute; an entrepreneurial training program; 

help our young people be good managers; know how to deal in 

international markets; know how to manage funds. 

 

But the drive, Mr. Speaker, the drive, that spirit that can take 

land and labour and capital and put it together in a new form, is 

the magic – is the magic of the western world. We have sent 

every other jurisdiction in the world behind us so far, whether 

it’s in the Soviet Union or whether it’s in South America or 

wherever it is. 

 

That entrepreneurial spirit, the spirit of men and women to 

create new, to be free to create, is so powerful. The changes that 

we have made in the last hundred years in this continent dwarf 

anything else in the history of the world. And we’ve had the 

same land and the same labour and the same capital. And other 

jurisdictions in South America and other jurisdictions behind 

the great eastern wall have had the same land and labour and 

capital, but they’ve missed one thing – that entrepreneurial 

spirit and that freedom to create new. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate in this province to help 

men and women and children be creative, to use their 

God-given talents in every single possible way they can, to 

build their communities, to manufacture, to process, to develop, 

to be out there in the arts, to be in there in music, to be there in 

sports – all that spirit, Mr. Speaker. And everyone agrees. 

There’s only one question  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

205 

 

 

it raises: what was happening to it before? Where was the 

encouragement? Where were the incentives? Where was the 

freedom? It wasn’t there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will only say this: that entrepreneurial spirit that 

is in the heart and soul of every Saskatchewan person will be 

defended and defended and defended with this new mandate in 

this new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, part of the building 

responsibility for any government is to provide the 

infrastructure so that people can build – that is providing the 

power, the water and all, the roads, and the general 

communication and transportation systems. 

 

As I travel across Saskatchewan and I look at the new mandate 

that we have, I put that in the context of the Speech from the 

Throne. I’m reminded of three major projects that we have that 

people as well agree with. 

 

Natural gas distribution across this province has proved to be 

extremely important to the people of rural Saskatchewan. It’s a 

large project. It’s $350 million over 10 years. And everybody 

agrees with it. Everybody in the towns and villages, as I travel 

across this province, say bring us the natural gas to my farm, 

my town, my village, wherever it is, my community. They all 

agree. 

 

It cuts your costs in about half. We have no end of surplus of 

natural gas in western Canada, billions of cubic feet between 

here and the Rocky Mountains, and we’ll export it for 

generations. And they said, why can’t we have access to it? 

Well we are, Mr. Speaker. We have a mandate to provide 

natural gas to the towns and villages, to the farms, to help us 

process, manufacture, and have a competitive edge. 

 

And no one disagrees. Nobody disagrees. The opposition 

doesn’t disagree. Everybody agrees that that should be done. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The farmers sure agree. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well that’s true. The farmers do agree 

very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve been to some places where 

it’s saved them as much as 25 and as much as $50,00 a year in 

hog barns and other kinds of operations that they’ve had. 

 

They’ll say, why wasn’t it here before? We’ve had this gas; 

why wasn’t it a priority? What did the previous administrations 

do? Why did I have to pay those high prices for propane? Why 

couldn’t I have access to natural gas? Well it’s a good question. 

But they agree with this. 

 

Individual line service – a very expensive project for a Crown 

corporation to provide individual communication technology to 

everybody in the province; two-way communication, computer 

access, forecasting, management systems; the best 

communication management development system anywhere in 

the world. 

 

And we are providing it because the people of  

Saskatchewan said, I want my business. I want my children to 

be the best trained and have the best technology and the best 

communication system that there can be. 

 

And when I announced that, Mr. Speaker – and I say this 

sincerely and humbly – when I announced this to the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention, which is a cross-section of people across this 

province, politically and geographically and every other 

demographic way that you could look at it, they gave me a 

standing ovation because they would have access to the best 

technology and the best management and the best 

communication systems any place in the world, right at their 

farm, right at their home. 

 

And you travel across this province, and every single one of 

them will agree that that’s the kind of thing that a government 

should do in providing them with the structure to build, that 

basic economic, social structure, and they agree. They’ll have 

one question: what’s been going on in the past? Why didn’t 

people do it? What were they doing? Why have they forgotten 

us? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one more in the public utilities, because the 

three of them are about $1.5 billion. We are going to take power 

lines and we’re going to bury them in Saskatchewan. The 

engineers and others tell us it’s a very good idea not to put up 

posts or power poles when they rot away and they’ve been there 

for 25 years or more; and as they deteriorate, we should put the 

lines underground. It’s safer; it’s less costly. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re doing it all across the province, staged program over the 

next 10 years or more. And we’re manufacturing, Mr. Speaker, 

the cable in Saskatchewan – manufacturing the cable – and do 

you know who disagrees with that? Nobody. 

 

The whole province—the whole province – says this is 

absolutely the thing to do, bury those lines. It’s a lot safer; it’s 

less costly. Manufacture the wire in Saskatchewan. Don’t buy it 

form Ontario; do it here. We’ll manufacture it in Moose Jaw, or 

manufacture it in Weyburn, manufacture it wherever. The jobs 

are here, the costs are down, and people are safer, and it’s 

efficient project and we’re in on it, Buy Saskatchewan, and 

everybody agrees. 

 

The only question they have, Mr. Speaker, is: what was going 

on before? What were these people doing? Were they asleep at 

the switch? Why wouldn’t they allow Saskatchewan people to 

build? Why wouldn’t they have rural gas distribution systems? 

Why wouldn’t they have individual line service? Why wouldn’t 

they have the kinds of technology that was existing there? We 

have rural gas distribution system sin neighbouring provinces. 

Why wouldn’t they make that commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan and to the towns and villages and the cities that 

didn’t have it? 

 

(1115) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only say this. Everybody in 

Saskatchewan agrees that we should do this. They agree with 

the mandate, and they’ve give us a mandate to provide that kind 

of structure. 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

206 

 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I just point out the entire building thrust 

of this administration and this province will be based on the 

whole fact that if you work with people – with them, hand in 

hand – listen to them develop, listen to their ideas, go to their 

communities, then you can be successful in manufacturing, 

processing, and developing for generations to come. I will just 

say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to that mandate to build, we have 

received that from the people of Saskatchewan because they 

believe it is the strategy; it’s a plan. It’s linked to the future. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will take that mandate very, very 

seriously. 

 

I want to shift gears. The second mandate that we had, Mr. 

Speaker, was to protect the people of Saskatchewan. To provide 

protection against things that we normally can’t handle 

ourselves as individuals or as families. And any politician in 

this room or in this province that is not prepared to protect 

Saskatchewan families is out of step with Saskatchewan people. 

They want protection where they need protection against things 

that they can’t control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you an example. When international 

speculators run the interest rates up to 20 per cent or 22 per 

cent, people in this province say that is not fair; somebody 

should do something about it; we should have somebody in the 

middle to defend our family farm or our family business or our 

home owner, somebody. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate; we have a mandate. We 

had a mandate in 1982. We’ve got a mandate in 1986 to protect 

people against high interest rates. Mr. Speaker, and do you 

know who disagrees with that – nobody. 

 

Everybody says we should do that in this administration, and 

we’ve led North America in that protection – not only Canada 

but North America. We said we’d step in, and I don’t care if 

interest rates go to 30 per cent, they’re not going to be more 

than thirteen and a quarter, and now they’re not going to be 

more than nine and three-quarters in this province for 

home-owners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And I said, Mr. Speaker, everybody 

agrees. They only have one question: what was going on 

before? Where were the priorities of the previous 

administrations? What were they? Interest rates were running at 

22 per cent and not a dime, not a cent – no compassion, no 

caring – nothing. Worried about senior citizens; worried about 

farmers; worried about families? No compassion at all, and 

everybody agrees today the family should be protected against 

internationally high interest rates that can devastate an entire 

community. 

 

We had questions this morning . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We had questions this morning, you 

know, about a community like Lanigan because there has been 

a strike and it’s legitimate discussion about what we can do it 

fix it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at 22 per cent interest rates,  

community after community, the entire province of 

Saskatchewan was under siege by financial institutions and not 

one hand was raised to help people. And any small-business 

man, you try to make it go at 20 per cent interest rates; it’s 

impossible, and nobody would help them. 

 

Well, we have a mandate, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll say this very 

clearly, to protect Saskatchewan people against high interest 

rates. We took it seriously in ’82, we’re taking it seriously in 

’86, and we’ll take it seriously as long as we are government in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have a mandate to protect people 

against drought. It’s not easy, but as much as we can do to 

provide drought protection in this province we are going to do. 

Whether it’s international disaster mechanisms; whether it’s 

irrigation systems or various kinds of programs that we can put 

together, Mr. Speaker, we are going to take it on. 

 

I am not going to elaborate on a large number of things today. 

I’m sure my colleagues have, and I have from time to time in 

this House. Programs to protect people against some really 

difficult international problems. I would just raise this one 

because it’s current. Internationally it’s unfair. It’s unfair if a 

government like the United States government can take 

taxpayers’ money and subsidize their producers of whatever – 

agriculture, lumber, steel, what it might be – cars. It’s unfair, 

and if they pump millions of dollars into that product, 

encourage production, surpluses develop and the price goes as 

low as it’s ever been. We’d bear the brunt of that in agriculture 

or in any other product. And it’s unfair, and people in this 

province believe somebody should protect them against that. 

They should. 

 

If European governments in their wisdom, or not so much 

wisdom, decide that they are going to highly subsidize 

agriculture products and it wrecks world prices, somebody 

should protect the farmer because he has to carry it on his back. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you this part of our mandate. We 

have a mandate to defend farmers and defend anybody else 

against unfair international competition. Mr. Speaker, we have 

lobbied hard for that. We have developed a national agriculture 

strategy. We have developed a deficiency payment mechanism 

now, that in 1987 will literally double net farm income in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s the largest protection package 

we’ve ever seen in the history of Canada – in the history of 

Canada. The people of this province have given us a mandate to 

do that, and, Mr. Speaker, we will take it, that mandate in ’86, 

in ’87, and as long as we’re here, to provide the protection for 

people against unfair international activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want a government 

that is compassionate. Not just talks about it – talks about it, but 

moves on it. See real moves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

207 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they will ask . . . and if you get time 

to talk to them, if you go visit with them, they will say, I want 

to see a move on interest rates. And when you do something, 

they appreciate it. That’s why they provided us a mandate in 

’82 and again in ’86. We’re protecting the farmers for drought –

proof protection. If you do it and move . . . They don’t want 

promises, Mr. Speaker, they want delivery. They want delivery. 

They’re sceptical enough about political leaders and politicians 

that come in and out of the legislature. They want action. They 

agree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had extra-billing in this province for a long time, and some 

people had to pay even if they didn’t have money – had to pay 

more. And when we removed extra-billing, everybody across 

this province agreed. They all agreed. The only question they 

had – why so long? Where were the previous administrations? 

What were they doing? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want people of action, 

not just rhetoric, running the government. They elect people 

who say, if I’m going to protect you against extra-billing, you’d 

better be doing more than talking about it, you’d better be 

moving on it. That’s the mandate that we’ve received. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we received a mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan to protect people that retire. Particularly women 

would never have financial security at retirement. They didn’t 

have it. They couldn’t get a pension -–many of them wives, 

farm wives – no financial security when it come to retirement. 

None. Small businesses couldn’t have pension programs for 

their employees because they couldn’t afford it. Insurance 

companies made it too expensive. And people cried out across 

this province: protect us, give us some assurance at retirement 

that we can have some financial security and dignity, something 

that would be unique to us, something that we could look 

forward to rather than just maybe a welfare roll because I can’t 

get any financial security or any pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the help of the people and their advice, we 

have the mandate and have delivered the first ever North 

American pension program for home-makers and 

small-business employees and people of all demographic 

backgrounds. Everyone in this province —everyone – can have 

a pension at retirement; every single solitary person, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve even modified the whole welfare system so 

within years, two or three years, nobody will ever even retire in 

this province below the poverty level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate to protect people at retirement, 

and do you know who disagrees with that? Nobody. Everybody 

in this province says, that’s a very good thing to do. The only 

question they’ll raise is: what was going on before? Why 

wouldn’t they help us before? 

 

Do you know what the people want, Mr. Speaker? They want 

action. They want a government to go in and say, if you need 

pension legislation, then you pass that legislation so we can see 

what you are doing. Not talking about it for 10 years or 11 years 

or 30 years or 50 years. Let’s see you do something. I mean, 

you were elected to  

be responsible, to perform; not just be in power – to perform. 

 

Well we have a mandate, Mr. Speaker, to provide protection 

and interest rates and drought and extra-billing and pension 

legislation and drug and alcohol abuse, Mr. Speaker. The 

first-ever treatment centre for young people across the country 

or western Canada, is going to be developed in this province. A 

treatment centre, Mr. Speaker. Right now Saskatchewan 

children have to go outside the country, outside the country into 

the United States to get that treatment. People and their families 

want that kind of protection, Mr. Speaker, and we have a 

mandate to deliver that. The only thing they’d say: what was 

going on before? A lot of rhetoric, but no action. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they want protection, as well, against unfair 

taxes – unfair taxes. And I’ll go back and I’ll look, Mr. Speaker, 

when we removed the tax off clothes for families, and we all 

know the impact of a sale tax. Sales tax is very regressive. It’s 

the worst kind of tax because even the poor have to pay it. You 

can be on welfare and you have to pay sales tax; you’re still 

getting hit. Income tax, obviously, is different. Income tax or a 

flat tax – at least you’ve got some income before you pay the 

tax. A sales tax, Mr. Speaker, is in theory and in practice most 

difficult for the poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we removed the tax, the sales tax, off the 

power bills and we removed the tax off clothing and we 

removed the tax off energy like gasoline, ordinary 

Saskatchewan people said, it’s about time. It’s about time to get 

the ordinary family, the working people, a break against the tax. 

They can’t write everything off like a business man or a farmer. 

They said, give me a break. Give me a break. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s what they said. 

 

Well I’ll just say, we have been given a mandate to protect 

low-income people, to protect people who have not had those 

kinds of breaks in the past, to provide them with interest rate 

protect. Some of them, Mr. Speaker – I heard a little chirp 

across the way – some of them, Mr. Speaker, in 1982, some 

poor families were losing 2 to $300 a month because of 20 per 

cent interest rates; 2 to $300 a month. Not a year, not over 10 

years – a month. And nothing happened. Not one dime of help, 

and every month after month after month 2 to $300 taken out of 

the family and they’d eventually lose their homes. 

 

And when we came in, Mr. Speaker, we said, no more of that. I 

don’t care what the international speculators say. We are going 

to protect you and we’re going to take the tax off clothes and 

the tax off gasoline so low-income people who really feel the 

benefit – the marginal benefit is to them; not the high income 

but to the low income – they said, right on. And they agree 

today from one end of this province to the other that we should 

stand there and protect them against unfair interest rates and 

unfair taxes or unfairness wherever we can find it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only question they asked: what was going on 

before? Why wasn’t there that help for these individuals? 

Where was it? There was a lot of rhetoric. We heard talk about 

how they were going to help the poor and help these and help 

that, but when it came to digging in their pocket to protect them 

against the banks, or  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

208 

 

 

protecting them against taxes from Sask Power who charged 

sales tax on their utilities, not a dime. The Saskatchewan family 

of Crown corporations could bill them and bill them and bill the 

poor – bill the poor. Well, Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for 

itself. 

 

This province and these people want a government that will 

protect them and protect those that are most vulnerable – most 

vulnerable. Well, they asked for increased revenue for senior 

citizens. Well, the senior citizens in this province are very 

special to me and this administration, Mr. Speaker. They are the 

pioneers of this province and indeed this government. Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided, on the advice and the counselling to 

senior citizens, the largest, and maybe it isn’t even large 

enough, but the largest increase and the largest cash payments 

to protect the incomes of senior citizens in the history of this 

province and one of the largest in Canada. And that heritage 

program that we designed for senior citizens is for those people 

that built this province. And they want hospitals and they want 

nursing home capacity and they want some income insurance, 

and they didn’t have it before, Mr. Speaker. But they’ve got it 

delivered in spades. 

 

In the mandate that we have received, this government has 

received now in 1986, I’ll say this to senior citizens, Mr. 

Speaker: we will defend the health and the financial security of 

senior citizens as long as this government is in power in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We will be there to protect them 

against high interest rates, we’ll be there to make sure they have 

accommodations, and we’ll be there to make sure that they have 

cash when they need it, Mr. Speaker. We believe in the people 

that created this province and gave us the opportunities as we 

have today. And we’re not going to forget them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, and we will protect people 

in the work-force. This province has the highest minimum wage 

in Canada. I don’t know if it’s high enough, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously it’s a balance between having it as high as you can 

have it and still creating as many jobs as you can so the small 

firms that hire the people want to hire as many as they can. 

 

(1130) 

 

I know this – that we will certainly be competitive in protecting 

people against the wage levels, and we will compete. We have 

the best job record outside of Ontario in the country, the best 

employment record outside Ontario the last four years. In fact 

it’s probably number one in this province. Despite drought and 

grasshoppers and all kinds of problems, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had 

the lowest to the second lowest unemployment, year after year 

after year after year. 

 

Labour in this province, Mr. Speaker, knows that the salaries 

are good, the protection of their homes are there, the taxes on 

utilities are no longer there, the taxes on fuel is no longer there, 

and the minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, is the highest in the 

nation. I just point out. We have a mandate to stay the course, to 

make sure the minimum wage in this province is as fair as any 

place else in North  

America and as high as we can have it, Mr. Speaker, and still 

have the job creation record that we’ve had in the past. If we 

can make it better, we will. 

 

But that mandate is here, Mr. Speaker, and nobody disagrees 

with that. Nobody disagrees. They just want to see more 

economic activity, more jobs, more projects, more upgraders, 

more paper plants, more manufacturing, more diversification. 

And I’ve already spoken about that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the third part of our mandate is to manage – 

is to manage this province, Mr. Speaker. And anybody that 

doesn’t believe, and any politician that doesn’t believe that 

management is important, is out of step with the people of 

Saskatchewan. The people of this province want less red tape, 

Mr. Speaker. They don’t want rules and regulations on top of 

rules and regulations so that you can’t get anything done and 

you get the bureaucratic shuffle. We have a mandate to reduce 

the red tape, Mr. Speaker, and reduce those rules and 

regulations. I believe that we have now taken something like 

1,000 obsolete regulations off the books in the first four years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fourteen hundred. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, 1,400. Fourteen hundred rules, 

obsolete regulations off the books that were there. 

 

And people could go through various kinds . . . They could 

wake up in the morning to find themselves almost illegal, given 

all the rules and regulations. And they say to us, reduce the red 

tape. Why have inefficient duplication of rules and regulations? 

You know who disagrees with that? Nobody. They also say, do 

that. Provide that kind of efficiency and effectiveness. 

 

And they say, Mr. Speaker, make sure that government is no 

bigger than it has to be. We want to see government as efficient, 

as effective as we can. We shouldn’t have Crown corporations 

any bigger than they should be. We shouldn’t have departments 

any bigger than they should be. They certainly say, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is the time, this is the time for quality, not 

quantity – quality, Mr. Speaker – when it comes to various 

kinds of institutions. They don’t like big private institutions that 

are top heavy. They don’t like big government institutions. 

They don’t like big bureaucracies. 

 

And if you read any of the recent material on what’s happening 

with respect to the rest of the world, that’s exactly the case, and 

the people of Saskatchewan are right on the mark. The trend 

today is efficiency and effectiveness and quality. And the very 

large institutions, whether it’s General Motors, may find that 

they get beat every day by small manufacturing firms out of 

Japan which can show them. Because you have to be able to 

move, and move quickly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate in this province by the 

people of this province to be as efficient, as effective as we can, 

in Crown corporations, in government departments or whatever 

that we are doing. We have a mandate, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure that people can participate in government. And we have 

started it obviously in 1982 and have continued, and we will do  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

209 

 

 

more. 

 

The participation in Crown corporations through shares and 

bonds, so that people here can invest. And they love it, Mr. 

Speaker. Hundreds of millions of dollars of Saskatchewan 

money has gone into investment, and what they really like is 

not having to go to an international bank and borrow the money 

and pay Americans interest. If Sask Power needs some money 

because it’s going to build a power project or whatever it may 

be, it can go to the people of Saskatchewan and say, here’s a 

bond – safe, secure Saskatchewan Power bond – 8, 10 per cent 

money. And if you buy that bond, then Sask Power can borrow 

the money from the people, and the interest goes to the people. 

And Sask Power doesn’t have to go to New York and they 

don’t have to pay the difference in currencies and exchange and 

run that risk. And the interest doesn’t go to some New York 

banker; it goes to Saskatchewan people. And everybody agrees 

with that – everybody. The only question they say is, why 

hasn’t it done before? Where was the imagination? 

 

Why not let Saskatchewan people build. Even in terms of our 

Saskoil shares, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has 

said, it’s a very good investment; if I could invest I would. Just 

paraphrasing. I mean, members of the legislature couldn’t 

invest in it. 

 

Allow people in Saskatchewan to invest in their own 

corporations or to get interest on the money that they want to 

borrow. It makes eminent sense and people are saying, that’s 

running government efficiently and effectively in a 

participatory fashion. Allowing people to participate here and 

the interest going back to the province of Saskatchewan as 

opposed to international bankers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate to continue that – to 

make sure those Crown corporations are run as efficiently and 

effectively as possible; to make sure they source Saskatchewan 

wherever possible; allow the people of this province to 

participate directly and indirectly whether it’s shares or bonds 

or participatory instruments or, in fact, manufacturing for the 

Crown corporations. And we’re going to stay the course on that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, people of Saskatchewan have given us a mandate to 

lead, Mr. Speaker. They have given us a mandate to lead – to 

lead politically and to lead economically and to lead socially. 

And any particular politician in this room or in this province 

that doesn’t believe that the people of Saskatchewan want to see 

that national and international leadership, is out of step with the 

people of Saskatchewan. Because they believe that they are 

smart enough and intelligent enough and well enough informed 

of world events that we should be out there, Mr. Speaker, 

providing that leadership in many fronts. 

 

I’ll give you a couple of examples, but there are many. We have 

worked closely with the people of Saskatchewan and with the 

farm organizations to develop a Saskatchewan agricultural 

strategy. And we have changed the tax system; and we have 

changed the irrigation system. We’ve got a new agricultural 

college;  

we’ve got science; we’ve got combinations of natural gas 

systems; many, many things. And I won’t list them all. But a 

strategy for Saskatchewan that has direction, we know where 

we’re going. 

 

We’ve taken that strategy, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve carried it to 

the national level. It has taken a great deal of work but the 

people of Saskatchewan were right on. Their leadership, their 

view of what this province should be doing in agriculture was 

precisely what the national – the country – needed. The country 

of Canada needed an agricultural strategy. We took those ideas 

and we took them to every meeting that we could find, and 

particularly the first ministers’ meeting. 

 

Let’s talk about a national agricultural strategy. Let’s take the 

leadership role away. We have been hit with drought, and 

interest rates, and commodity problems, international trades 

problems, political problems internationally. Let’s show that the 

Saskatchewan people can have the lead and show them how we 

can do it. We’ve done it at home; why don’t we do it nationally. 

 

To make the story as short as we can, Mr. Speaker – we did. 

And the people of Saskatchewan put together the national 

agricultural strategy that was accepted by premiers and the 

Prime Minister of this country, and it’s the first time it’s ever 

been done. Mr. Speaker, that national agriculture strategy which 

is the framework for this country in food and agriculture for the 

next 25 or the next 50 years is now on the books, signed by the 

Prime Minister and the premiers, that says we have a vision. We 

know where we’re going to go in food and agriculture. We 

know what we have to do internationally, what we have to do 

locally, what we have to do to protect farmers, what we have to 

do in research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that obligation to politicians to provide leadership 

does not just end at the national level. It’s international as well. 

The people of this province want to see a world agricultural 

strategy that makes some sense. And the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be involved in that strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The agricultural trade wars are the 

number one trading problem in the world today. If you could fix 

that, you’d fix most of them. The multilateral trade 

negotiations, as the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade knows, focus on the bizarre policies of Europe and 

United States and others when it comes to agriculture. If we 

could have a world agricultural strategy that is inconsistent with 

Saskatchewan’s, consistent with Canada’s, and consistent with 

some other players around the world, Mr. Speaker, we can have 

a dramatic and powerful impact on our future for generations to 

come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have given us a 

mandate to go do that, not just deal with the problem in any 

particular corner of Saskatchewan; not just to deal with the 

problem in any particular corner of Canada, but to take our 

talent and our ideas, and the things that worked for us in the 

past, right to the international forum and make sure that we can 

make the changes there. It will  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

210 

 

 

have a very large impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will just say this. With respect to that mandate 

for leadership, this government will take it very seriously and 

we will not cease ever to make changes in the national 

agriculture strategy or other international strategies as long as 

this government is in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The development to take place on trade, 

Mr. Speaker, will need leadership. As the Leader of the 

Opposition has pointed out, we should have a free trade 

arrangement between the U.S. and Canada on potash. We need 

it – we need it. We need the same sort of rules Ontario has. We 

need to have those trading relationship with Japan, with China, 

with the Pacific Rim, with South America, and with Europe. 

We have a good reputation, Mr. Speaker. They like Canadians, 

and they particularly like people from Saskatchewan. We 

should be out there making sure that the changes that are taking 

place today are in our favour. We can’t just hope to sit back and 

get lucky. The world changes. The politicians change, the 

policies change, and we should be on the forefront making sure 

those changes are in our favour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate to do that and we’re going to 

take that mandate seriously. We’re going to provide leadership, 

not only on pension legislation but on social reform that 

protects people, particularly low-income people –people who 

really need that help, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s because of tax 

changes and tax reform, whether it’s because of pension 

legislation, whether it’s other protective measures, we will be 

there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to have a leadership role when 

it comes to trade and languages. I visited yesterday with the 

deputy secretary of the Communist Party of the province of 

Jilin who is heading the delegation here. And I was talking to 

him about our Speech from the Throne. And obviously he 

speaks Chinese and I speak English and we were talking 

through an interpreter. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to him, I said 

we are going to put more attention on training our young people 

if they want to be trained in that fashion, to learn the languages 

we use in trading with people around the world. And one of our 

major priorities will be Chinese. We have 1.2 billion people that 

are there as our customers, to a large extent because of potash 

and wheat and others. And young people pick up languages so 

quickly, so quickly. We are going to allocate public funds to 

make sure those students who want to learn Japanese or 

Chinese, those students who are prepared to go to spend six 

months or a year in China to learn the language and come back 

here developing trading relationships, have that opportunity. 

 

I mean, what’s the next wave after the computer, Mr. Speaker? 

Do you know what it is? It’s communication of any kind. And 

languages are one of the most important things that we can do. 

We’ve made dramatic steps in French in Canada. My children 

are all bilingual, and the next generation will be bilingual – 

more and more of the schools. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as this world becomes closer and  

closer, those communities that can speak more than one, more 

than two, more than three languages, and particularly the 

important trading language, are going to be on the forefront, not 

just in computer technology, but in good, solid, honourable, 

eyeball to eyeball relationships that people understand and they 

can trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to take a leadership role, a leadership 

role, not only on building and not only on manufacturing and 

not only on protecting, but on developing our skills and our 

young people’s skills so that we can be among the finest trader 

and the finest people with the finest reputation and the finest 

communicators any place in the world. And we can do it. 

 

My children are not intimidated by computers or technology. 

They just absorb it. There is a huge appetite for it. And they’re 

not intimidated by languages. When they start young, when 

they are getting through into high school and universities, they 

can pick them up quickly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this province. . . I’ll jut say this. We have a 

mandate in this province to make sure that we’re not behind any 

other jurisdiction when it comes to communication, technology, 

or languages. That mandate will be taken seriously because we 

will be there providing leadership – not only for this province, 

but indeed the country, if it has to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to close with 

just a couple of observations about the alternatives that we have 

in this province. I believe building and protecting people, 

providing good, solid management effectiveness, and providing 

the leadership, is a mandate the people of Saskatchewan have 

given this government. And they want people in this 

administration to provide those goods and services and those 

qualities and that direction for the next four to five years. And 

they agree, Mr. Speaker, they agree from one end of the 

province to the other. And you can go through – and I’ve just 

listed them for the last half hour or more – how people will 

agree all over the province that that’s the things that we should 

do. 

 

(1145) 

 

Well I want to give you a couple of ideas, Mr. Speaker, that I 

know the people of Saskatchewan don’t agree with, and that I 

will guard against, because they have told me time and time 

again. When interest rates ever go up again and farmers ever get 

into trouble and any government comes out and says, I’ll buy 

your land and put it in the bank and you can farm it for me, is 

going to be in trouble. Mr. Speaker, the land bank idea in this 

province is not something that everybody agrees with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nobody in this province wants the government to 

own the farm. And you can go across this province from one 

corner to the other . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to remind you of this 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I seem to have got 

the attention of some hon. members opposite because I’ve 

struck a chord. 

 

I’ll remind the young fellow that was speaking – that  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

211 

 

 

just got elected – what it was like in ’82. People in this province 

were facing interest rates at 22 per cent and the government 

wouldn’t do anything to help. And the answer was, from the 

minister of Agriculture at hat time, sell your land to the 

government. We’ll take it and we’ll own it and you can be the 

share-cropper. 

 

And do you what happened? Do you know what happened 

across the province of Saskatchewan? Nobody – not anybody – 

believed that was a good idea. Mr. Speaker, I will never, ever 

let this administration look people in the eye and say: I will 

provide no interest rate relief; I will buy your farm from you 

and I can run it. That will never, ever happen in this 

administration. Ever! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make another 

point that’s not going to happen under this administration. The 

Leader of the Opposition – and he can defend himself. He’s not 

here, but I’m going to use a quote that this. This is the 

Leader-Post, October 7th. “We’d be taking land of production.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point very clear. We have 

experienced Operation LIFT (Lower Inventories For 

Tomorrow) in this province. We have experienced other 

difficulties but in this province we are not going to solve the 

agricultural problems by adding to them. We are not going to 

take land out of production in the province of Saskatchewan as 

the solution to the farm problem. We will protect the land. We 

will have soil conservation and we will look after the water. 

We’ll look after the management and we’ll have wildlife, but 

we will not wholesale take acres and acres of production and 

pay people not to grow. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, any politician that stands up in this province 

and says that we’d be taking land out of production will not get 

the agreement of the people of Saskatchewan – will not get the 

agreement. It’s just like the land bank. You will not get the 

agreement. The things that I’ve talked about this morning and 

are in the Speech from the Throne are accepted by everybody, 

but these aren’t, Mr. Speaker. These aren’t. 

 

And I quote, and here’s the reason. This is The Western 

Producer, October 2, 1986, the Leader of the Opposition: 

“There is no God-given right to survive in farming.” That’s 

evident, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the agriculture policy 

when there was 20-some per cent interest rates and the answer 

was, I’ll take your farm. Well I guess there’s no right to farm 

under that. I mean, we left Europe because we didn’t want that 

to happen. We wanted to own our own farm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just make that point, Mr. Speaker. I will 

never forget that, and this administration will never forget that. 

The government is not in the farming business. We’ve set a 

record in the last four years of selling land back to farmers, 

even under difficult times, and we’re going to stay the course, 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe that entrepreneurial spirit that 

farms out there shows the productivity that is in the essence of 

Saskatchewan food  

production – not running it out of the government or the 

bureaucracy. I will never, ever let that happen. 

 

I remind the members opposite: when people were losing 

thousands of dollars a month because of high interest rates there 

was not a word out of the previous administration –not a dime – 

and they talk about compassion and they talk about food banks 

and they talk about all the good things they’re going to do for 

people, and not one cent when they lost their home and they lost 

their farm. What do they talk about? The Saskatchewan family 

of Crown corporations will run your farm. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I raise this – and it is partisan, and I admit it 

– because it is the very essence that I got into politics, because I 

wanted to see individuals and families and communities and 

people build with an industrial strategy that would allow them 

to go out into the world and compete and do well, not be 

smothered, not be overregulated, overruled with a bunch of 

rhetoric, but a government that would be sensitive and allow 

them to build the things that they want to build. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we heard about the building of potash 

mines, we’re heard about he building of paper-mills, we’ve 

heard about the building of bacon plants, and everybody agrees 

we should be doing this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the previous administration, I don’t believe the 

previous administration built one new potash mine – not one. 

Never built one. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the previous 

administration built one pulp company –not one. I don’t believe 

the previous administration built one bacon plant – not one. I 

don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that they built a paper-mill, that 

they built an upgrader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can look at pulp mills, and you can look at 

potash mines, and you can look at bacon plants – they didn’t 

build one. Bought a few. Bought a few. Took the taxpayers’ 

money and bought what was already here. Didn’t create any 

new economic activity in building and diversification and 

growth. No. They bought the mines that were already here and 

didn’t create one new job. All that money that they sent to New 

York — $600 million – all down to New York and the interest 

going there and not one job. 

 

And they talk about the poor and they talk about the children 

and they talk about seniors and they talk about families. What a 

waste, Mr. Speaker. I’ll never forget that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

never forget it. As long as this government’s in power, we’re 

going to build new; we’re not going to buy the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — What senior citizens would want us to 

buy the past? Why buy the trees that are there, or buy the roads 

or the lake or the mines or the packing plants? Any senior 

citizen would say to his children, go build a new home. Build a 

new business. Start a new activity. Don’t just borrow money to 

buy the past. 

 

It does not only make any economic sense, it doesn’t even make 

any political sense. You didn’t even hear about it in  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

212 

 

 

the last election that they were going to buy all this stuff again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I raise it because it’s the essence of the difference 

– the essence of the difference – and the member says we’re 

right, and he is right, and I agree with him. He would buy 

mines, and he would buy pulp mills, and he would buy packing 

plants, and I say, Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate across this 

province to build new—not buy the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the final mandate that we 

have in this province – the final mandate – is to listen to people. 

And nay politician knows, and any government knows that you 

will only do as well as you can listen to people – listen to men, 

women, children, people from all walks of life and all 

jurisdictions, communities, municipal governments, school 

boards, organizations. And we have a mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

And if I have learned anything in the first four years of our 

government, it is to listen to people. 

 

And I just say very sincerely that I’m going to be supporting the 

motion, the Speech from the Throne. And I say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, this administration will listen, and I will listen to 

the people, whether they’re farmers, whether they’re in towns 

and villages, whether they’re in businesses, whether they’re in 

cities – north, south, east, or west. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mandate to build and diversify and protect and 

grow and manage is only as good as the people that are doing 

that and staying close to the people of Saskatchewan. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, this administration will listen, it will 

manage, and it will build and it will protect, and it will provide 

leadership, nationally and internationally. This government, Mr. 

Speaker, will be a government of the people. I’ll be supporting 

the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 

deal of pleasure that I rise in this Assembly this morning to say 

a few words about the throne speech. It’s a particular pleasure 

for me because I was one of the members who did not have the 

privilege of sitting in this last Assembly when we witnessed all 

of the heavenly things that the Premier just talked about. 

 

And I would like to start off my remarks, if I may, by once 

again congratulating you on your selection as Speaker. I know 

that the last eight days in this Assembly have proven to be quite 

important and educational for all of us, and in particular 

yourself, and I think you’ve conducted yourself very well, My 

best wishes for continued good works in this Assembly. 

 

I’d like to also take this opportunity, if I may, to congratulate 

the mover of the address in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne, the member from Saskatoon Eastview. I at one point in 

the past had that privilege and I feel that it is quite an honour. 

And he did a very good job  

in making his presentation in his remarks. Also, my 

congratulations to the seconder from Pelly who, I think, if he 

doesn’t take too seriously the remarks of the Premier, will likely 

do a good job for his constituents in the future. 

 

I’d also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the 

government on its re-election. Many members that are not here 

now, I think would be interested in being in government at the 

moment. I know that the former member from Moosomin who 

was in the opposition gallery a few moments ago was a very 

good member in that caucus. He had done his job very well. He 

was an articulate speaker. He spoke on behalf of his 

constituents. And I personally thought, having known him 

between the period of ’79 and ’82, to be a very capable person 

comparatively to his colleagues. And I was always quite 

puzzled as to why he was never put in cabinet because I think 

he would have made one of the top five or six in that Executive 

Council. But it was nice to see him in the Assembly today and I 

think that we should all keep in mind that there are other people 

around that have served here and could have done a very good 

job. 

 

On election night on October 20, 1986, I had some interesting 

feelings and I wanted to share them with you this evening. I 

thought about two or three things. One, that when the victory 

was finalized in the constituency of Regina North West, a 

feeling of gratitude to those who had voted for me and my party 

in that constituency. And I also felt a substantial amount of 

gratitude to those who had worked for me in the election 

campaign, and though about my grandparents and my family as 

well. 

 

My grandparents came form the Ukraine in 1890s. They were 

one of the first wave of immigrants to this country. They 

homesteaded north of Dauphin, Manitoba, and farmed all their 

lives. My grandfather lived to the age of 96 and was a pioneer 

that Canadians can certainly be proud of and our family is 

proud of. 

 

I thought of my parents who are no longer with us; they are 

both deceased. My father died on the election day of 1979 when 

I was elected, and I thought of my mother as well who had 

passed away in July of ’83. And I thought primarily about what 

they had taught me to do as a child and as I was growing up, 

and what they had impressed upon me to try and do in the term 

of my life. They had encouraged me to treat all people with 

respect, to treat them like I would want to be treated myself. 

They also taught me to be as honest in my dealings with people 

and in my life and my family as I could. And I hoped I’ve 

fulfilled those goals in their life as I know I believe I have. 

 

I also want to remind members that we are elected to represent 

everybody in our constituency, and together as members in this 

Assembly we are elected to represent everybody in this 

province. And we must not forget that when we’re debating 

issues in this Assembly or when we are working in various parts 

of the province. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity as well to thank the voters 

directly, of Regina North West, for their overwhelming support 

on October 20th. Along with my gratitude to them, I offer a 

special thank you to the 400 people who worked in my 

constituency in my campaign and to the 800 families who 

publicly demonstrated their  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

213 

 

 

courageous support by placing a lawn sign on their property. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Those Regina North West families openly 

displayed their support for the New Democratic Party in spite of 

the threat of reprisals form the Conservative government, the 

government that the Premier has talked about doing so many 

great things for people and for families. And after listening to 

his remarks very briefly, you’d think everybody in this 

province, if they took them seriously, would have died and gone 

to heaven. And I don’t think that’s the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’re in a difficult period in this province, a difficult period 

for people who must always watch over their shoulders for PC 

reprisals, whether it be in the private or public sector. My party 

and I recognize and applaud the courage of our supporters to 

stand up for what they believe in. In particular, their courage to 

stand up to a PC government that rules this province, in many 

instances, like tyrants in a banana republic. 

 

(1200) 

 

Regina North West has 16,000 voters. It is the third largest 

constituency in the province. These voters and their families 

come from all areas of the city, the province, and the country. 

They work hard, those that are still working that is, and the 

number is getting smaller daily it seems. But they work hard in 

all sectors of the economy, including agriculture. 

 

My riding is a reflection of Saskatchewan, as many of them are. 

But the families who live there are concerned about either 

getting a job, or if they have one, concerned about the security 

of their job. They’re concerned and apprehensive about the 

future, Mr. Speaker, and where they and their children fit into 

that future. They’re concerned about what this PC government 

has in store for them. They’re concerned because they have 

suffered the anguish and anxiety of four and one-half years of 

Conservative rule in this province and they expect little to 

change in the future. This feeling has only been reflected with 

the content and thrust of the throne speech that we heard earlier 

last week. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the families of north-west Regina have 

placed their confidence in the New Democrats to protect them 

as much as possible form massive continued abuse by the PC 

government. They have placed their confidence in our party to 

protect them by electing 25 strong, able representatives in our 

party. And in this light, Mr. Speaker, I pledge to my 

constituents to work hard on behalf of their families over the 

next four years – and hopefully longer if they choose – to 

ensure that they have the representation that they deserve in this 

Assembly. I’ll work to confirm that it is better to light one 

candle than to curse the darkness. And together my colleagues 

on this side of the House will work to confirm Saskatchewan’s 

belief that it is better to light 25 candles than to curse the 

darkness reflected by the governing 37 members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Solomon: — My constituency is composed of many 

neighbourhoods – Regent Park and Lakewood and Rochdale 

Park; Walsh Acres, Sherwood Estates, McCarthy Park, 

Normanview and Normanview West. And I want to at this time 

in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, convey a message to them about 

an issue which I feel will concern them in the future – 

primarily, the issue of rail line relocations. 

 

There has been a rail line relocation committee that is funded by 

the city. They have spent in the area of $1 million to date 

putting forward a proposal to move the CNR yards which are on 

the south boundary of my constituency and on the north 

boundary of the Rosemont constituency – moving those yards 

and the CPR yards downtown, the CPR main line – to the 

north-west part of the city and the north-east part of the city. 

 

The Canadian Transport Commission (CTC) is now holding 

public hearings. The last one was this afternoon—or yesterday 

morning. They will reconvene on January 20th. And I wanted to 

inform my constituents through this Assembly that they should 

be looking very closely at what that rail line relocation plan is. 

 

I’ve looked at it very closely, I’ve made the representation on 

their behalf to he transport commission and I feel that it’s, very 

simply put, a catastrophe in planning. They are planning in 

moving the yards and the rail lines from one part of the city to 

another part of the city. They’re not getting rid of the problem 

or eliminating it. They’re transferring it from one location and 

time which is now, to a new location and time. 

 

And I feel it’s going to be really important that politicians at the 

municipal level, and the CTC and others, and in particular 

citizens in this city, look very closely at this plan and make the 

conclusion, as I have and many others have, that to spend $57 

million in phase 1 and a further $40 million in phase 2, to just 

move the problem from one part of the city to the next is a 

major mistake. If we’re going to move the rail yards and move 

the lines, that we move them to a location that is a permanent 

location, either farther north outside of the city so there’s no 

longer problems, or to an area east, west, or south. There are 

many, many options. 

 

When I took a look at the proposals that were put forward and 

the map that the rail line relocation committee had drawn up, 

they proposed in phase 1 to build the yards north-east of the 

community of Uplands which is in the north-east and north 

constituencies, on their boundaries. They planned to move it 

930 feet north-east of the house northern-most in Uplands. And 

in my view that’s a mistake for a number of reasons. 

 

One, the aquifer is right underneath the yards that they propose. 

The aquifer provides 30 per cent of the drinking water in 

Regina and everyone knows that the quality of that water now is 

questionable. Whether we can further endanger our own 

livelihood by polluting our water in the future, we should be 

very, very careful about that. 

 

I would also like to point out that there are some really strange 

discrepancies and some mysteries presented by  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

214 

 

 

the presentations that have been put forward by the CTC. They 

plan to run the CPR main line 930 feet north of Rochdale Park, 

the residents of Rochdale Park and Lakewood. And what that 

will do, in essence, is will provide a main line for between 20 

and 40 trains a day with a north-west prevailing wind blowing 

diesel fuel into the community, running it on the Condie Ridge 

which is the high point of the city, (actually the high point of 

the Regina Plain), and if there was a spill to occur, such as a 

chlorine gas spill, which is a heavy gas, it would naturally seek 

lower ground and it could possibly be a potential major disaster 

for not just north-west Regina but all of the city, indeed. 

 

So I want people to be aware of that. I will personally be trying 

to meet with more people. I’ve met with all of the residents of 

Lakewood on a number of issues over the past 18 months. I 

have not spoken to all of them on this issue but I plan to do that 

in the near future and to inform them of what kind of 

catastrophe that this plan puts forward to them. 

 

I would also like to encourage any members of the public to go 

forward to the CTC. The juggernaut of the rail line relocation 

can only be stopped by the CTC at this point, or amended. I 

personally have made recommendations that the CNR and the 

CPR and the city be ordered to get together and negotiate a new 

location to ensure that the safety factor is looked at in a closer 

light, that our environment is better protected and that the three 

parties can come to an agreement. 

 

What disturbed me a little bit in my presentation was that the 

CNR and the CPR both supported my contention and my 

intervention. And I thought about that for a bit, but I talked to 

them before and afterwards and everybody that’s made any 

intervention on this matter has opposed it for very 

well-documented and very important reasons. And the only 

group that seems to be supporting it is the mayor of the city. 

 

I drove out to where the yards are going to be located and there 

are wheat fields all around except in two locations. On the east 

side of the yards there was wheat field all around, but where the 

line was going to come through was a property owned by 

Ramsay Construction. On the west side of the yard . . . I’m 

sorry, that was west side. On the east side of the yard there were 

two properties through which the rail line were going to go 

through, one owned by Genstar and Trimac. 

 

And what I started thinking about is at what cost are we 

building these yards where they are, environmental problem, 

the noise problem, the pollution problem, but in fact possibly 

increasing the cost because we have to purchase or expropriate 

these properties right here with wheat fields all around. None of 

the railways wanted to build there. They wanted to go farther 

north, another mile north or north-east, which would solve the 

problem for future city development and certainly solve their 

problem in terms of possible safety precautions and so on. 

 

But I’ll be saying more about that as time goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

But I did want to take this opportunity to inform my 

constituents and to ask them to call the rail line relocation 

committee in the city hall and to ask them if  

there is some objection to this proposal that they try and make 

some presentation, either as a group or individuals, at the 

hearings. And I’ll be speaking with them on that matter. 

 

It’s been the tradition in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when an 

opportunity afforded itself, to boast about all of the government 

expenditures made in the members’ constituency, in particular 

when the member is on the government side. Well, I do not sit 

on nor indeed support the government side at this time, but I’d 

be pleased to speak about the recent government expenditures 

in north-west Regina. 

 

North-west Regina has received a government grant to convert 

an empty school into the Pasqua Neighbourhood Recreation 

Centre on Pasqua Street. We have seen in our riding the 

building of Sherwood Village Library on Rochdale Boulevard. 

The Government of Saskatchewan has contributed significant 

funds to upgrade and refurbish Regent Court in to Regency 

Court, a housing development which provides decent affordable 

housing to those who have a more difficult time financially to 

meet rent commitments in the private markets. The 

Saskatchewan government has spent $2.3 million to build the 

North West Leisure Centre on Rochdale Boulevard and has 

constructed two primary schools, Centennial and W.H. Ford 

School, and approved one high school. 

 

That sounds like a great deal of activity for a four and one-half 

year term. But wait – all of these projects didn’t happen in four 

and one-half years. They didn’t even happen in three and 

one-half years. They were undertaken in just the two and 

one-half year period, Mr. Speaker. What’s that you say, 

member from North, just two and one-half years? That’s sounds 

like a record anyone could be proud of – doesn’t it? – and it is. 

 

But let me tell you when all of these projects were undertaken, 

Mr. Speaker. They were undertaken not by a conservative 

government opposite. Were they initiated by the previous PC 

member of the constituency of North West? No, absolutely not. 

Mr. Speaker, all of the projects that I have mentioned were 

initiated, approved, or completed between 1978 and 1982 when 

an NDP member represented North West constituency and 

when an NDP government represented this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Not one project in the last four and a half 

years has been undertaken in the north end of Regina at all by 

this Conservative government. I’d like to say that the NDP 

government between ’78 and ’82, they undertook these projects 

because they cared about families, not like the PC government 

who are more concerned about oil companies, banks, and 

multinational corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most observers of the political scene in 

Saskatchewan, and of the recent throne speech in particular, are 

in agreement that it has become painfully obvious that this 

Conservative government is a government in decline. And as 

their slippery slide downhill to political oblivion becomes faster 

and faster,  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

215 

 

 

they are desperately trying to dig their heels in to stop or at least 

slow down the pace of their demise as a government. This 

throne speech by the PC government is a deliberate attempt to 

halt their fall. It is yet another rhetorical appeal to the people of 

Saskatchewan to tighten their belts while they and their rich 

friends let out a few more notches. 

 

But more than this, this throne speech contains an ominous and 

dangerous message to the people of Saskatchewan from the 

Conservative government. Mr. Speaker, in a brilliant flash of 

light, a brilliant flash of insight, this throne speech informs us, 

and I quote, “The world economy is in transition.” My, my, my! 

The world economy is in transition. 

 

Where did the Premier come upon this earth-shattering 

revelation that the world economy is in transition? I didn’t 

know where he found out that information until I discovered in 

a newspaper article that he found out the world economy is in 

transition by reading an article in a magazine flying on an 

airplane from Ottawa to Regina. Now what puzzles me is why 

couldn’t he have found that out from all the high-priced 

Conservative help he has in Regina. He has probably close to 

150 staff members in his department, many of them making 70 

or 80,000 or 90,000 or 100,000 a year or more, and they 

couldn’t tell him what’s happening. Either they didn’t know, or 

what is more likely, the Premier and his cabinet wouldn’t listen 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not often I agree with much the Leader-Post 

editorials espouse, but I do agree with the editorial comment 

made in this regard to the throne speech on December 4. It goes 

on and I quote: 

 

What is dispiriting is an absence of positives. Premier 

Grant Devine continues to butter up the people of the 

province for their pioneer qualities of ‘openness, 

ingenuity and perseverance’ which will enable us to 

‘exploit changes in the world economy.’ 

 

And it goes on: 

 

There are references carried on from those in the last 

legislature to ‘protecting’ the people from the outside 

calamities, all apparently justifying further deficit 

financing and warning that more must come. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is all that this throne speech represents, a 

shallow justification for a bad job done by this Devine 

government, a faltering attempt to justify the wasteland created 

by this Conservative government over the past four and 

one-half years they have been in control of the province and the 

lives of our people. 

 

Time doesn’t permit me to outline all of the serious 

ramifications this throne speech has for the people of 

Saskatchewan, but here are a number of areas I feel should be 

brought to the attention of Saskatchewan people, areas of 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that will seriously affect each person in 

this province unless the fly-now,  

pay-later philosophy of this government is revealed for what it 

is. 

 

When I speak to people in my constituency, I find them quite 

aware of the breakdown of prices in volume and employment in 

the national and international community. They are aware of it 

because it concerns them and it affects them. And they too 

travel on airplanes like the Premier, and they too are able to 

read magazines. Yet this throne speech offers either no 

solutions or solutions which certainly bear close scrutiny. Let’s 

look at a few of the Devine solutions offered. 

 

To small business they offer a five-year $50 million high 

technology strategy. Apparently the ideas is that it will help 

small business buy computers and high-tech office equipment. 

The question is, how will it help small business? 

 

It’s my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that most small businesses in 

Saskatchewan are efficient and well run. While new high-tech 

equipment would help them somewhat in their businesses, it 

seems logical to assume that they would attempt to purchase 

such equipment themselves if it were to make them more 

competitive or if this was the critical need of their business. 

 

What is more important is who will get the contracts for 

supplying this equipment to these small businesses? Will the 

contracts be tendered? And from the record of the government 

to date, the answer to that one is painfully obvious. Or is there 

some other method this government has in mind so that friends 

of the government can benefit from the $50 million that will be 

spent? 

 

Is this one of the ways this government is going to provide the 

private sector with the opportunity to compete with the 

government in the provision of services? We 

I'll be watching very carefully who really is going to benefit 

from this huge purchase of high-tech equipment – the small 

businesses for whom it is intended, or the large corporations 

who fund the Conservative Party and sell hardware. 

 

Finally, when these funds for new equipment are used up, who 

will pay the ongoing costs of servicing this equipment and 

replacing it? Who knows? The throne speech doesn’t give us 

that kind of information, and nor will the Progressive 

Conservatives. And most business people are sceptical about 

whether the government can accomplish anything with this 

program, anyway. 

 

What should better serve small business is getting more 

Saskatchewan people back to work so they can spread the 

money around in the economy. Instead of giving $300 million 

per year in tax breaks to the oil companies, and massive 

give-aways to Weyerhaeuser and Peter Pocklington and other 

international corporations and banks – instead of corporate 

give-aways, spend the money in Saskatchewan for 

Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

For every dollar spent in our economy, another $3 is generated 

through the multiplier effect. If we were to instead spend the 

$400 million to $500 million in this province this government 

across the way annually gives out to their out-of-province 

corporations and friends, the  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

216 

 

 

effect would generate $1.5 billion of economic activity right 

here in this province —billions for all of Saskatchewan people, 

not billions for friends of the Conservative Party outside our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — If these corporate welfare give-aways had not 

taken place, there would be a far more manageable deficit in our 

province, and more people working, and a larger contributory 

base for income tax purposes, and obviously fewer social 

problems. Simple economics to help people. 

 

But instead the Conservatives prefer complex economics for 

their corporate, multinational, and national friends – the poor 

struggling friends of the PCs – those struggling corporations 

like Exxon and Shell and Texaco and Weyerhaeuser and Peter 

Pocklington. 

 

The PCs shipped them these tax breaks and they, their friends, 

shipped the tax breaks back to the parent internationals and 

nationals outside this province which then filters down to the 

stockholders throughout the world, all of them and the majority 

of them 99.9 per cent outside of this province. All we get in 

return, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for our massive subsidy of these 

Conservative friends, is a huge deficit and, of course, long-term 

debt for our children. 

 

But the PC party believes in generous corporate contributions to 

their political war chests, contributions which pay for the PC 

propaganda, which in turn encourages Saskatchewan people to 

vote PC, so the drain on their tax dollars continues unabated for 

the friends of the Tories. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, rather than commit themselves to 

improving our economy to create jobs, they prefer the corporate 

handout which in turn finances their party. The three 

fundamental principles of the conservative party: greed, 

materialism and selfishness. Three cornerstones that they 

promote and feed themselves through their corporate friends. 

 

Some aspects of the throne speech which could be considered 

comical, Mr. Speaker if it were not for the tragedy they reap on 

the ordinary people of this province, are points that I’m going to 

raise right now. 

 

Take for instance this government’s answer to the serious 

economic problems through creating research institutes. This 

government wants to create more research institutes, and that’s 

an honourable thing if you have some objectives. We have 

institutes already in this province and we have universities. We 

have research capabilities already in existence in a numb of 

fields. But the research is difficult when universities and 

institutes that exist now are so badly underfunded by the 

Conservative government. 

 

Each day we hear about the effects of cut-backs at our existing 

post secondary institutions – places, Mr. Speaker, capable of 

providing the kind of information the Premier seems to think 

we need. But the Premier says our  

existing research capabilities and the people involved aren’t 

good enough. We need to create some new institutions, and we 

need to cut back further at the universities and other existing 

institution so that our young people are suffering even more. 

 

So while more and more Saskatchewan people are denied the 

capability of solving their own problems through existing 

institutions, more money will be made available for five or six 

or seven new institutes. Our own existing universities will have 

budgets slashed even further while new are created. For what 

purpose? Well if you have to build all these new institutes and 

do some more studies, you can effectively stall long-term 

commitments to real solutions to Saskatchewan’s economic 

development. 

 

It gets worse. There’s something very frightening about this 

government’s proposal to create a government department of 

human resources, labour and employment. In the same breath as 

the throne speech mentions this, it says that civil servants 

should not look forward to pay increases, that social assistance 

programs will be continually reviewed, and that the 

requirements for health services will be reviewed too. 

 

This sounds very ominous to me. It looks very much like 

creations of a giant bureaucracy designed to undermine working 

people and their unions. It appears that further attempts will be 

made to cut back on services to those who need them most. And 

further, it looks clearly like we can look forward to a 

fundamental change for the worse in the quality of health care 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, in one way this throne speech does have 

some consistency with previous speeches by this government. 

There will be even more tax and royalty breaks for the oil 

companies. No mention of tax breaks for individuals or 

small-business, no mention for more long-term, full-time jobs 

for people, but more hand-outs for oil companies. It seems that 

$300 million in royalties and tax breaks each year just wasn’t 

enough for the poor oil companies. They need even more to do 

the big, tough jobs of drilling for oil in existing pools. However, 

small business can only look forward to $50 million in fancy 

office equipment with no tax breaks for them or for the people 

who work in them. And the unemployed and low-income 

families get blamed again by this government for their 

incompetency and for the rising costs of their mismanagement. 

 

The Premier states in the throne speech that he intends to give 

even more taxpayers’ money away. After four and a half years 

he has decided that government workers are incapable, totally 

incapable of providing services as efficiently as private 

companies. So he’s going to allow private companies to 

compete with government in the provision of services. Of 

course, then the government won’t have to be responsible, will 

it? Now that this government has blamed its problems on 

everybody else in the world . . . In ’82 they blamed them on the 

NDP; in between ’82 and ’86 they blamed them on the NDP; 

during the campaign they blamed them on international 

economic cycles. But now it’s going to pass on its 

responsibilities to the private sector in Saskatchewan. 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

217 

 

 

All of this is meant to somehow make Saskatchewan world 

class – to use the often-quoted phrase of the Premier. By 

undercutting home-grown industries and workers, we are 

somehow going to be more competitive in the world markets. 

This view, Mr. Speaker, from a Premier who stood by doing 

nothing while the federal government made a decision not to 

provide the CF-18 contract to a Winnipeg firm. 

 

This view from a Premier who couldn’t and wouldn’t stand 

with a sister western province on an issue which had to do with 

the very thing he talks about in the throne speech – the ability of 

a province to diversify its economy. Who did the Premier stand 

with? He stood four-square with the Prime Minister – 

four-square, shoulder to shoulder – with the Prime Minister 

from central Canada, who is plummeting like stone in the polls. 

 

But that’ll change as Mr. Mulroney’s popularity declines, 

because as we all know, the government opposite never acts. It 

does a poll, it hesitates, then it reacts. And that’s exactly what 

it’s going to do when it finds that the wrist chain that they have 

with the federal government is going to draw them down into 

the gutter where the federal government is now grovelling. 

 

The Premier clearly said by this actions that he really does not 

believe what he says he believes in. This government can no 

longer attempt to straddle the fence and keep both ears to the 

ground at the same time. Pretty difficult thing to do. Either it’s 

committed to the people in this province or it should clearly 

state where its real loyalties lie. And we all know where its real 

loyalties lie. It’s tough to hide the fact many PC cabinet 

members have oil on their boots and banker’s letter-head on 

their desks. 

 

What we are seeing in Saskatchewan and Canada is a 

conspiracy. What we are seeing in this province and this 

country, Mr. Speaker, is a conspiracy on the part of 

conservative governments everywhere — a conspiracy to 

change the face of government so the traditional purpose of 

government, to deliver services to families and to protect 

families through various social programs in times of need, is 

weakened to suit their own cruel, costly, political purposes. 

 

What they are doing in essence is saddling government with 

massive debt, nearly $3 billion in Saskatchewan’s operating 

budget alone this year. They’re saddling government with 

massive debt so that government’s only responsibility with 

massive debts so that government’s only responsibility down 

the road is to manage debt, not introduce or improve or manage 

programs needed by people in our province. 

 

They are going to set this province and this government 

provincially, and this government federally, into a cycle that the 

only job that we are going to have to do as legislators is to 

figure out ways to pay the banks and the bond dealers around 

the world, not in this province. 

 

And the job of government will be, I predict, thanks to the 

Conservatives opposite, not program delivery, but debt 

management – spending our resources, satisfying the 

requirements of the banks and bond dealers outside our 

province, not spending our resources to create jobs or to  

deliver needed programs to our people. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly have a lot to say. But 

I think I’m going to be around here for a few more months, and 

hopefully a year or two. And I will be glad to try and convey 

and share some of my ideas with this Assembly, and in most 

part to continue to represent my constituency in a way that they 

have not seen for the last four or five years. 

 

The other day I went to a Christmas concern. My six-year-old 

Jennifer had a concert at Ruth M. Buck. Ruth M. Buck School 

is located actually on the boundary of Regina North West and 

Rosemont constituencies. And at that concert, I watched with a 

great deal of emotion – because I do get emotional around 

Christmas time; it’s a very important time for families. But I 

watched the families during the concert and I listened to the 

children. And what appeared to me to be the most important 

message from the children at that time was, as I was listening to 

their songs and admiring the work they had done in terms of 

preparing for the Christmas concert, I thought about where they 

were going to live in the future and what kind of future they 

were going to have. 

 

I think that it’s really important for all of us to remind ourselves 

on a regular basis that the job that we do in this Assembly is for 

the benefit of our children. J.S. Woodsworth once said, “What 

we desire for ourselves, we wish for all.” And I think that that is 

something we have to keep in mind, not only for all of us 

currently that are alive and currently working and operating in 

our economy, but for the children that are now in school, that 

are looking towards having some career, having a world of 

peace, and so on. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must inform the Assembly that under rule 

13(3) it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate and put the 

question on the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Blakeney 

Prebble 

Brockelbank 

Shillington 

Koskie 

Romanow 

Rolfes 

Mitchell 

Upshall 

Simard 

Solomon 

Kowalsky 

Atkinson 

Anguish 

Hagel 

Lyons 

Calvert 

Trew 

Smart 

Van Mulligen 

Koenker 

Goodale 

— 22 

 

Nays 

Devine 

Muller 

Duncan 

Andrew 

Martineau 

Johnson 

McLaren 

Hopfner 

 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

218 

 

 

 

Berntson 

Taylor 

Swan 

Muirhead 

Maxwell 

Schmidt 

Hodgins 

Gerich 

Hepworth 

Hardy 

Martin 

Petersen 

Swenson 

Martens 

Baker 

Toth 

Gleim 

Neudorf 

Gardner 

Kopelchuk 

Saxinger 

Britton 

 

— 30 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is this a point of order? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I was interrupted almost in the middle of my 

remarks. I still have just one or two minutes left before I finish 

my speech in the address in reply. I had the floor when you 

interrupted me. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — According to the rules of the practice of this 

House when a member is speaking prior to interruption for the 

amendment vote, he loses his place unless he is given leave by 

the House. Is leave granted for the member to continue? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. 

members. I just wanted to take one more minute and finish my 

remarks. When I was talking about the Christmas concert at the 

Ruth M. Buck school and the children that were present, I 

wanted to at that point try and say a few words to the members 

here before the Christmas season started. I would like to 

certainly be the original author of something that was 

inspirational, but I thought it would be more appropriate at this 

time to just read a message that Tommy Douglas once 

conveyed and I’d like to quote in the record if I may. And I 

quote: 

 

The Yuletide season is not time to talk about politics 

or national affairs. This is a time to think about 

Christmas and what it means for us and all mankind. 

We usually associate Christmas with sprays of holly, 

tinselled trees and gift-wrapped parcels, but surely 

these are only the trappings of Christmas. Its true 

meaning lies much deeper. To find its real significance 

you must go back to those words which some lowly 

shepherds heard on the Judean hills 2000 years ago, 

“Peace on earth and goodwill towards men”. 

 

Peace on earth is not something we have achieved but 

something for which we must strive if mankind is to 

survive. If Christmas means anything, it should mean 

that like the shepherds of old, we catch a vision of the 

world as it ought to be and not as it is. 

 

If we and our children are going to live in a world of 

peace, the spirit of Christmas must be part of our 

everyday living and permeate our national life. If we 

live for ourselves and ourselves alone, we are 

desecrating the message of Christmas in delaying the 

day when peace on earth shall not be merely a fervent 

hope but a blessed reality. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to convey  

cordial greetings to all members present and to extend my best 

wishes for peace, goodwill, and happiness throughout 1987 and 

throughout this Chamber. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and privilege 

for me to stand in this House and represent the people of the 

Canora constituency. 

 

I would first offer my congratulations and support to you, Mr. 

Speaker. I feel that you, sir, have the ability and the integrity to 

serve the position with great distinction. I would also like to 

express congratulations to all my colleagues on both sides of 

this House who have been elected to serve in this the 21st 

Legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. Let us work 

together so that the people of Saskatchewan are the benefactors 

of our efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a few remarks about the 

people of the Canora constituency. These people of my 

constituency saw fit to send me to Regina as their representative 

and they did it with a greater majority than the Progressive 

Conservative Party enjoyed in the 1982 election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — This speaks very highly of the Premier of 

this province and the Progressive Conservative government and 

is a clear-cut endorsement of our policies and programs. Mr. 

Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not take a few moments to 

talk about the excellent leadership of our Premier. 

 

In Canora constituency, people respect the Premier as a leader 

they have faith in, a man they can trust. The Premier is known 

as a straight shooter. There is no doubt in my mind that the 

Premier was the key reason why this Progressive Conservative 

government was returned to office. People believe in the 

programs of our Premier; they know he has the courage to do 

what it takes to build Saskatchewan. I know that my 

Progressive Conservative colleagues have spoken in support of 

the Premier, but I believe the facts need to be emphasized. 

Premier Grant Devine, the Premier of Saskatchewan, is by far 

the best premier in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be in this 

legislature as a part of this Progressive Conservative team. Mr. 

Speaker, when a constituency located in what is often called 

“red square” can return a Progressive Conservative member to 

the legislature, there is a clear and decisive indication that rural 

Saskatchewan has become a free enterprise area. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is another reason why the people of 

Canora constituency are once again on the government side of 

the House. That reason, Mr. Speaker, is because of the superb 

effort that was made by the people of my election team. These 

people dedicated approximately 28 days of non-stop 

campaigning to  

  



 

December 12, 1986 

219 

 

 

ensure the re-election of this government. 

 

The men and women of my campaign team can take pride in a 

job well done. I personally and sincerely recognize the 

hundreds of people who canvassed, door-knocked, put up signs, 

worked in the office, and just did every job that needed doing. 

Today I hope they feel that this victory was their responsibility. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly describe my constituency. It 

is made up of many diverse nationalities and interests. It 

stretches from the southern farming communities of 

Willowbrook and Jedburgh to the forest reserve areas of 

Usherville, Endeavour, and Rockford. We have the beautiful 

lake resort areas that touch Springside, Theodore, Tadmore, and 

Amsterdam. 

 

We go to the west to communities such as Tiny, Buchanan, and 

Rama. Our largest trading centres are Canora and Preeceville, 

with Sturgis not far behind. You can hunt deer at Insinger or 

Gorlitz in the southern part, then pursue moose and elk at 

Ketchen or Hazel Dell or Okla or Lintlaw. You can visit with 

some of the most successful farmers in the province at 

Ebenezer. 

 

I feel that I represent one of the most friendly, honest, and 

hardest-working areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, I am very 

proud of the people I represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, they are builders, and they 

are fighters of doom and gloom, and they want to be a part of 

Saskatchewan and its history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to examine in a little more detail 

some of the reasons why the Canora constituency has returned a 

Progressive Conservative member to the legislature. The people 

of my seat know and acknowledge that in the past four years 

this government has protected, it has built, and it has provided 

opportunity. Mr. Speaker, when you talk protection to the 

people of Canora, you talk about 6 per cent farm production 

loans to our farmers; you mention the abolition of the provincial 

tax on gas and you talk about mortgage rate protection for home 

owners. The people of the Canora constituency know that the 

Progressive Conservative government is there to help when 

help is needed. 

 

We have had, and continue to receive, excellent co-operation as 

we build our constituency. Major school renovations have been 

approved, and in some cases completed, in Sturgis, Springside, 

Rama, Preeceville, and Endeavour. Senior citizen housing units 

have been built in Buchanan, Springside, Theodore, and 

Canora. A new hospital will be built in Theodore in 1987. 

 

The farmers of the Canora seat are extremely interested in the 

announcement that production of farm chemicals will take place 

within the province. These are the kinds of ideas that they like 

because this investment will bring down farm chemical prices 

while at the same time providing jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

Mr. Speaker, within 40 miles of Canora are located three major 

lake resort areas. Within that area, we also have eight golf 

courses, of which six have grass greens. I mention this, Mr. 

Speaker, because this type of infrastructure is vital in the tourist 

industry. 

 

Once again, the people of the Canora constituency welcome the 

government announcement of a 5-year, $50 million program to 

stimulate tourism industry expansion in our province. Our 

business people are elated about tourism because this 

government has announced that in expanding the tourism base 

they will be directing this program to local communities. This 

Progressive Conservative government will assist local 

communities and cultural groups to develop their individual 

strengths in tourism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canora constituency has one of the highest 

senior citizen population groups in the province. This makes 

our health care program of paramount importance to us. The 

people of Canora note that our government is now spending 

over $1,000 on every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan, 

which is the best in Canada. 

 

We also note, as I mentioned earlier, the senior citizen housing 

units that have been built, the new hospital at Theodore, and 

additions of special care beds to lodges at Canora and 

Preeceville. We welcome and are appreciative of all this 

assistance which has been provided. But, Mr. Speaker, our 

needs are unique and constantly increasing. Therefore, I pledge 

to the people of the Canora constituency that I will continue to 

press and ask our government for assistance in providing 

adequate care for our elderly and our sick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at White Spruce the government of Saskatchewan 

is going to establish a new drug treatment centre for teenagers 

and young people. This drug treatment centre at the former 

Canadian forces base will be the first of its kind in Canada. It 

will provide a family-orientated drug treatment program. I 

congratulate the Premier and the government in the leadership it 

has shown in establishing this drug treatment centre at White 

Spruce. 

 

The problem of alcohol and drug abuse is a serious one in 

today’s society. It is a tragedy so many people are touched by 

these problems. The Government of Saskatchewan is showing 

real leadership in its five-point attack on drug and alcohol 

abuse. The facility at White Spruce will go a long way in 

helping those with drug and alcohol problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the home improvement grant has helped many 

home owners in the Canora constituency to carry out all sorts of 

renovations and additions to their homes. The home 

improvement grant has been a real boost to the local economy 

for carpenters, plumbers, electricians and general contractors. I 

want to thank the Progressive Conservative government for 

having the vision to introduce such an excellent program to help 

home owners. There has been no other province in Canada that 

has brought such a plan to help home owners. 

  



 

December 12, 1986 

220 

 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would also want to say that I am 

proud of the 10 year, nine and three-quarter per cent mortgage 

program introduced in the Speech from the Throne. I’m sure all 

those with mortgages in the Canora constituency are pleased to 

see the introduction of this plan which will protect them if 

mortgage ever go above nine and three-quarters per cent. Again, 

this is a case of the Progressive Conservative government 

protecting people. 

 

During the campaign, Mr. Speaker, because the Canora seat is 

so predominantly agriculturally based, four more factors that 

relate to farming became vote issues. I am first referring to the 

record number of young farmers that have or are contemplating 

the purchase of land as a result of eight per cent interest rate. 

When you compare this program to land bank, it is no wonder 

that at farm after farm I talked to young farmers who were 

openly supporting me and the Progressive Conservative 

government, and at the same time admitting their parents often 

supported a different political party. These young farmers were 

second and third generation farmers who had decided to change 

their politics at this time. 

 

This government has initiated three other programs of extreme 

importance to rural Saskatchewan. The first is the installation of 

natural gas to farmers, thereby drastically reducing heating 

costs. The installation of private telephone service for farmers is 

another impressive program. I believe that these two programs 

go a long way to proving to rural Saskatchewan that there are 

no second-class citizens in Saskatchewan. The final program 

that I wish to mention is our government’s promise to remove 

the surface power lines and poles from rural Saskatchewan. I 

predict that this program will be one of the most popular during 

the next few years with our farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as MLA for the Canora constituency I am pleased 

to support the motion in support of the Speech from the Throne. 

Today, I have delivered my maiden speech to this legislature 

and look forward to being an active member of this legislature. 

The Speech from the Throne contains the programs of the 

Progressive Conservative government of which I am proud to 

be a supporter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I wish to inform you that I will be 

voting in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, being near 1 p.m., I move 

this House do now stand adjourned. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that we 

would have a procedural problem, and since I have waited for 

some time to get into this debate, and I know that members 

opposite have waited as well with eager anticipation, I beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 

 


