


















































May 22, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 22, 1986 
 
 

1423 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 of this 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of more than 2,000 
Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the provincial 
government's sale of SaskTel's cable distribution system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my privilege 
today to introduce a group of 49 students from the Wilson 
elementary school in the constituency of Saskatoon Centre. 
Wilson is located on 7th Avenue, right in the heart of Saskatoon 
Centre, and well-known to me and my family. My daughter, 
Rachael, took grade 1 in that school. So it's a pleasure to introduce 
them to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the Assembly. I 
hope that you have an enjoyable afternoon in the Legislative 
Assembly. I know you're going on a tour at 2:30. I hope you find 
the question period interesting. I'll be meeting with you at 3 
o'clock for pictures and answering any questions you may have. so 
I'd like all members to welcome the students and their teachers, 
Warren Debert and Fred Waite, to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — It's my pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce to you and, of course, through you to the other members 
of the Assembly, a group of students form my constituency. They 
are seated in the west gallery. The group of students, 41 in 
number, are from the Langbank-Kennedy elementary school, 
grades 4 and 5. They're also accompanied by Jim Golding, Erin 
McKee, Karen Yuhazs, Cindy West and, of course, their bus 
driver, Don Penney. 
 
I will be meeting with the students after question period today for 
some refreshments and pictures and to answer any questions they 
may have. I trust that they've had a good tour of the Legislative 
Building. I trust that you'll find the question period interesting and, 
of course, I trust that our visit will be an enjoyable one and a 
memorable one. So thank you for coming and I ask members to 
join with me in welcoming them here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Sale of SaskTel Cable Distribution System 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for SaskTel. Just prior to question period I 
tabled a series of petitions signed in recent days by more than 
2,000 Saskatchewan residents protesting your government's plans 
to sell off SaskTel's cable distribution system to private operators. 

Can the minister tell us whether or not you will heed these 
concerns, or will he confirm, in fact, the sale of the system is to be 
completed with the signing of documents at a Regina law office 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly I'll read the petition and the 
information. We've received letters in the past, in response, and 
have responded fully to them. My understanding is that the 
attempt will be made tomorrow to sign the agreement; and 
secondly, but one cable operator has indicated concerns, and that 
may or may not hold up the signing tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how much have Saskatchewan 
taxpayers invested in the creation of the CATV distribution system 
at SaskTel? How much is your government selling it — for how 
much, and to whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there are some negotiations still going 
on. I'll be more than pleased to give the final advice to the 
members when negotiations are fully completed. I gather there 
may be some discussions this afternoon as well. Having said that, I 
will get you the details of the full cost of the investment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No it's not. I mean, if any of you knew 
any lawyers of any ability over there, you'd know that negotiations 
sometimes go on right up to the signing and that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . they should go to the Conservatives for 
legal advice rather than taking some of your own. But I'm sure 
you're very familiar with that. So the details can change. We've 
indicated that the reason for the sale is that the officials advised 
that it's costing about $1.9 million a year less than the . . costs 
more than the revenues coming in; and secondly, to refurbish the 
system is roughly $17 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. With the 
sale, can the minister advise us what guarantees there will be of 
the jobs of those who are now responsible for the maintenance of 
the system at SaskTel, and what guarantees there will be for the 
cable customers that the system will be maintained to the same 
high standard that it now is by SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the agreement makes provision for 
maintenance. Secondly, we had indicated to the SaskTel unions 
last fall that the jobs would be secure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want now to 
ask a supplement to an earlier comment you made. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, how you can claim that SaskTel is losing money on the 
CATV system when the documents which SaskTel filed with 
PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission) clearly show 
otherwise. I have here a statement of revenue and expenditures for 
CATV, which SaskTel filed with PURC. The document shows 
that the distribution system made a profit in 1981, again in 1982, 
and in fact it makes a return, or made a return at that time on its 
investment higher than the average return for SaskTel. You have 
not disclosed any figures since that time. The last disclosed figures 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1424 
 
 

show you were making a profit. How can you say that you're 
losing money on this system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The advice I have from officials says that it's 
losing approximately $1.9 million a year. That's the reason for the 
sale. Secondly, the cost of refurbishing the system is estimated to 
be in the range of $17 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, would you advise me of 
what documents you have filed with PURC which shows that 
you're making a loss. The documents you filed with the Public 
Utilities Review Commission show that the corporation is making 
a profit on CATV. Would the minister refer me to the documents 
filed with the Public Utilities Review Commission which 
substantiate the statement you have now made, but now, so far as I 
am aware, substantiated that the system is losing money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I've indicated, I will supply the 
information to the hon. member. the advice we have from officials 
is that it's losing now, on an annual basis, about $1.9 million a 
year. And at that cost why should all of the taxpayers subsidize the 
operating losses? Secondly, the cost of refurbishing is about an 
additional $17 million a year. It's not a service being supplied to 
everyone in the province. It is obviously being subsidized by all in 
the province, and as a consequence that's the reason for the sale. 

 
Hearings on Bill Reducing Federal Transfer Payments 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Acting 
Minister of Health in the absence of the minister. This question 
has to do with the legislation now before parliament, Bill C-96, 
which would reduce federal transfer payments to the provinces for 
health care and post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a Canadian Press report today, the committee 
which is now studying this Bill — and I want to quote from a 
Canadian Press report that goes as follows: 
 

The Conservative majority on a committee studying legislation 
to reduce the growth in federal (transfer) payments to the 
provinces for education and health care has voted not to travel 
across the country hearing views on the Bill, an NDP committee 
members says. 

 
I wonder if the minister can indicate to the Assembly whether or 
not you have complained to the federal Tories in Ottawa, and on 
behalf of the nurses and health care givers from Saskatchewan 
who had intended to give briefs to this committee when it travelled 
across the country? Have you made your views known that you're 
opposed to the Conservative point of view on the committee that 
these kind of hearings shouldn't be held across Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, responding to the hon. member, 
we have not indicated any views on the need for public hearings. 
It's very interesting that the request for national hearings came 
from the province of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if the hon. 
members would listen, came from the province of Manitoba, who 
have embarked, of course, on the rather desperate, political  

Ottawa-bashing campaign, and it wasn't taken seriously by 
virtually any of the ministers in Canada. 
 
The parliamentary committee, though, is holding, I believe, public 
hearings. And all of those affected, or believe that they wish 
changes or believe they have some suggestions to make, can make 
recommendations to the parliamentary committee. 
 
Why this particular parliamentary committee would be any less 
likely to listen to the public than every other one that's going on an 
ongoing basis is beyond my comprehension, as being suggested 
by the hon. members opposite. But I do believe that there will be 
ample opportunity for public input in the normal course of the 
parliamentary committee system in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the minister. The minister 
has outlined some problems that the Manitoba government has 
had, but I would say that clearly they've had a little more success 
standing up for Manitoba than Premier Lee has down on his hands 
and knees in front of Mulroney. 
 
But my question to the minister, Mr. Speaker: this parliamentary 
committee in fact began hearings on the legislation this morning in 
Ottawa, and it plans to cut off hearings on June 5th, even though 
more than 100 groups and individuals have asked to appear. Will 
you be appearing — the government — on behalf of the province, 
and will your government be demanding that Ottawa drop its plans 
to cut financial support for health care and post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan by hundreds of millions of dollars? 
Have you got a brief ready to go down there to beat up on the 
Mulroney government, rather than saying: keep up the good work, 
Brian? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don't know what success Manitoba's 
had with the federal government, but I can give a long, detailed 
list, including removal of the capital gains or the capital gains 
exemption being 500,000, which came from the province of 
Saskatchewan, responded to by the government in Ottawa; the 
removal of fuel taxes which initiative came from the Government 
of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . and was responded to by the government 
in Ottawa — and I could go on and on — as contrast to your 10 
years of fighting over there. And as the Leader of the Opposition 
publicly admitted, the only thing that he was able to bring forward 
was the charter of rights, after 11 years of fighting with Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, a few weeks ago the Minister of Health in the Assembly 
didn't have a clue as to how much in federal transfer payments 
Saskatchewan stood to lose under this legislation. In fact, he said 
he was going to go to Ottawa and fight that the Bill would not 
even be introduced. 
 
I wonder if you government has now at least had the  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1425 
 
 

officials in the Department of Health look at the potential loss to 
Saskatchewan as a result of this legislation, so that you can report 
— and being the Minister of Finance you may be able to do that 
— how much will it cost the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the people of the province over the next five years when this Bill 
has been passed? How many hundreds of millions of dollars extra 
taxes will have to be levied on the citizens of the province in order 
to make up for the cut-backs that your federal counterparts are 
planning to take away from the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well first of all, let me indicate that 
negotiations with the federal government are still going on, and I 
expect will be going on for some time. 
 
Secondly, your indication that there will have to be tax increases 
because of any changes on established program funding may be an 
excuse for you to raise taxes, and it may be something that you 
would hope to be able to try and convince the people of 
Saskatchewan is a justification for a raise in taxes; that is no 
justification for raising taxes. Let me assure you, secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, that health and education expenditures under this 
government are at record levels. Secondly, we will continue to 
fund health and education as we . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

 
Trade Complaint Against Canadian Lumber Exports 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In the last two days the members opposite 
raised several questions as it relates to the free trade question, the 
free trade negotiations, the involvement of Weyerhaeuser, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they asked a question; I'm going to try to respond to 
the question. Today or yesterday, Weyerhaeuser corporation of 
Tacoma, Washington, issued the following statement in support of 
free trade: 

 
Weyerhaeuser company is not a member . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Give the minister 
the opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . .  
 

Weyerhaeuser Company is not a member of the coalition 
pressing for duty on Canadian lumber. Last year through the 
advisory committee, Weyerhaeuser participated in the 
Canada-U.S. government talks on the lumber issue. It intends to 
continue to look at the re-examination . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I've asked the members to 
come to order twice now, and I would ask them to take it 
seriously. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wonder if I could ask the Speaker what 
question the minister is answering. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser further went 
on to indicate that they were seeking a negotiated  

solution or settlement to this particular issue, and that they did not 
agree with, and were, in fact, against any unilateral action by the 
United States government; as they were, I might add, as a U.S. 
corporation head office in United States, against the 1982 
countervailing action in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'm going to caution the member from Quill 
Lakes for the last time today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill 
Lakes had requested this particular . . . had raised the particular 
question with regard to the sale of Weyerhaeuser corporation, 
indicating that that was against the free trade . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member for 
Regina North West to apologize to the Assembly for refusing to 
obey the ruling of this Chair. I've asked you to apologize to this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I can't apologize while you're standing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — All right; now apologize. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I don't know what I've done in the Assembly, 
other than ask whether this is question period, and if I've 
committed any kind of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member knows full well 
what he has done. I have asked for order several times, and you 
continue to bray across the floor. I'm asking you now to apologize, 
otherwise I will have to take the next step and ask you to leave the 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I'm not sure what I'm apologizing to, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the question I asked was a reasonable question. 
What was the question he . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I've asked the member to apologize 
for his action in the House for not obeying the ruling of the Chair, 
and I'm expecting that apology without any other comment. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Could you just outline what I'm apologizing for, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — For continuing to holler and yell right through 
the question period. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I very seldom open my mouth, Mr. Speaker. I 
could . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the member refusing to apologize? Are you 
refusing to apologize? If the member is going to apologize, let him 
do it quickly. Failing to hear an apology, I . . . Failing to hear an 
apology, I name you, Bill Sveinson, and I would ask you to leave 
the Chamber. 
 
Order, please. Proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The question raised by the member from 
the Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1426 
 
 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite sought 
questions the last two days, one of those being the question of 
Weyerhaeuser. Weyerhaeuser Corporation endorses free trade, 
endorses the Canadian position, and wishes the countervailing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would caution the member from Regina North 
East as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . endorses the position taken by the 
Canadian lumber industry, and is against the position being taken 
by the association in the United States. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the questions we asked were clear and precise and did 
not give rise to a speech about Weyerhaeuser from the minister. I 
ask you, Mr. Minister, a very simple, narrow question: do you 
deny that Weyerhaeuser is a member of the coalition which is now 
mounting a case for tariffs against Canadian lumber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Weyerhaeuser is not part of the coalition. I 
indicated that to you, if you had listened during the answer that I 
tried to give to the members opposite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I will 
read the Hansard with interest, because you did not mention the 
word "coalition" . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we will see. 
We will see. 
 
Do you deny that Weyerhaeuser is a member of the national group 
which is applying for the tariffs? Do you deny that Weyerhaeuser 
is a member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Weyerhaeuser has indicated publicly that 
they are opposed to the countervail proposals being conducted in 
the United States. Weyerhaeuser publicly stated that they were in 
favour of the Canadian position. Weyerhaeuser stated that they 
were in favour of free trade. Weyerhaeuser is not part of the lobby 
in the United States to try to restrict Canadian lumber into United 
States. Weyerhaeuser is not part of the lobby that tries to take 
away jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, will you turn to the 
question, after your rhetorical answer. The question is: is 
Weyerhaeuser a member of the national group which is mounting 
the attack? And I'm asking very, very specifically whether they are 
a member of the national forest products lobby. I do not have the 
name with me here. 
 
And I ask you the same question with respect to the western lobby. 
These are well—known organizations. They are mounting the 
case. Weyerhaeuser is a member of each, or I assert it is, and I ask 
you to deny it if you think I'm wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I question the member opposite. And that 
is this: Weyerhaeuser U.S. has indicated clearly that it is against 
the lobby . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They say it's not the 
question. Weyerhaeuser has indicated they are clearly against the 
U.S. lobby interest. 

Weyerhaeuser is not part of that lobby group — not part of that 
lobby group. Weyerhaeuser has indicated very clearly and very 
strongly that they support the actions and the responsible actions 
of the Canadian forest industry and of the Canadian government 
— strongly support that view. 
 
The members opposite would try to have us believe that they are 
on the other side, and that is misleading. That statement is 
misleading, Mr. Speaker. And one can only question the question 
from the Leader of the Opposition: is he, in fact, concerned about 
free trade, or is he really against Weyerhaeuser coming into 
Saskatchewan, creating jobs in Saskatchewan for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
minister answer my question and not attribute by innuendo 
motives for the question. The question was relatively simple. The 
question is this: the lobby is being mounted by the U.S. Coalition 
for Fair Lumber Imports. That coalition is being sponsored by the 
National Forest Products Association and the Western Wood 
Products Association. I ask you very simply: is Weyerhaeuser a 
member of the National Forest Products Association and is 
Weyerhaeuser a member of the Western Wood Products 
Association? Relatively simple questions: is Weyerhaeuser a 
member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Just simply read the question again to 
yourself. The question you are asking and posing is: is 
Weyerhaeuser part of the lobby against the Canadian forest 
industry, a part of a given association. But the question and the 
fundamental question is: are they lobbying against the Canadian 
interests? That's the question. And the answer to that question is 
no, they are not part of that lobby group . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They are not part of that lobby group. 
They take the position favourable to the Canadian forest industry 
and the Canadian government. They are in favour of the free trade. 
They are against the tariff walls, the countervailing duties being 
proposed by the U.S. industry. That's a strong, fundamental, firm 
statement by Weyerhaeuser Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Minister. I take 
it then that you're not denying that Weyerhaeuser is a member of 
the Western Wood Products Association. You're not denying that 
Weyerhaeuser is a member of the National Forest Products 
Association, and a very strong member in each case. You're not 
denying that those two associations are supporting the U.S. 
Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports, and you're not denying that 
that coalition is calling for tariffs. 
 
You're just saying that somehow Weyerhaeuser, which is a 
member of the organizations which are mounting the attack, is 
somehow disassociating itself for the attack. Is that your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the member opposite looks to  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1427 
 
 

say if you belong to an association and that association takes any 
position whatsoever, that automatically that's your position. 
Weyerhaeuser has made it very clear — which seems to me to be 
the fundamental issue we're talking about here — Weyerhaeuser 
has made the fundamental position that they are opposed to the 
U.S. position, the U.S. forest position on lumber, lumber lobby, on 
the particular duties and countervailing duties against the 
Canadian forest industry. And I think they should be commended 
for standing up and stating their preference to an open border so 
that the forest can move back — or the lumber can move back and 
forth. 
 
What you raised in the House yesterday and the day before was to 
somehow put a black cloud over Weyerhaeuser as being a bad 
corporate citizen that we should not be dealing with, and that was 
not in the interest of the province of Saskatchewan to deal with it. 
That is wrong. That is misleading, and that is not what 
Weyerhaeuser stands for. Weyerhaeuser stands for the Canadian 
position to create jobs in our province, to build in our province, 
and I don't know whether you're for it or against. One day you're 
for it; the next day you're against it. When you're in Regina you're 
against it; when you're in P.A. you're for it. Back and forth, back 
and forth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Parks Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member I 
move first reading of a Bill respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 
Parks Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 

 
POINT OF ORDER 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 
on a point of order, and it deals with today's question period. And 
there are a number of parts to the point of order, and if I could just 
briefly outline them. 
 
During the question period the Minister of Economic 
Development rose to answer a question — apparently he was 
rising to answer a question. He didn't outline the question that had 
been asked, when it had been asked, or what the question was, and 
went on to make a lengthy statement on free trade. 
 
Members of the opposition are very concerned about statements 
like that being made during question period and being allowed 
because we don't understand how ministers can abuse the question 
period to use it. In fact, the day that the minister was missing, I 
believe, 10 other cabinet ministers were not in the Assembly as 
well. And the habit has become taking notice of questions because 
there are no ministers here, then coming back in with lengthy 
statements that have no relevance to the questions being asked. 
And they're being allowed. 

And this is happening over and over again, Mr. Speaker, and we 
have great concern about the fact that this government . . . And if 
we look across the benches today and see how many ministers are 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The number of 
ministers here or not here is not part of any point of order. If you 
have a point of order, I'll listen to it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — When they're taking notice of questions, the 
point I'm making is because there are so many ministers not 
attending the Assembly, I think it has everything to do with the 
point of order. 
 
The other issue is, is that when the minister rose to give his 
answer, the member for Regina North West was on his feet long 
before the minister got up. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
person that I see on their feet first, and that is not a point of order. 
You may see something different than I see, but the man that was 
on his feet was recognized. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other part of the point of order is that 
when the minister gets to his feet, having not been in his place to 
answer the question, someone else refers him the question, he then 
goes on to accuse the opposition of having other motives in asking 
the questions. And I think that is totally out of order and shouldn't 
be allowed. 
 
The other thing that I would say, that it appears to members in the 
Assembly in the opposition that we are not in agreement with the 
member from Regina North West being kicked out of the House 
today, and I . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. You cannot challenge rulings 
made by this Chair in a point of order. 
 
The Acting House Leader yesterday took notice of the question 
that was asked by the Leader of the Opposition, and he said that he 
would refer the question to the minister, who would be back today, 
to answer, and that's exactly what happened. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax 
Credits 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to rise 
today and move second reading . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I've taken just 
about all I will from the member from Shaunavon calling names at 
the Chair. And if he says anything more today, I will ask you to 
also leave the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask Mr. Speaker to tell me clearly 
what statement he heard me make so that I can apologize for it 
because I'm not sure what he's referring to. 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1428 
 
 

Mr. Speaker: — You were telling the whole House, quite loudly, 
that the Speaker was not being fair, and that I couldn't win an 
election from this Chair. And that's not what I'm trying to do. And 
that if the member proceeds in doing that kind of thing in the 
House, I would ask you to leave the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, at no time did I refer to the 
Speaker attempting to win the election . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! We'll proceed with the next 
order of business, but I'm just cautioning the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of a Bill respecting stock savings 
plan credits. This Bill is yet another initiative of the government to 
encourage public participation in the Saskatchewan economy. It 
follows the successful introduction in 1984 of The Venture Capital 
Tax Credit Act and The Livestock Investment Tax Credit Act. 
 
The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act has resulted in attracting over 
$30 million in investment, investment that is available to small 
Saskatchewan businesses. The livestock investment tax credit 
program has provided tax credit for livestock fed in the province 
to slaughter condition, another innovative way to invest 
Saskatchewan savings in Saskatchewan's future. 
 
Earlier this session we announced extensions to both of these 
programs and introduced the livestock facilities tax credit. The 
latter credit applies to the construction of all new facilities or the 
major expansion of existing facilities begun after January 1, 1986, 
where the principal use is raising livestock. This credit available to 
both farm and non-farm investors. 
 
These tax programs are in addition to the substantial assistance we 
have given agriculture, the manufacturing sector, the resource 
industries, and small business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have criticized the government, 
saying there has been too much reliance on out-of-province 
corporations. They said there is virtual total dependence on the 
out-of-province big business as the only engine of growth. 
Obviously not true. Our government has paid more than lip 
service to the concept of Saskatchewan ownership and job 
creation. These initiative and opportunities to invest in Crown 
corporations are providing a strong signal that the investment 
climate has changed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government is introducing this Bill as a further component of 
our comprehensive program to encourage the investment of 
Saskatchewan savings in the province of Saskatchewan. Our 
residents save more than 17 per cent of their disposable income. 
Much of this money is creating jobs in other provinces and other 
countries. As a result of this, in previous legislation, the greater 
proportion of these substantial savings will be directed towards 
equity investment in firms with a substantial presence in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result of the greater availability of equity capital, the 
legislation will: strengthen the private sector through  

economic activity and job creation; secondly, provide equity 
capital to junior Saskatchewan companies where access to capital 
is limited; and thirdly, to encourage diversification in the 
Saskatchewan economy, investment in new plants, development 
of resources in northern Saskatchewan, and the location of head 
offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
The plan will provide funds that will be spent in Saskatchewan — 
funds attracted by established Saskatchewan public firms, public 
firms that are relatively new to our province, and companies that 
are currently operating as private corporations. 
 
The corporation's securities will be eligible for the credit if it is 
incorporated in Saskatchewan, has a permanent establishment in 
Saskatchewan, and at least 25 per cent of all its wages and salaries 
are paid to employees at this permanent establishment. 
 
Regulations may be prescribed that require a lower corporation 
involvement in this province if the proposed investment activity 
will create Saskatchewan jobs that will, in time, result in the 
achievement of the 25 per cent ration. 
 
Eligible securities include common shares, preferred shares, and 
units of a unit trust to be prescribed by regulation, trading in on 
one of the Canadian stock exchanges. These regulations may 
consider the different circumstances faced by new and junior 
corporations in attempting to raise equity capital. 
 
Preferred shares in unit trust can be designed to reduce the risk, of 
new equity issues from emerging corporations. To the extent that 
emerging corporations can help achieve the employment and 
investment objectives of the government, we will provide the 
mechanisms that will help it happen. 
 
The Saskatchewan Stock Savings Tax Credit Act will provide a 
credit to individuals resident in Saskatchewan against 
Saskatchewan income taxes otherwise payable. The credit will be 
equal to 30 per cent of the cost of the eligible investments. 
 
The maximum credit that can be earned in a year is $3,000. That 
is, investments of $10,000 will earn the maximum credit. If the 
earned credit exceeds the provincial taxes otherwise payable, the 
excess can be carried forward to a subsequent tax year. The 
carry-forward period will be limited to seven years. 
 
The plan will be administered by investment dealers who are 
members of a Canadian stock exchange or the investment dealers' 
association. This will ensure that potential investors have access to 
professional investment counselling and advice. 
 
Investment dealers will report the investment activity that took 
place during the year in an investor's account. This report, and 
changes that have taken place in the level of eligible investments 
from one year to the next, will form the basis of the calculation of 
the tax credit. The Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
will issue a tax credit certificate, if earned, by February 28th of 
each  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1429 
 
 

year. 
 
When an eligible investment is acquired, the investor is obligated 
to maintain the level of an investment for the remainder of the year 
and two subsequent years. If the level of investment is not 
maintained, the Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
will enforce repayment of part or all of the previous credits issued. 
 
The private sector has agreed to be responsible for a substantial 
part of the administration, a further example of the partnership that 
is developing with the private sector. 
 
The introduction of this legislation is a component of our 
successful efforts, Mr. Speaker, to create a positive climate for 
economic development. We will continue to encourage the 
investment of Saskatchewan savings in Saskatchewan. In the 
future, we will encourage and participate in seminars that will 
outline the important criteria that should be considered before 
going public, and provide participants the opportunity to learn 
more about the effects of this Bill on eligible corporations and on 
eligible investors. 
 
As a further incentive to encourage individual ownership in 
Saskatchewan enterprises, we will introduce legislation that will 
provide for labour-sponsored venture capital corporations. The 
continued prosperity of this province is dependent on the 
co-operation of labour organizations, private business, 
co-operatives, and the public sector. These corporations will give 
organized labour and employment co-operatives an opportunity to 
create jobs in Saskatchewan by channelling investments to small 
and medium-sized business. 
 
This Bill signals our continued belief that the private sector should 
and will be responsible for creating jobs and opportunities. When 
we created a favourable tax climate in the oil and gas industry, it 
flourished. This government is confident that this initiative will 
have a similar effect in this and other sectors of our economy that 
require equity capital to finance expansion. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to move that Bill No. 41, An Act 
respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax Credits, be now read a second 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
aspects of the Bill which we would like to familiarize ourselves 
with. Accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — When the Table is on its feet, you can't interrupt 
at that point. Later on. Proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I'm pleased today to rise and move second 
reading of the Bill amending The Income Tax Act. The Bill 
introduces a number of important incentives to encourage the 
development of Saskatchewan business. It  

also brings forward a number of technical amendments that have 
been requested by the federal government as part of our 
responsibilities under the Canada-Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. State your point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize. I'm not 
certain if I'm in order or not, but, Mr. Speaker, I for my own 
satisfaction, and for my colleague's satisfaction, as we understand 
it, when you asked him to apologize to you, sir, he did. I heard that 
here, as did other members on this side of the Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, on that basis, that I heard it and other members of the 
Assembly heard it on this side, I would ask: what was the reason 
for asking him to leave the Chamber? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — At no time did I hear him apologize. All he did 
was ask continuous questions, and I've made my ruling and it 
stands. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated, the Bill introduces a number of 
important incentives to encourage the development of 
Saskatchewan businesses. It also brings forward a number of 
technical amendments that have been requested by the federal 
government as part of our responsibilities under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection Agreement. 
 
I would first like to discuss the policy changes announced in the 
budget. We consider the small-business community to be the most 
important component in the province's achievement of economic 
growth in job creation. It has been the primary creator of 
employment in Saskatchewan. This is as a result of two important 
factors. First, it is due to the business man's entrepreneurial sprit 
and his will to be a contributing force in Saskatchewan's economy. 
 
Secondly, it has been a result of the government's support of 
business development through a number of measures, including 
the industrial incentive program, which provides one-time 
payments of $7,500 for each new permanent job created by 
manufacturing and processing firms; the nine and five-eights 
interest reduction program; the venture capital program; and the 
tax holiday for small manufacturing and processing activities, 
which increases the after-tax reward to the business men for 
operating a successful manufacturing and processing activity. 
 
These measures and others have created a positive environment 
for the encouragement of investment and job creation in the 
province. We wish to continue this climate through an extension 
and enhancement of existing incentive measures through the 
introduction of new programs. 
 
First, in order to improve the climate for the formation of new 
small businesses, I am pleased to introduce a two-year corporate 
tax holiday for qualifying small  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1430 
 
 

businesses. This measure will permit a tax holiday on the first 
$200,000 of active business income of the corporation in each of 
its first two tax years, thereby increasing the return on successful 
business investment. 
 
It will require eligible corporations to be genuinely new, 
small-business activities that choose to incorporate as 
Canadian-controlled, private corporations. This means that 
existing businesses which incorporate, but don't materially change 
their business activity, will not qualify. It also disqualifies large 
businesses from being eligible. 
 
It is our belief that this tax holiday will create considerable interest 
in the prospect of creating new businesses by Saskatchewan 
people. This feeling is based on the success that we have 
developed in the tax holiday which we introduced in the oil 
industry. 
 
The Bill also introduces a significant expansion in the 
Saskatchewan tax incentive program. This program was initially 
established in 1984 with the introduction of two tax credits; the 
venture capital tax credit, which to date has generated over $32 
million of new investment capital; and the livestock investment 
tax credit, which has helped maintain a healthy climate in the 
livestock industry during a period of unstable market conditions. 
 
I'm pleased to say that the government will continue to assist 
farmers and small businesses through a continuation of these two 
measures. However, the province is also expanding its support to 
business through the introduction of three provincial tax credits: 
first, as a major incentive program to encourage the production of 
livestock in Saskatchewan, the government presents the livestock 
facilities tax credit. This provision will provide a significant 
encouragement to prospective investors who are willing to 
construct the necessary capital infrastructure for the raising of 
livestock. It offers a tax credit equal to 15 per cent of the capital 
cost of eligible livestock facilities, and will therefore reduce the 
fixed costs associated with them investing in the livestock 
industry. 
 
And combined with the $25 per hog interest-free cash advance 
program and the 8 per cent loan program on new or expanded 
facilities, the government has clearly demonstrated the strength of 
its support behind the important Saskatchewan industry. We are 
especially determined to see a significant expansion in the hog 
industry in order to meet future demands created as a result of the 
recently announced expansions by Gainers and Intercontinental 
Packers. 
 
The Bill also introduces the stock savings tax credit. While I'll 
have more to say with respect to his measure when I present . . . as 
I presented the stock savings tax credit Bill for second reading, I 
would like to point out just a few of the more important aspects of 
that particular program. 
 
As I indicated, our province has developed an extremely strong, 
small-business base through an unwavering commitment by 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and through targeted support by the 
government. However, our medium- and large-business 
community has demonstrated a slower growth in terms of 
industrial base  

and the creation of jobs. This is due in large part to the province's 
reliance on primary industry and the present downturn in 
international commodity prices. 
 
It is therefore important to provide an incentive for medium and 
large business to develop its productive capacity through the 
encouragement of equity investment in those firms. The stock 
savings tax credit will achieve those objectives. It is our belief that 
this program will accelerate the diversification of our economy, 
including the development of northern reserves activity. 
 
Our government has also announced the introduction of one other 
tax credit, the labour-sponsored venture capital tax credit. This 
measure will provide an opportunity for Saskatchewan employees 
to become directly involved in the support of Saskatchewan 
business. In turn, by encouraging equity involvement by 
employees, this measure creates a new avenue with which to 
finance business expansion and maintenance while increasing the 
employees' commitment to the work-place. 
 
Specifically, this measure provides a 20 per cent tax credit for 
individuals willing to invest in ventural capital companies that in 
turn make equity investments in small and medium-sized industry. 
In addition, the federal government will also provide a 20 per cent 
tax credit to the investor, so that the result is substantial support for 
investment in the creation and protection and maintenance of jobs 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The legislation supporting this new initiative will be presented 
later this session. We have delayed the introduction of this 
particular Bill in order that we can solicit advice on the design of 
the tax credit from interested parties, including the trade unions 
and associations and the federal government. 
 
The initiatives I have announced will play an important role in the 
development of a strong business community in the province. 
However, there is a cost associated with this support. We are 
therefore raising the general corporate tax rate from 16 per cent to 
17 per cent. This rate is levied on only the largest 2,500 
corporations operating in the province. Small businesses will 
continue to pay corporate income tax at the reduced rate of 10 per 
cent. 
 
Combined with the corporate capital tax increases that are being 
levied on large businesses and financial institutions, I'm pleased to 
say that the business incentive package provided through the tax 
system will be virtually self-financing. 
 
One final policy change that is addressed in this Bill is the 
elimination of the Saskatchewan capital gains tax rebate program 
for transactions occurring after 1984. The program served 
Saskatchewan farmers and small-business people well during its 
operation by providing capital gains tax relief on their business 
holding. In doing so, it enhanced the farmer's ability to provide for 
his retirement through an increased return from the sale of his 
business property. With the introduction of the $500,000 capital 
gains deduction for federal and provincial income tax purposes in 
1985, our rebate program became redundant, and we are therefore 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1431 
 
 

 repealing it. As a matter of fact, without repeal, some not paying 
capital gains by virtue of the federal exemption could still apply 
for a rebate. Residents wishing to make application respecting a 
capital gain from a prior year may still do so until the end of 1987. 
 
Finally, this Bill introduces a number of technical amendments at 
the request of the federal government under the terms of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection Agreement. These 
amendments serve to make our legislation consistent with the 
federal law so that taxpayer compliance is made as simple as 
possible. Technical amendments deal in particular with the 
overseas employment deduction, and some of the taxable benefits 
received as a stock option from the taxpayer's employer, again 
dealing with the foreign tax deduction. 
 
The second aspect is that the provincial tax reduction for . . .the 
child tax reduction, there was some question as to whether two 
taxpayers could apply for the same child. And we are clarifying 
that so that one taxpayer only can apply for the one child. Those 
are the technical amendments, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
move An Act to amend The Income Tax be now read a second 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will at the conclusion of 
my brief remarks be asking that the debate be adjourned, but I do 
want to make a few comments. I want to make a few comments on 
what is in the Bill, and I want to make a few comments on what is 
not in the Bill. 
 
Firstly, what is in the Bill is very, very interesting in certain 
aspects. We have stood in this House, or sat in this House and seen 
others stand in this House and talk about tax reform and tax 
simplification and how we are going to make our tax system 
simpler and understandable to the taxpayer. And then we have this 
tax Bill that would defy an ordinary lawyer and would defy some 
tax lawyers. 
 
The minister very kindly provides us with simplified explanations 
of what the provisions are so that we will all have the clear and 
simple meaning of what is provided, and that is very, very helpful. 
I know that none of us would have any difficulty with a simple 
explanation, the one on page 11, which . . . It's a new provision, 
and the amendment permits the regeneration of tax credits 
previously claimed under section 8.3 where taxes owed during the 
averaging period are less than the tax credits claimed during the 
first four years of the averaging period. And that is his simplified 
explanation. This is by way of making our tax system simple. 
They offer that. They have talked about their livestock facilities 
tax credit and stock savings tax credit — and this is the simplified 
layman's explanation of what they have in mind here. 
 
This section must also be amended to permit the return of tax 
credits previously claimed against provincial taxes owing in 
situations where the application of block averaging has resulted in 
a reduction of tax credits applied. This amendment is to be made 
effective for the 1986 and subsequent taxation years — another 
very short and simple explanation of this simplified tax system 
which they are introducing. 
 
So I think that all talk of tax reform and simplified tax  

system adds up to what so much of this government has said about 
taxes. It is talk. When the opportunity comes to follow through, 
there is no follow-through. When the opportunity comes to 
simplify our tax system, our tax system gets more complicated. 
 
And no one on the opposite side can say that the income tax 
system, the provincial income tax system, is not now more 
complicated than it was when they came to office, even though 
they've suggested on many occasions that they were in favour of 
tax reform and a simplified tax system. 
 
I leave that point and go to a second point, and that has to do — 
and this is a point of some substance that I hope the minister will 
listen to because I want to raise it in the committee stage — and 
that has to do with respect to the capital gains tax. 
 
He proposes to repeal the provision whereby a taxpayer can get a 
refund of capital gains which he paid. Not only does he propose 
that, Mr. Speaker, but he proposes to do it retroactively so that it 
will apply as of December 31, 1984. Anything done in 1985 will 
be subject to full capital gains. 
 
Let's understand what our situation here is, Mr. Minister. The 
capital gains . . . There is no capital gains tax as such; there is an 
income tax on capital gains. And for these purposes, that's not 
merely playing with words. It means that when the federal 
government imposes a tax on capital gains, our province must 
impose a tax on capital gains. And we have dealt with this in the 
past, for the last eight or 10 years, by refunding the capital gain 
which was attributable to the provincial income tax on that 
income. and that's what's been done since, oh, 1978 or thereabouts. 
 
Understand, Mr. Speaker, how this works. A person sells his 
business and makes a substantial capital gain. And this shows up, 
or half of it shows up in his income, and that is subject to income 
tax — a federal income tax and a provincial income tax. And there 
is no way that the province can avoid imposing that income tax 
unless they wish to set up a totally separate income tax system, 
which nobody advocates. We have dealt with this in this province 
by saying: well where a person sells a small business he may be 
able to — and makes a capital gain and a portion of that, a half of 
that is taxable as income — we will refund the tax he pays as a 
result of provincial income tax. 
 
And it's been possible to get refunds of 30 or $40,000 and I'll pick 
a figure — perhaps a good deal more than that — but I'll just pick 
a figure of $30,000. suppose a person sold his business on March 
31, 1985 and made a capital gain of $200,000, 100,000 of which is 
taxable, and he may well have paid a tax on it which would 
amount to $30,000 of provincial tax. If my figures are wrong, we'll 
simply adjust the figures because many people do pay significant 
amounts of provincial tax on capital gains. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now it seems to me that until very recently, at least until the 
budget, the citizen had every reason to believe that he  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1432 
 
 

would be able to apply for this refund and get it. 
 
The minister is now taking that right, effective back in 1984, or 
January 1, 1985. The minister says this won't matter because he 
won't be paying federal tax because he can claim the federal 
exemption on capital gains, to which I say: not true. For the year 
1985 all you could claim was a $10,000 exemption, unless I'm 
very much in error. In subsequent years this may make some 
sense. But I think that for calendar '85 what we're doing is taking 
away a right, raking away the right of the person to apply for 
$30,000 — in my example — tax refund, and you're saying, not to 
worry, you can get 10,000 from the federal government. Well he is 
not going to be quite so sanguine about this as the Minister of 
Finance is. 
 
Unless I misunderstand this Bill completely, we are taking away a 
right to apply for capital gain — my argument doesn't necessarily 
apply to farmers, I concede that out of hand — I'm talking about 
small-business people and possibly residences. And it seems to me 
that we are taking away something from small-business people, 
from people who sold small businesses and very, very 
unexpectedly. We're taking it away retroactively. And there's no 
way that a person can rearrange his affairs. 
 
He heard the minister's budget in March of '86, but unfortunately 
he sold his business in March of '85. There's no way he can go 
back on that; there's no way he can rearrange his affairs to avoid 
this tax which he didn't know he had to pay. 
 
So that it's entirely possible, as I say, for a hotel owner in Regina 
North or Rosetown or Kindersley or wherever . . . And unless I 
misunderstand this — and I have done a little checking on it; not 
enough, I admit, because I don't claim to be a tax expert — but 
unless I misunderstand this, we are taking away something 
retroactively and very unfairly. And I want to say that we think 
that's entirely wrong. 
 
The third point I want to make is what is not in this Bill. And what 
is not in this Bill is any dealing with the now-notorious flat tax. A 
year ago the then minister of Finance, the member for Kindersley, 
introduced a flat tax, and he did it on the grounds of making our 
tax system fairer. That's what he said. And Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Minister, I think it is now clear to the public that that change in the 
tax system did not make our tax system fairer, but it made it 
demonstratively less fair — demonstratively less fair. 
 
And I say again, and I give my example of my two twin brothers, 
one of whom is a schoolteacher and one of whom is a lawyer; one 
of whom makes an income of $35,000 and is married and has two 
children. And he doesn't invest in the stock market, and he doesn't 
invest in MURBs (multiple unit residential buildings), and he 
doesn't invest in frontier petroleum projects, and he doesn't invest 
in video or film manufacturing. He just supports his wife and 
children and makes some contributions to his church. And the 
income on which he pays his money is virtually his entire salary, 
subject only to some very modest, modest deductions for his STF 
dues and the like. 

My other twin brother is a lawyer. He goes to a convention in 
Hawaii. He invests in MURBs — multiple unit residential 
buildings, nothing wrong with that as an investment — I'm just 
saying that's what he does. He is single. He invests in frontier 
drilling credit arrangements. He is in partnerships that drill for oil 
and the like. His income is $100,000, but of course, that's gross. 
That's before he takes off his trip to Hawaii, which of course 
comes off before he calculates his flat tax. Any advantage, any tax 
deductions which the MURBs, the multiple unit residential 
buildings, give him, that of course comes off before he calculates 
his flat tax. Similarly, any investment in frontier drilling credits or 
in drilling partnerships here in Saskatchewan or in the 
manufacture of films and videos, all of those are deductible before 
he calculates his flat tax. 
 
But his brother, the schoolteacher — no deductions. The 
schoolteacher makes some contributions to his church; they 
unfortunately are not deductible either. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker: how is this capable of being defended on 
the grounds of fairness? Each of them pays the same tax rate. Even 
though the one has an income three times the other, there is no 
progressive tax. Even though the one is married and the other is 
single, there is no allowance for that. Even though the one has 
dependent children and the other doesn't, there's no allowance for 
that. 
 
The flat tax is unfair; the flat tax should be dealt with in this Bill. 
This Bill change the provisions with respect to personal income 
tax, and it does not change them in the way that I'm suggesting it 
should change them. I think we all know that what I'm saying is 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am talking about The (Saskatchewan) Income Tax 
Act, and I am therefore not going to talk about other things that are 
not in the Bill, because they do not deal with income tax. But I am 
dealing with income tax, the income tax imposed by this Bill 
which is being amended. And I ask members, once again, to 
consider whether or not some of these amendments to this Bill 
should not be changed to permit the restructuring of the flat tax so 
as in effect to do away with it. We have here proposals for 
livestock facilities tax credits and stock savings tax credits. Could 
we not have some relief from the flat tax? And I think that it is 
every bit as relevant to providing for a fairer tax system to have 
some relief from flat tax as it is to provide additional tax incentives 
to people who buy stocks listed on the stock exchanges. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why members opposite are in effect 
cheering a Bill which will have the effect of providing yet further 
tax benefits to my bachelor lawyer, who will be one who will no 
doubt invest in these stocks listed on the stock exchange, but offer 
nothing to my married, with children, teacher, who will not have 
any money to buy shares listed on a stock exchange. He will just 
pay his additional flat tax, which has doubled this year over last. 
But more benefits for the investment in stocks or the like. 
 
We all, I think, can find something to be said in support of almost 
any tax saving, for somebody. But it is highly relevant to whom 
tax savings and tax breaks are directed. 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1433 
 
 

And here, Mr. Speaker, this Bill directs the tax savings, and the tax 
breaks once again to people who, by and large, will be in the 
higher-income groups that will be the principal beneficiaries of 
livestock facilities tax credits or stock savings tax credits. yet there 
is no relief offered for people who are of much more modest 
incomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a comment has been made with respect to labour 
venture capital funds. I look perhaps in vain in the Bill to find a 
provision for them, but it may well be there — it may well be 
there. We will have an opportunity to pursue this further at another 
occasion. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I need hardly say 
that this Bill is a complicated Bill. The speech given by the 
minister made that very, very clear. 
 
I have made the three points I wanted to make of a general nature: 
firstly, that this is tax confusion, not tax simplification; secondly, 
that the capital gains provisions, as I understand them, are 
retroactive and unfair . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — To the business community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . and yes, to people who we have held 
out something to and are now taking it away from them 
retroactively; and thirdly, that the Bill does not do anything to 
make the tax system fairer. It doesn't attack the most unfair aspect 
of our income tax system here in Saskatchewan, the flat tax, and it 
continues to offer further benefits for higher-income people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other aspects of the Bill to which I will 
want to turn my attention, and accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 25 — An Act to 
amend The Tobacco Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 26 — An Act to 
amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to make a few brief comments in closing debate on this Bill, 
and they relate back to the member's comments on second reading. 
 
To begin with, he made some allegations about this being a 
phoney tax, a token tax on banks. I think, in fairness to the public, 
they should know what the figures are, and I'd like to take this 
opportunity to give them. In 1982 the total capital tax on banks 
was $1.6 million; estimate for  

1986 is $10 million. I don't think anybody, by any language, 
would call that a token or a tiny, foolish, little tax. 
 
In addition, the member said something to the effect that we're 
trying to start a phoney war with the Boyd Robertsons of the 
world to pretend that this is a little fight with the banks and then 
say, see, we're like the NDP; we don't like the banks either. 
 
Well on this side of the House we never very often, in fact never 
take the opportunity to say we're like the NDP. We take a great 
deal of pride in extending the difference between the two of us. 
Certainly the differences are, when viewed in terms of taxation, 
their massive tax increases during the 1970s in spite of high 
revenue, and to contrast that, our reduction in taxes on such things 
as gas, clothing, some of the items that the Minister of Finance just 
outlined providing measures for people to reduce their income tax. 
 
(1515) 
 
One final comment that I would like to make on this matter is to 
simply say that for anyone to suggest that this is a token tax is pure 
foolishness; that the tax in Saskatchewan is 3 per cent on capital, 
the highest in the country. That's roughly three times what the 
national average is. It's certainly twice what it is in NDP 
Manitoba. So if anybody has a love affair with the banks in this 
country, it appears to be the NDP. I don't know what the product 
of such a love affair might be, but no doubt it would be a 
hideous-looking monster. 
 
We hear them run down the banks and other corporations in this 
House day after day, and certainly I would just like to add and 
read into the record that the banking community in this province 
employ 4,600 people. They pay a payroll of $131 million, and we 
appreciate the jobs created by all sectors of the economy, and we 
appreciate being able to have these people here to tax and to 
generate revenue in the province, whereas they, being consistent 
with their political philosophy, try to run everybody out of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 28 — an Act to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to address a few 
words to the House on this Bill. This Bill in effect tinkers with The 
E & H Tax Act by way of exempting certain goods . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I will attempt to make it clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, is this: the Bill exempts a relatively 
small class of goods from The Income Tax Act, relatively small in 
terms of the total amount. And it comes from people who promise 
to take the whole tax off. Every one of those people opposite said 
that they would remove the entire sales tax in their first term of 
office — every one of them. There is the member for Rosemont 
shouting from  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1434 
 
 

his seat, and he campaigned saying that all of this tax would come 
off, every bit of it, all of it in his first term of office. He's already 
been in office as an MLA longer than anybody since World War 
II, between elections. Nobody has sat longer in a seat between 
elections since World War II than the member for Rosemont — 
nobody. So I don't know what he meant by his first term. 
 
All I can say is this, he said he would take off the entire tax . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Give the member the opportunity 
to make his points. There's too much chatter in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will attempt to make 
my points uninterrupted by members, wherever they may be. 
 
I want to say this: clearly, clearly the members opposite promised 
to remove the entire E & H tax in their first term of office. And if 
they wish me to bring in the ads, the large half-page and page ads 
— and I have an interesting collection of them — I have one from 
the member for Kindersley, removing the E & H tax entirely in 
their first term of office, many, many more. You all know that 
because you all ran those ads. You know that you promised it, and 
you know that this will be, in all probability, the last session before 
an election. 
 
You know you have The Education and Health Tax Act before us, 
and you're not doing it. That is a promise made and a promise 
broken — a promise made and a promise broken. And I think that 
that point is the first point that needs to be made with respect to 
this Bill. It represents a serious breach of promises made by every 
single member who was elected as a PC member. And this wasn't 
a casual promise. This wasn't number 43. This was one of the 
three or four major promises included in the ad of every member 
opposite, and now they are admitting they're not going to keep that 
promise — they're admitting they're not going to keep that 
promise. 
 
Now let's come back to one other point. One other point deals with 
used vehicles, and this is highly relevant to the Bill before us — 
trucks, cars, snowmobiles. Notwithstanding the promise to remove 
the entire tax, a tax was imposed last year by an amendment to 
The Education and Health Tax Act, introduced by the member for 
Regina South. Now that's what was introduced, and for nine 
months they collected this tax from 60,000 vehicle purchasers, and 
they collected 4 or $5 million. And they finally admitted that the 
tax was wrong, finally admitted it was a mistake, but they won't 
refund the money — but they won't refund the money. 
 
And why won't they refund the money, Mr. Speaker? Because 
they intend to reimpose the tax. That's why. No, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's why. There's no amendment here to 
do away with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite chuckle that the tax 
was removed, supposedly, by some fiat from the Premier's office. 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that according  

to our practice in this legislature and in legislatures all across the 
Commonwealth, if you remove a tax or impose a tax — and 
they've done both in this case — it can be done by announcement 
of government policy, but the government then has the obligation 
to bring in legislation to confirm the imposition or removal of the 
tax. 
 
Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, we're not only talking about the 
removal of taxes from used vehicles, but imposing a tax on new 
vehicles for which there is no statutory base. No base. They're out 
there collecting taxes — and they have been since last December 
— on no statutory base. 
 
And they had a special session in January and perhaps, 
understandably, they didn't deal with it. Then they went on, and 
we are now in day 46 of this session, and they have not introduced 
it again. Now why, Mr. Speaker, would they, if they're so proud of 
themselves for having withdrawn the tax on used cars, why 
wouldn't they bring in the legislation which withdraws the tax on 
used cars? Why wouldn't they? 
 
Well I'll tell you — I'll tell you why it's not here. It would have 
been here had they intended to withdraw it permanently, but the 
problem with bringing it in here is that if they want to put it back 
on again, they have to come back to the legislature. Their current 
situation is that in order to reimpose that tax on used cars and 
trucks, all we need is a press release from the Premier's office, 
because the law now requires it to be collected. It's not being 
collected, but it can be collected with one word from the Premier. 
 
Now obviously, if they wanted to establish the fact that they 
intended to repeal this tax permanently, there would be something 
in this Bill before us. That's because they're supposedly proud of 
this. They're supposedly proud of it. They're supposed to have 
learned their lesson, I think, was the phrase used. But they didn't 
do it, and they didn't do it because they intend to reimpose it if 
they get the chance. But it doesn't matter, Mr. Speaker. It doesn't 
matter because they're not going to get the chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — They're not going to get the chance 
because I say to you, Mr. Speaker, following the next election 
there will be legislation, and there will be an amendment to The E 
& H Tax Act which will repeal the tax on used cars and trucks, 
and repeal it permanently. 
 
And that will happen. And that will happen, notwithstanding the 
covert designs of members opposite to reimpose it with a fiat from 
the Premier's office. It's not going to work, and I tell them, and I 
tell the people of Saskatchewan, that that tax is gone, because after 
the next election legislation will be brought in the amendment to 
The E & H Tax Act which will bury that tax for ever. And it will 
be buried just as sure as the Progressive Conservative Party will be 
buried at the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, there 
are other aspects to this Bill which I want to refer to, and I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1435 
 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member indicates that he 
hollered no and I didn't hear it. Order. Order. Order. Those in 
favour of adjourning debate say aye; those opposed say no. I 
believe the ayes have it. 
 
Debates adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 
amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left here I 
have Dan Gilewich, the deputy minister of Rural Development; 
behind him I have Larry Chaykowski, director of administration; 
sitting at the back I have Lloyd Talbot, director of community 
planning; and beside him, Dennis Webster, special assistant to the 
deputy minister. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'm not sure what system you follow here. 
Sometimes the ministers have an opening statement; sometimes 
they don't. You didn't have one today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, there's a number of 
things I and my colleagues would like to raise with you today, and 
that we want to consider before estimates on behalf of our party 
regarding the Department of Rural Development. I have lived in 
rural Saskatchewan all my life. I'm gravely concerned, Mr. 
Chairman, and Mr. Minister, about what's happening as far as 
events and trends are concerned in the past two or three years. I'm 
very concerned. 
 
I think back of ministers like E. I. Wood, that raised Rural Affairs 
to the forefront in Saskatchewan, second only to Agriculture, and 
we had a department that was singing and humming. Now we 
seem to have a department that is backed off into the woods and is 
shelved and is fifth-rate, let alone third-rate. You hardly hear the 
minister, hardly hear concerns. The rural people and the rural 
elected people that are representing rural Saskatchewan are 
considered second-rate — second to all companies, second to 
banks, second to financial institutions. 
 
But that's going to change very soon. that's going to change very 
soon, because I know when our party forms the next government, 
if you ever get up the courage to call an election, there's some 
issues that we think need to be concerned and maybe this is a time 
when we can forewarn some of your staff to start preparing 
already, and giving you some advice and directions in areas that 
you  

should be going. 
 
In the last three years Saskatchewan has lost over 3,000 farmers, 
3,000 — 5 per cent of the farmers, either through retirements, 
some of them of that, but people that have decided to sell off and 
get out of farming and move out of rural Saskatchewan. Some are 
foreclosures; some are bankruptcies. But the thing that disturbs me 
. . . and over the weekend I picked up a paper and I looked in the 
paper, Mr. Chairman, and I don't know if bankers and people like 
that look at that section or not, but what really concerned me is the 
number of auction sales that are advertised across Saskatchewan. I 
think that's an indication of what's happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe you think that some of my remarks are going to . . . or 
should be saved when we do Agriculture estimates, but it relates 
directly to you, Mr. Minister, and to the Department of Rural 
Affairs. And the kind of environment we're going to create out 
there that shows an example, or shows to the people that are in 
municipal government and shows to farmers that we intend to 
have them around for a long time, and that we intend to have 
programs that will make survival of rural communities — one 
that's healthy, and not one that says to the rural people and to the 
people that are elected from rural Saskatchewan, look, you know, 
agri-business is the way to go; the big farmers is the way to go. 
Our trend now is to bigger is better and we're going to consolidate. 
Some farmers just aren't going to make it no matter what. We'll 
put up some little committees to look at their situation. And if they 
decide they're not going to hang in there, tough luck, and let's go 
with those who have. I suppose that's maybe why there's so little 
emphasis on rural development. 
 
You know, you've named your department . . . you've renamed it 
since you people have been in office, and like my leader just said a 
few minutes ago in the last Bill, your mandate has extended 
beyond any government's mandate since the war. Since the 
post-war period, you've had the longest term of office. 
 
To indicate to rural Saskatchewan that you believed in rural 
Saskatchewan, you renamed your department. And I remember 
talking about that when that happened, and you called it Rural 
Development. And I says, well if you're changing the name, let's 
hope that there's some emphasis and some direction as far as 
development is concerned. But just the opposite is true. 
 
You know you say one thing and do another. You're wolves in 
sheep's clothing. You talk about development and how we're 
going to encourage rural Saskatchewan, and you dry it up. You 
just create the opposite. You create an environment there that isn't 
conducive to a good, healthy rural society. 
 
Last year the grain crop was almost non-existent in southern 
Saskatchewan. And in your area, Mr. Minister, I've had the 
privilege of doing some mini-tours with some of my caucus 
colleagues, and we visited a lot of Saskatchewan - many, many of 
the constituencies in rural ridings. And I was impressed with the 
mental state of mind that I encountered when I met people at either 
machinery dealers or at elevators or wherever, and even though 
their bins were full, their attitude wasn't any  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1436 
 
 

different than it is amongst farmers down South whose bins are 
empty. There's a depression out there amongst farmers and there's 
the sense there that there's no hope there. They see no future 
coming from your people. 
 
When they're talking about the present government, they're talking 
about a government that has high priority for the banks, high 
priority for the oil companies, high priority for those with a few 
bucks, like Peter Pocklington or George Hill. But when the farmer 
and the rural conditions are talked about, and they talk about the 
availability of gravel or programs to oil their roads or rebuild their 
roads, or grants to build community facilities, or help to rural 
Saskatchewan just to create an environment that gives people 
some hope, it's not there. It hasn't been coming. It hasn't been 
coming. 
 
So I think, even though there's some grain in the bins up in the 
North, there's a real drought for cash. The northern farmers are 
saying, we can't afford to spend all the money drying our grain. In 
Saskatchewan, for example, no. 1 and no. 2 used to grade about 80 
per cent of our grain that we grew. Last year it was down as low as 
29 per cent. The financial loss to Saskatchewan due to just the 
reduced quality, it costs well over $60 million. 
 
So I'm concerned about what's happening and the quotas that are 
there for tough and damp wheat and for grades that are poorer than 
no. 1 and 2. And when you add that up to the conditions that exist, 
I'm wondering what rural people have to look forward to. I'm 
wondering what you hold out there for a vision. When I look at the 
estimates under Rural development, I'm wondering: what is there 
for a development vision for the future in your estimate? What is 
there and what have you got there? 
 
Somebody was saying to me this weekend, why are estimates 
taking so long? And we had a nice function I was at, at the 60th 
anniversary of the Legion in Assiniboia. And it was a great 
occasion. I had a chance to visit with many of the Legion people. 
And they've been wanting to upgrade their hall, and they say, are 
you people going to reintroduce the community capital fund? Now 
that may be straying a little bit, Mr. Minister, and you're going to 
look into it, but the R.M.s got a share of that. And they said, you 
know, where are those days when we get 75 or $100 per capita, 
that the town can pin—point and say to a group like the Legion 
that we can rebuild our hall and we can expand our facilities? 
 
The place was packed and we didn't have room . . . we didn't 
hardly have room to sit. And that's kind of nice, when you go to a 
social function and you haven't got a table to sit at and you move 
from one table to the next. You get to visit with everybody that's 
there, and they don't really realize, you know, that they're doing 
you a favour. 
 
But every person I talked to said, every person I talked to told me, 
what has this government got for a vision or hope? When do you 
think the election's going to be, was the second question on 
everybody's mind. And I think when we add it up, people are sick 
and tired of slogans and expression and talk, clichés that say one 
thing and mean another. 
 
Change the name to Rural Development and then cut  

development completely. Take development right out of it and cut 
programs one after the other. I think it's time you spell out . . . And 
oh yes, what I was starting to tell you is that, when they said, why 
are estimates taking so long; why are estimates taking so long? 
And you know what my answer was? This government put 
together a little book here for their estimates for '86-87 with no 
intentions of implementing it. No intentions. 
 
Maybe you're going to implement the money you're spending for 
communication. That was in there, the increases in 
communication, the advertising budgets. And give Dome 
Advertising a little extra money — that's part of the package. But 
when it gets right down to the expenditures, this government has 
no intentions of implementing these estimates. They thought 
they're going to call an April election. They'll print a little book, 
read the budget, call the election, and then they've got a chance to 
show the people where the numbers are really at. Let's show the 
people what the numbers really are. 
 
And I'd like to see, and from your department today, we want to 
have a little discussion on what are your real intentions for 
developing rural Saskatchewan, for rural development. What are 
your true intentions? Not what you printed in the book to get a 
little election book together, but what's the long haul? What are we 
going to have to work with for the year '86-87? 
 
And I think, when I look at the farm debt in Saskatchewan, for 
example, the average over the period in 1972 to '82, that 10-year 
period, the farm debt increased by $949 million. Today it has gone 
up to $3.15 billion — a 350 per cent increase. Your government 
has added to that. They told farmers, you aren't going to sell 
enough grain to make a go, but borrow some money. Borrow a 
little extra and that will carry on. Saskatchewan farmers owe today 
well over $5 billion to lending institutions. That's the kind of debt 
Saskatchewan farmers are carrying, and all you've done for them 
in your period of time, you have forced on them a third of that 
debt. 
 
The Department of Social Services has been forced to pay social 
assistance to family farms and have changed their rules so some 
family farms could get social assistance. For the first time in my 
lifetime — for the first time in my lifetime — we have food banks 
down in my constituency. food banks. I think that is a measure of 
this government. 
 
Food banks are great to help people out in third-world countries —
third-world countries. Or in a capitalistic regime like California, 
where you have a lot of people making lots of money, then you set 
up rescue missions for those that can't make it, and you feed them 
at a rescue mission, and you throw them a few crumbs to salve 
your conscience. 
 
But in a society like Saskatchewan, in a place like we grew up and 
like we're used to living in — Mr. Minister, the whole 20 years 
that you farmed and worked under a CCF government, you never 
saw a food bank. You never saw a food bank; you never saw one 
soup kitchen during our term in government. During 20 years of 
Tommy Douglas or 11 years of Allan Blakeney government, there 
wasn't such a thing as a food bank or a soup kitchen. And that 
speaks of the nature and where this government's  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1437 
 
 

heart really is. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan, that used to be a place where people prided 
themselves that they could make it go and they could survive 
under any circumstance, have found out that it's different. And I 
want to tell you, Mr. Minister, you are as responsible as anybody 
for people facing the tough times that they are when they're saying 
that old slogan over, that came from 50 years go, that Tory times 
are tough times. 
 
This is serious, I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, that to sit by and 
stand by and call your Department of Rural Development, and see 
things go backwards like they have, it's a disgrace. It's a literal 
disgrace. I'm ashamed to be a citizen of Saskatchewan under this 
kind of government. I can't wait for an election to be called to turn 
things around. 
 
I'm embarrassed. I'm embarrassed to talk to foreigners or people 
from outside of Saskatchewan and see what's happening right 
across the piece. I'm embarrassed with the maintenance of rural 
roads and the kind of money they got, and the grid road program, 
and the super-grid program, and the farm access program, because 
of the cuts, and you haven't kept pace with the increased costs. I'm 
embarrassed by what's happening. 
 
Falling land values have hurt farmers even worse than any other 
province except Prince Edward Island, and this is just not a loss on 
paper; this is a loss that's happened because of the depressed value 
and your government's plans and programs to help these people. 
 
(1545) 
 
Between the end of harvest in 1984 and the end of harvest in 1985, 
Saskatchewan lost 75 machinery dealerships. That's something to 
be proud of. That's something to be proud of — an indication of 
the kind of environment you've created and the kind of situation 
that's been created because of your administration. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that grain prices are falling, and 
you sat idly by. You travelled around Saskatchewan with the 
committee. You travelled around Saskatchewan; you even had a 
hearing in my own constituency; and you listened to farmers. You 
listened to them talk about chemical prices and all. And I'm sure 
that at every hearing you were at you got the same message you 
did in Assiniboia, and that message was that farmers can' afford to 
operate under the depressed price. 
 
I don't hear your government saying anything about deficiency 
payments. I don't hear it. Everybody else is picking up on it. Now 
all of a sudden the Premier goes down to Ottawa and says that 
we've got to change the U.S. farm Bill. Instead of Canada picking 
up their share and helping Saskatchewan farmers compete, we 
want to tell the Americans to change their Bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I thought he said Reagan needed a hug. 
About six months ago, he was his friend. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Yes, give him a little hug. Keep up the good work, 
Brian and Reagan, is what our government is  

saying. 
 
And I think things in Saskatchewan haven't been that good for 
farmers. At a time when farmers and small-business men who 
depend on them have had a very difficult time coming up with 
enough money to live on, let alone pay their ever-increasing 
property tax, the Department of Rural Development has year after 
year refused to provide enough revenue-sharing money to R.M.s 
to keep pace with the increased costs. I think the revenue-sharing 
program is . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — order. Order. Order. Why is the member from 
Thunder Creek on his feet? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, to introduce some guests, if 
possible. They are on a fairly tight schedule and have to leave 
fairly soon. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly seven students from Brownlee School 
in Thunder Creek constituency. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Werner Janzen, and their bus driver, Wayne Cozart. 
They're here on a tour of the buildings and watching the 
proceedings in the Assembly today. I hope that it proves 
educational to them and that they can take back to their school the 
essence of our democratic process at work. 
 
I'm sure, from watching the members interact today, that they will 
definitely learn something. And I'd ask all members of the 
Assembly to please join in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would like to add 
my words of welcome to the group from Brownlee. Welcome 
here, and I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think, getting back to rural affairs — and I was 
just talking about revenue sharing — every budget that you have 
introduced, Mr. Minister, you have frozen or given less than 
inflation rate to revenue sharing that you've contributed to urban 
municipalities. Millions of dollars have been diverted by your 
government over the last four years from grid road maintenance, 
and farm access road construction, and bridge construction, 
improved ferry service. 
 
You haven't made it tougher for the likes of Imperial Oil. The oil 
companies are getting more than $300 million a year more than 
they did under our administration. You haven't been tough on guys 
like Peter Pocklington, who are able to get $20 million to build a 
pork plant and 10 million of it is going to be written off as a gift. 
You haven't  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1438 
 
 

been tough on guys like Mark Silver, like you've been on the 
R.M.s. Your pals and your party have done very nice at the trough 
— they've done very nice. 
 
But what about the people that depend on revenue sharing to keep 
the taxes down? What have you done for them; what have you 
done for them? There was a little program in place to help the 
small farmer and the home owner and the business man with a real 
shot in the arm. You moved last year to remove the rural home 
improvement grant, the property improvement grants and rebates. 
That move cost the rural home owner $230 a year. Every 
small-business man lost $250 a year. Every renter lost $150 a year. 
Farmers lost in the neighbourhood of $675 a year, depending on 
what their tax was on their home quarter. And you call that rural 
development. I'm saying it's rural destruction, Mr. Minister. 
 
You've taken out of the pockets of individuals that kind of money, 
that they expected every fall when they paid their taxes. And not 
only that, it was an incentive to get their taxes in. I'm going to be 
touching on that one a little later on. 
 
But the priorities of your government and your department are 
clear to me, Mr. Minister. There's no help at all for hard—pressed 
taxpayers and municipal governments, but there's lots of money 
for the biggest cabinet in Saskatchewan's history — close to 100 
international junkets by yourself and your ministers to places like 
Hawaii and Paris and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Now what's the matter? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I think the . . . As I see the purpose of 
the chairman of this committee is to see that the exchange goes 
back and forth and that things keep moving. I think that's my job. 
 
I think that when you get into areas and start making comparisons 
that are irrelevant to the subject matter, I believe then that we've 
gone beyond the realm of the estimates at hand. I would ask you to 
remain on the department. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, thank you for your ruling, Mr. Chairman. If 
you would have been listening, at the top of page 6 in my notes I 
was talking about the priorities of the minister's department and 
your government to help hard-pressed taxpayers and municipal 
governments. And I said that revenue sharing has been cut and 
that money was used. 
 
And if I can't talk about that, I'll abide by your rulings. But 
everybody knows that the minister and his colleagues have been 
spending money on things that didn't relate to rural development. 
When you talk about rural development, I'd like to see money, 
additional money, for development — seed money —put into 
rural affairs and to rural development. 
 
But no, we've got millions — millions, with an "s" — extra for 
advertising, but less for revenue sharing. We've got millions extra 
for trips when the Deputy Premier went 

 to Beverly Hills on an extended stay at $300 a night. We had 
money for that, but we didn't have money for gravel. We had 
money for that, but we didn't have money for gravel. 
 
Now if you don't want me to talk about priorities, I won't. But I 
want to say to you, Mr. Minister: where's the money for bridge 
building and improved ferry service? Where is it? I see $390 
million loan guarantee for Manalta Coal to buy a coal mine in my 
riding with $12 million down, and pay for the power, but I don't 
see any money for Coronach R.M., any additional funding like 
they used to get. 
 
I met with those people down there, and they told me the 
difference. They told me. The surface rights committee told me 
how this government was running roughshod over the farmers. 
And you know, when that coal mine was originally in the drawing 
stages and they had the original meetings down there, the 
department of municipal affairs were those that were in charge and 
were placed as the trustee of the rural people. And the department 
of municipal affairs looked after the interests of the farmers in the 
town to make sure they got a good deal from Sask Power, and they 
got a good deal from those involved, and the contractors that came 
in, and the oil drillers that came in. They made sure that everybody 
gave the farmers a good deal. And what did this government do? 
 
What did this government do? They turned the coal mine over to 
their friends, Manalta. They gave them a coal mine — $230 
million coal mine for $12 million down and they sold it to them 
for $145 million. Instead of being the custodian and the guardian 
of the affairs of the rural people at Coronach, you gave it to a 
private company so they could run roughshod over the farmers — 
so they could run roughshod over the farmers and that the farmers 
could see how they get by. 
 
Let me give you one example, Mr. Minister, and maybe you can 
answer this one for me — maybe you could answer this one for 
me. They had an agreement, and I'm raising this here, Mr. 
Chairman, unless you know, and give you the facts: the 
department, when it was called municipal affairs, when they were 
concerned about the interests of people and they didn't change 
their name to Rural Development to camouflage the erosion of 
rural Saskatchewan's population, when it was called the 
department or whatever it was supposed to be, looking after the 
affairs of rural people, they were in charge of what was happening 
down at Coronach. 
 
Today the coal mine told the farmers that had . . . When Sask 
Power had an option on their land they told the farmers, look, 
we're going to buy your land in such and such a time; this is the 
time frame we're going to dig your farm up. So these farmers went 
to work and they bought a new farm site, planted trees, built some 
quonsets, and intended to move over there — made a lot of 
expense. Now, all of a sudden, Manalta says: we're not going to 
dig there; tough luck, boys. And they're not going to be 
compensated for the additional expense they made. I think that is 
your department's problem, and you should  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1439 
 
 

be custodian of those people's concerns and need. 
 
Do you know what, Mr. Chairman? The minister won't even meet 
with them. He wouldn't even meet with them. 
 
People that were very perturbed with the former government . . . 
And I can assure you that when you develop a new coal mine, you 
lose some friends. And I'm chuckling a little bit when our Premier 
thinks that Rafferty dam is going to be an election gimmick for 
him, because when we came into Coronach to build the Cookson 
reservoir and to buy up some land to make a coal mine, it cost me 
a lot of votes — it cost me a lot of votes. I gained a few when the 
people moved into town, and the workers that were there think it's 
great. 
 
But now the farmers have a chance to look at this minister and this 
department and his friends in government, and compare it with 
Jack Messer and with Kim Thorson and some of the former 
ministers of Sask Power, and they say, hey, what did we do? Why 
did we get rid of those guys that used to listen to us? — Doug 
McArthur. Those guys used to come in and they'd come down; 
they'd go to meetings; they'd listen. But what do you guys do 
when they've got a problem? Won't even meet with them. You 
won't even meet them. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, if the Premier thinks that 
Rafferty is going to be a good thing, I've got news for him. I've got 
news for him because you can't flood people's land, you can't take 
their oil wells away on them, you can't flood out Bible camps and 
church camps and the Mainprize park and beautiful places like 
that — you can't destroy that and win votes; it just doesn't work. 
There's no combination of having that kind of development and 
being electorally successful. 
 
And I want to tell you . . . The minister of Rosemont just perked 
up because he thinks he's going to have a crack at the leadership. 
Well maybe our little cheer-leader's going to do the same thing as 
Bennett did and quit before he goes to the polls. Because Bennett 
realized he wasn't going to make it, and I suppose you won't here 
either because, I want to tell you, that's bad news. 
 
And the people and the farmers in that area need a custodian. They 
need somebody that's going to be on their side, not only in 
appearance but in reality. And I'm going to challenge you, Mr. 
Minister: go down to that country; go down and visit the valley 
out of Estevan and listen to their concerns and be their champion; 
stand up for their rights. Don't defend the little cheer-leader that's 
going to flood them out and walk roughshod all over them, 
because that isn't going to do the farmers any good. 
 
And the other area I want to challenge you on is: please, listen to 
my farmers down in the Coronach area and the way they're being 
mistreated — the way they're being mistreated by Manalta Coal. 
They wish Sask Power were back there dealing with them instead 
of a private coal company that won't listen. And they, for now if 
they ever did, now they need a champion on their side. They need 
somebody that cares. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I said before, you have a pretty sad record. When 
you compare the tax holidays for the oil  

companies with the benefits to the farmers, it's dismal — it's 
dismal. You call yourself Rural Development; I could give you a 
new name. If you want to change your name one more time in this 
long term of office you've got, we can give you a new name. 
Because I can tell you what the farmers are calling in the bar 
rooms and around the country. I can tell you what they're calling 
this government. And they're saying, why don't they get up the 
courage to call an election? Why don't they get up their courage to 
call an election so we can change it? 
 
(1600) 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, the R.M.s made representation to the 
former minister of Rural Development, asking for the right to set 
their own level of penalty for late payment of taxes. Some R.M. 
councils feel 12 per cent isn't even enough, and they want the 
same rights extended under the new urban municipal Act to the 
urban governments to set their own penalties. Is this something we 
are going to see, Mr. Minister? Are you planning on changing 
that? 
 
I am concerned that things are going to get pretty tough for my 
friends back on the farm if you'd get a chance for one more term at 
them. I think if the development in Rural Development continues 
at the rate you're going — at the rate you're going — I'd hate to see 
what Saskatchewan would look like in four more years. I'd hate to 
see the condition of our roads that need rebuilding and of roads 
that need to be taken into the super-grid program. That isn't 
happening. I'd hate to see what would happen under the name of 
Rural Development. 
 
So to start off, Mr. Minister, I suppose the first thing I'd like to ask 
you: can you give me the names and the present salaries of your 
personal staff members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm going to 
answer some of the questions that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg brought up as he went along. he went on 
to some 40 minutes of talking about . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let's have order here. Let's have some 
order in this place. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That's exactly what I intend to get. I would 
ask you to keep order in here and let the minister now reply. It was 
quiet when you were going through your presentation. Now give 
the minister the same opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, I'll start out by giving my staff's 
names and their salaries. I have no problems with that. I can either 
send it over or I can read it in; it doesn't really matter. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send it over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'll send it over. As the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg went into his 40 minutes of discussion on 
times regarding Rural Development, I sort of kept notes of what 
he talked about. And some of the areas, the concern that he 
brought up — and I'm sure it's a concern to him — was one of the 
ones the named going  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1440 
 
 

back, he said, into when the NDP and the CCF were government. 
He said rural Saskatchewan never had major problems. In fact, 
they were always there to help them. 
 
I'd like to just start out by saying, Mr. Chairman, that I can 
remember back in 1951 in the Hudson Bay area where we hadn't 
had no crops for three years. And in fact the then government, the 
CCF government of that time, sent a letter to my father saying that 
there would be some help for him. He went down to the local LID 
(local improvement district) office, and do you know what he got, 
Mr. Chairman? He got one case of Klik — one case of Klik to do 
us for the winter. That was their food bank line for the whole year. 
There was no other assistance out for farmers in those days. They 
had absolutely zero to help the farmers in those days. You 
root-hogged or died, was the saying, as that went out in our part of 
the country. 
 
And he went on to say that this government had done nothing for 
rural Saskatchewan, nothing for agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. 
Well I happen to have a little booklet here that we had with us 
when we were out on the farm input cost tour. We had 13 
meetings in this province in February and March. We travelled 
around this province. We had 2,000 people out to the hearings; we 
met with another 1,000 people. And you know, Mr. Chairman, I 
think I can honestly say that they felt that this government had 
done a great deal, in fact all that would be expected of them, in 
regards to farm input costs and helping the farmer. 
 
Now I'd just like to go through a few of the things that the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said, that we haven't done anything. 
And I think it's time that we sort of brought it to his attention some 
of the things that we have done. And maybe he's not aware of it. 
 
By the way, Mr. Chairman, we were in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg; 
in fact, we were in Assiniboia, and I never noticed the member at 
the meetings. He never came out and made a presentation on 
behalf of his farmers. He'd never come out to those meetings. We 
were there the whole day, and never did he come out or have any 
representation as an MLA there. I think that's just, you know . . . I 
don't know, maybe he didn't care about his farmers at that time, 
but certainly he had the opportunity, Mr. Chairman, to come out 
and voice his opinion to that farm input cost committee, and he 
didn't do it. 
 
We were also in Shaunavon, and I never noticed the member from 
Shaunavon out either. I did not notice him out there. When we 
were in Swift Current, I saw the member from Swift Current'; I 
saw the member from Morse there. In Moose Jaw, I saw the 
member from Thunder Creek there. But, Mr. chairman, I didn't 
notice those folks out there. 
 
I'm just going to read into the record a few of the things that we 
have done for rural Saskatchewan in the last couple of years. In 
the last couple of years, Mr. Chairman, the production loan 
program, $25 an acre; 6 per cent money for Saskatchewan 
farmers. Can you ever, ever remember any government in this 
province ever giving farmers 6 per cent money or any type of loan 
at all of that 

 type? Never, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The oil royalty refund, it's the first time — no it isn't the first time. 
I remember one other time that the former government for one 
year, for one year or two years, had it out there at 4 cents a gallon 
— 4 cents a gallon. That's what it was, Mr. chairman. We had one 
out that is now 21 cents a gallon and it's tied to our oil royalties. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, there's much more. There's the farm purchase 
program, 8 per cent money for young farmers. There's the 
livestock cash advance, $125 per head for cattle, and it's interest 
free. There's a livestock investment tax credit, the feeder 
association loan guarantee, the feeder-to-finish market insurance, 
the cow-calf finish market insurance, the hog incentive, Mr. 
Chairman, the farm land security Act, the counselling assistance 
for farmers that we brought in. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Chairman, that was one of the very highlights 
that we got from farmers, from bankers, from just about 
everybody when we were out on our farm input costs tour, is the 
farm counselling assistance, how beneficial it was to the farmers 
who, in fact, many of them were able to sit down with these 
counselling people and put together an agenda. They could take it 
to the banker and the banker accepted it. In fact, it worked out 
quite well. 
 
And there's many more. The natural gas distribution system in this 
province. For the first time the farmers will have natural gas 
available to them. The individual line service for telephones, and 
we can go on and on, for rural Saskatchewan — building rural 
Saskatchewan. That's what it's all about. 
 
I noticed that the member also brought up when he was talking 
about municipal affairs — he said it was called municipal affairs. 
Well when they changed the name — it was at one time municipal 
affairs — they changed it to rural affairs, and now it's called Rural 
Development, and just to make sure he understands. And, Mr. 
chairman, I think it's come a long ways in the last year or two 
years since it has been changed. It's got a long ways to go. 
 
I believe it's got a long ways to go. We found out when we were 
out on our farm input cost tour the need for short-line distributors, 
the need for processing, the need for small business in small 
communities. Rural Saskatchewan has to have some assistance 
there to build it and to put it into place and to recognize that. I 
think that's one of the things we'll do with our economic 
development corporation is, in fact, Mr. Chairman, put in place an 
avenue for small communities to in fact develop with their own 
resources. 
 
Another thing that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
brought up that we hadn't met with the R.M. of Coronach. Just for 
your information, and I've only been the Minister of Rural 
Development for five months or six months, we had met with 
them in December of '85, February of '86 — the department has 
— and in March of '86 I met with them. So we had met with them 
three times in the last five and a half months. I just don't know 
where he got his information from. 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1441 
 
 

You're talking about the taking over of the land and not now 
taking the land over. I remember, going back a few years ago, 
when the NDP took that land from those farmers down there. It 
seemed to me that they were some upset about it. They tore out the 
culverts; there was protests; what else went on down there. I'm not 
just sure if the farmers really wanted their land taken away from 
them. 
 
I think he mentioned something about the property improvement 
grant, and the need to replace it. And the only thing, in my view 
. . . And one of the things the property improvement grant did — 
and he brought it up — it did in fact help, was an incentive to 
bring taxes back into the R.M. offices. But when we were at 
Esterhazy, one of the farmers made a presentation to us in regards 
to the need to reinstate the property improvement grant. And the 
question I asked him was, will this help stabilize your farm in any 
way? And he looked at me and he said, no, but it would be good 
spending money. That's what he said to me at the Esterhazy 
meeting. And I think . . .I'm not sure that that relates to every 
farmer, but it certainly related to that particular farmer. But what 
he did say was, the 6 per cent money was a great lot of help; the 
$125 of interest-free money was a great deal of help, and more 
should be done to help stabilize the farm income. And that's where 
he felt he needed his money. 
 
You mentioned food banks, that you had food banks down in your 
area. That may be well true, but I also noticed that . . . I think I saw 
you drive up in a new Lincoln here the other day, and so certainly 
everybody down in your area doesn't have food banks — I can see 
that — or need for it. 
 
You were talking about ministers travelling all over this country, 
or all over, out of the province. I just want to draw to your 
attention that in over a year I haven't been out of this province. I 
have not left this province in over a year. In fact, I travel very little 
out of this province. But I'll tell you one thing I do: I travel a great 
deal inside this province. In six months, I've been around this 
province almost totally twice now — almost around this province 
twice. And then in June, I'll be back out at the executive meetings 
that are being held all over the province again. So that'll be three 
times inside of six months . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I 
probably did. Well I'm sure he brought up some more questions, 
but I'll leave it at that and we'll see where he takes it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I appreciate the minister opening it wide up to 
personal attacks, Mr. Speaker, and we'll keep that in mind. We'll 
talk a little bit about that. 
 
You talked about travelling around the country with your input 
costs, and mentioned that my colleague from Shaunavon and I 
attended your meetings. Well I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, we 
read those meetings for what they were. They were a little political 
charade where you were trying to build some support out in the 
country. But it kind of fell flat when one of your members made 
some snide jokes about farmers and tells stories like this. The 
reports I heard from that series of meetings is that it wasn't money 
very well spent. And by the way, what did that whole series of 
meetings cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? What did this little 
political charade cost us? 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know. It's under the 
Department of Agriculture. I was only chairing the meetings. 
You'll have to ask the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Engel: — It seems to me that that's about the rate that this 
man administers things. He was the chairman of the committee 
and doesn't know what it costs. That's why he hired somebody to 
manage Sask Forest Products for him when he was the minister in 
charge of Sask Forest Products; paid him $10,000 a month plus; 
$2,500 a week — $2,500 a week. 
 
But you know, to my friends at the table that didn't hear this story 
before, they hired a guy to come in from B.C. They paid his flights 
back and forth; they paid his flights for his wife to come and visit 
him; they bought him . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Sask Forest Products has 
nothing to do with these estimates. Order. And would you carry on 
with your . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On a point of order if I could, Mr. 
Chairman. During the minister's comments, I believe he was 
talking bout automobiles of the member opposite and that type of 
thing, and you sat there and allowed it to go on, never moved a 
finger to straighten him out. I wonder if you could be a little bit . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, order. I cannot anticipate that 
the member is going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He quit 
talking about it and I would ask the member to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear him out. Let him finish. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your ruling. I know 
why you're making it. I know what the government's trying to do. 
But the point I'm making is that that man is incompetent. He was 
the chairman of a committee that travelled across and did a 
political junket and doesn't know what it costs. 
 
He was the minister in charge of Sask Forest Products. That same 
incompetent member was the minister of Sask Forest Products that 
paid $10,000 a month to one man, bought his pork and beans and 
his groceries, paid his trips for his wife. That incompetent minister 
doesn't know how to spend money? He's the chairman of the rural 
. . he's the minister in charge. This same minister is in charge. 
 
(1615) 
 
When he is a member in his own constituency, they took a back 
hoe in and dozed down the Piwei campgrounds right in his own 
constituency; took a building that the people built to . . . The 
farmers of his constituency got together and put up a place. And 
he took a back hoe and knocked it down and destroyed the 
campgrounds. He closed down the Green Bush correctional centre 
in his riding. And I want to tell you, this minister is incompetent to 
the nth degree, that can stand up in this House and criticize me for 
the kind of car I drive. 
 
Well I think that shows the arrogance of this government.  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1442 
 
 

I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, if you want to get into personal 
attacks, I will tell you I know what you're doing. We've got a little 
letter we're going to read into the record from some Audrey 
somebody that I'm not familiar with, but I'll let my colleagues do 
that one. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you toured Saskatchewan as a chairman of a 
committee and tried to raise the hopes and tried to suggest what 
you were hearing. But the reports I heard from farmers that went 
to it said what a farce it was — said what a farce it was. And as the 
minister responsible, who had your way paid to travel around and 
do some politicking across here, what did you get out of it? How 
much extra did you get paid? 
 
Does the minister not have to listen or answer my questions, Mr. 
Chairman? I asked him a question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, if your colleagues would quit hollering from their seats and 
shouting like they're doing, the members . . . and if they want me 
to name them, I can. If they would quit hollering from their seats, 
you could maybe hear the question. I was going to repeat the 
question again, and I see they're bringing in a new chairman to try 
and shut me down, but we'll see. He does it before. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don't believe this. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That is exactly right, if I may quote members 
of the opposition. I don't believe this. You know full well . . . And 
if I have to cite to you rule 117, there will be no imputation 
regarding the role of the chairman and what he will do or will not 
do. And there will be no reflection upon the rulings or the duties of 
this Chair. If you have questions, you will ask the minister 
responsible and you will not refer or reflect those kinds of feelings 
upon this Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It depends on how you act, that's what. it 
depends on how you carry out your duty. Who do you think you 
are — Gestapo, or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. The 
member from Shaunavon indicates to the Chair: what do you think 
you are — Gestapo, or something? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member has risen on a point 
of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, that type of statement is not 
very respectful for this Assembly or for the members of this 
Assembly. And no matter from what side of the House you come 
from, surely members of the legislature can do better than that. 
And I think that we should surely have some order in the 
Assembly with regard to the yelling and the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A comment on the assumption that the 
minister is making that I, when I made the comment from my seat 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Would you please be seated. Now, are 
you rising on a point of order? 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — No. I'm not rising on a point of order. The 
minister made a point of order and I would like to speak to the 
point of order made by the speaker. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Please proceed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that very much, Mr. Chairman. 
The comments that were attributed to me by the minister, which 
he says I made from my seat, and then he goes on to assume that it 
was made to the Chair — I never mentioned the Chair. I was 
saying of the government, that a government with this massive 
majority that attempts to shut down members of the opposition by 
hooting from their chairs is, in fact, acting in an outrageous 
manner. That's the point I was making. The remark wasn't made to 
the Chair; it was made to you and your members opposite who 
continue to try to shut us down in doing our work that we're paid 
for to be here and elected to do. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It is very difficult . . . I was trying to get your 
attention. It is very difficult to decide one way or another on this 
matter. However, there have been numerous cautions this day in 
the House, and I will add to it my caution to the House. 
 
Rule 117 states very clearly: 
 

Reflections upon the character or actions of the Speaker may be 
punished as breaches of privilege. 

 
Be very careful; be very careful. 
 
Rule 325 — in so far as my role as the Chairman here and what I 
may or may not do — and I will read it to you to caution you: 
 

When the Speaker takes notice of any expression as personal 
and disorderly, and tending to introduce heat and confusion . . 
 

I have the option of standing up and bringing the House to order 
on that. 
 
What I will state in my decision regarding the point of order is 
that, in order to continue on with this House, I would hope that 
cooler heads would prevail; the questions that would be from 
members to the minister would be just that, and replies from the 
minister back to the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, is the Chairman 
suggesting that the proceedings in this committee are confined to 
questions and answers? Are you suggesting for a single moment, 
sir, that substantial statements by any member, that are in order in 
the sense of being in the area that is being considered by the 
committee, are not in order? Are you suggesting for a single 
moment, sir, that members should conduct themselves on the basis 
of questions to the minister and answers by the minister? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — To the member of Regina Elphinstone: I was 
asked to make a ruling on a point of order. I've indicated my 
thoughts on that matter. I am not suggesting that members cannot 
ask questions of the minister in a broad sense. The member from 
Elphinstone, as a  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1443 
 
 

long-time member of this House, is probably a lot more familiar 
than the Chair or the Clerks regarding the rules of this House. 
 
On many a time I've indicated that rule 494 does allow for 
questions that are broad in nature on the topic of general 
administration. So I do not . . .In fact, rather than say "I do not, " I 
do not think it's reasonable or necessary to imply what my 
thoughts are on this matter. The questions shall go on. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The discussion will continue. We were moving 
along rather nicely for quite a little while until, I don't know, it got 
bogged down when you decided to do a personal attack, when you 
decided to personally attack us on this side of the House. 
 
And I hope that you will, as a minister, set the stage and example, 
and answer the allegations we've made. And if you want me to go 
through the former question again, I can. And the question was 
simply put: how much did it cost the taxpayers for the committee 
you chaired to tour around the province? 
 
And don't try and put off, because you're responsible. You were 
the chairman of the committee. And don't try and put off 
answering this question till we debate it on another topic, because 
you were the chairman, Mr. Minister. And the broad topic is 
talking about rural affairs and rural development and the direction 
your department is taking. 
 
And there's a ballpark number rolling around that everybody 
knows. but I want you to be man enough to stand up and say, we 
spent X amount of dollars on this little public enterprise of ours, or 
this little venture where we tried to gain some respect from 
farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's obvious that I 
wouldn't have the dollars and cents that it cost to do the farm input 
cost study, because it was under Department of Agriculture. And I 
was appointed by the Premier as chairman, which is appropriate. 
He may appoint anybody. He could have well appointed one 
member from the opposition if that was his wish. 
 
So I wouldn't have the cost in regards to that. And I'm sure that I 
never did hear the costs of what it cost on the Crow, when the 
former minister of Agriculture went around the province in 
regards to the costs and travelling around when he went around. 
And I'm not sure that it's relevant to the point, but I don't have the 
costs. And if you ask the Minister of Agriculture, when you're 
doing his estimates, I think you'll find them out then. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to challenge the 
statement you just made. You said that you don't have the costs of 
the Crow committee. Do you want me to read from Hansard when 
you actually quoted the number that Gordon MacMurchy spent on 
his little tour around the country? And I know that you're referred 
to that number, along with all the other colleagues in your House, 
and we know how much this little venture paid. 
 
But the difference is . . . There's a little difference there. That 
Crow committee was out there trying to tell farmers 

 — and I travelled with it; I was Gordon MacMurchy's legislative 
secretary; I travelled with him on a lot of those meetings at my 
own expenses. But I want to tell you something; I want to tell you 
something, Mr. Minister. We were out there to alert farmers, 
saying that the cost of moving your grain is going to go up, and go 
up severely. And we had a recommendation in place that we were 
going to take on the federal government, and we were going to 
fight to maintain a cost factor that the farmers could count on. 
 
And what do you do? You let it go. You let the Crow get away. 
You opened the door to the cage and told the railways, step up, 
stick your hands in the pockets of farmers and take all you can. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, your little committee — who had a member on 
it that had just come back from a paid trip to Venezuela defending 
the farmers. The member got his expenses paid by a chemical 
company to go to Venezuela on a little holiday on your committee, 
and you took him around with you to hear farmers talk about input 
costs. 
 
And you wonder, why didn't any recommendations, why didn't 
any recommendations come out of that committee? How come we 
haven't heard anything in the budget from that committee? How 
come we haven't seen any new direction in agriculture to save the 
farmers some money? 
 
You took and travelled around the country, and I estimate that — 
with the advertising and the hall rental and the entertainment and 
the lavish things you tried to pour on the farmer — I estimate that 
that cost a pretty buck. That cost a good amount of money. And I 
could throw a number into the air and let you challenge it, because 
there's been numbers quoted in the press on what that little venture 
cost. And you know what it cost. Don't tell me you don't know 
what that little operation cost. You're deceiving us if you tell us 
you don't know. And I think you had an expensive little venture 
there. 
 
We talked about the estimates of Tourism and Small Business, and 
how they increased their role and the money they're spending on 
communication — and let's get our message out there and let's let 
the people know what a good government this PC government is. 
Your little agricultural committee went out there, and the idea of 
that committee — that input cost committee went out there — and 
the idea was, let's convince farmers we're worried about input 
costs; we're going to do something about it. Where's your action? 
Where's your action? 
 
You knew when your committee went out there that your term had 
run out. You knew it was on year 4. You expected me and my 
colleague to come to your political gatherings? You really 
expected that? You thought I'd go to a meeting that was politically 
oriented with your kind of people — when a pro-chemical man 
was on your committee to talk about the chemical input costs, and 
somebody that had just come back from a trip, and to colour your 
committee with that kind of information — and you expected me 
to attend that political meeting? 
 
Well I want to tell you, your Premier has a little picnic  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1444 
 
 

down in Thompson Lake Regional Park; I don't go to it. They 
have a Premier's valentine ball in Limerick; I didn't go to it. I don't 
go to those political meetings and I don't expect you to come to 
mine — I don't expect you to come to mine. And let's wise up and 
let's do a thing . . . 
 
But the trouble is, you're paid; you're paid to go to them. And the 
taxpayers paid a pretty penny to travel you boys around in style 
and have some lavish little meetings around. I was in some of the 
towns while you were there, and I don't think you can get away 
with hiding those kind of numbers. 
 
(1630) 
 
And it's the same way as you couldn't get away with your manager 
of Sask Forest Products — the company lost more money than 
ever. And the same way as you lost your campgrounds; you lost 
your correctional centre. You're just not on top of things, Mr. 
Minister. You just don't seem to know what's going on and 
managing your department. 
 
Now the other issue I raised, and that is that some R.M.s are 
asking about higher tax penalties for farmers that can't afford to 
pay their tax. Has this been drawn to your attention, and have you 
discussed it as a department to change the penalty they can charge 
for late payment of taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in regards to the 
arrears or the penalty for late payment of taxes, we have a rural 
law review committee travelling around the province — have been 
out there for six months now — and they've been meeting with 
R.M. councils and ratepayers and they've been . . The ratepayers 
so far and the councils have some reservations about being able to 
set their own. They've been saying . . . We've asked them that 
question, and they're simply saying, well we don't know, maybe 
it's best if it's set at a provincial level so it's all the same. 
 
When the committee's finished and we get the recommendations 
back, we'll certainly look at them and see and then discuss with the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
people what they think should be done, because before we make 
any decision in regards to rural development or the activities 
within rural Saskatchewan related to our department, we usually 
discuss it with the SARM executive and a lot of taxpayers and 
ratepayers around the province. 
 
So before we bring in or make any changes, certainly we'll do that. 
But they're telling us out there that they would like to . . . well they 
have reservations; there's some that maybe think they should, and 
some that think they don't, and some have a lot of reservations 
about it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — How many meetings has the rural committee held 
to date, or how far along are they? Have they published an interim 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, they've had no interim report. They've 
held eight meetings, but there's been questionnaires sent out to all 
R.M. councils that are now starting to come back in again. I'm not 
sure when they're  

going to have an interim report. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Who are some of the people of this committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well just so I have it straight here, Mr. 
Chairman, John Marusiak is the chairman; Bill Street, from 
SARM, a representative of SARM that they've sent to put on the 
board; Jim Angus from the Saskatchewan association of rural 
administrators; a reeve, Dahl, from the north—eastern part of 
Saskatchewan; and a Godenir, he's a reeve from the south—
eastern part of Saskatchewan; and Gerry Parrott from the 
department are the ones that are sitting on the review panel. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And they haven't made a recommendation or they 
haven't given you an interim report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They haven't given us an interim report. We 
expect one about some time in early July. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I was just wondering why you put these 
people through all the work. It's similar to what you did in your 
own committee. Your committee travelled around and listened to 
farmers and got it in. It's similar in only one respect. Listen, Mr. 
Minister, don't make me repeat a question 50 times and disagree 
with me before I've made the statement. 
 
The timing is bad. I appreciate . . . and I know over half of these 
people on this committee, and they could do some excellent work, 
but the timing part of it, when you're telling people to have some 
input and not going to report after your term of office, you know. 
 
In all likelihood, when these were appointed, you expected the 
election to be in April and at best June. Like my leader said, we're 
well beyond your normal term of office. You've been in power 
longer than any government since the war. And only one other 
Tory government tried it that long and they came back with not 
one member. 
 
Your committee went out . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What government was that? 
 
Mr. Engel: — The Anderson government. My friend from 
Shaunavon was well aware that when those boys were around, 
they decided, we're gong to try and change public opinion and 
travel around the country and do a few things to increase public 
awareness. And I'm sure that's what your committee was all about. 
 
This rural law review committee is talking bout seeking a fair tax 
system . . . isn't quite the same as the question I asked you. The 
question that I asked, and I'd like an answer for, Mr. Minister, an 
don't try and evade them . . . The Chairman has suggested we get 
into a reasonable discussion here and debate and answer the 
questions. You can help us move this thing along by co—
operating a little bit and not always changing the topic every time I 
ask a question. Are there proposals kicking around, or have you 
intentions of raising the penalty for late payment of taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I said that, you  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1445 
 
 

know, the law review committee that is travelling around the 
province is asking that specific question of delegates from rural 
municipalities. And SARM right now, and I'm speaking from 
what they've told me, is that they would have some reluctance 
about changing it. And so, unless the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities and the R.M.s in general wanted it changed, I 
don't believe we would change it. We would have to have their 
concurrence that they would like to have that happen. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'm just checking here with a Leader—Post of an 
article that says, "Higher tax penalties wanted." And the reeve of 
the R.M. of North Battleford thinks rural municipalities should 
have the same right as the cities do to levy up to 18 per cent tax. 
And that concerns me a little bit, with as tough as things are back 
on the farm, to push the farmer still further with their backs to the 
wall. And my question is: do you have intention of changing that 
and giving a leeway to charge over and above the 12 per cent that 
they now can charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I said, no, I don't, 
unless . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's the first time you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No. I said: unless the association of rural 
municipalities and the R.M.s themselves directly asked for it. I 
don't intend to change it unless they're in concurrence with what 
they want done. There is regional meetings being held in June, and 
that will be asked at those meetings. There's also a law review 
committee out there looking at the whole rural development Act. 
And so, you know, if that was their wish, but I would doubt very 
much . . . I believe that most councils are responsible and they 
wouldn't want to raise it beyond a reasonable amount, and 12 per 
cent is a reasonable amount. So I would wonder if they would. 
 
Unless they come back to me and said raise it, and it was their 
decision, then I guess you would have to go by what they'd want. 
But I don't believe that they would do it, nor would I ask them to 
do it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well you say no, but. Because you said if the 
councillors ask for it, and I have here a press release where he said 
he would like to see R.M.s allowed to set their own penalties at 
higher rates like Regina's 18 per cent penalty, to act as an incentive 
for people to turn over taxes earlier. 
 
And I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister: what is your position on it? 
You have the authority. And are you planning . . . and will you put 
the minds of the rural ratepayers across Saskatchewan that are 
having a tough time making ends meet; people that have had to 
borrow a billion dollars at 6 per cent and think that that's even too 
high — 18 per cent or 12 per cent isn't reasonable. I'm wondering 
what your position is on it; and don't give me a no, but, or yes. But 
I'd like to know just where do you stand on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know; that 
might be one councillor saying that. I can't speak for one 
councillor. I speak for all the councillors in Saskatchewan, and the 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan. I would hope that that's how I'd 
represent them. 

It's in the statues now, and unless we bring it back to this House 
and change the statues, it won't be changed. And what we're 
saying simply is, unless it's the desire of the people to have it 
changed — and I'm talking about the people in general — then it's 
not going to be changed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could 
indicate whether the rural municipalities are having greater 
problems in collecting their taxes these days, and whether you 
could indicate to your knowledge whether there is a grater amount 
of arrears of taxes through out Saskatchewan at the present time. 
And I was wondering whether you could . . Well I'll let you give 
me some of that information first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well an assumption would be . . And we 
haven't got the end of '85 with the rebates back, that's related to the 
R.M.s, and I wouldn't know where they stand exactly at the end of 
'85. But I would assume it's been pretty tough times out in south 
and south-western Saskatchewan and all over Saskatchewan. And 
when you have tough times, farmers are probably more in arrears, 
and I figure that's probably a fair statement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The information . . . You're the minister, and I 
would have thought that you'd have a pretty good grip on this. But 
the information that I get, and in talking with the R.M.s throughout 
my constituency, is that there is in fact a larger amount of arrears, 
and there is a reason for it. And the basic reason for the increased 
arrears is there is . . .you've taken way the incentive for people to 
pay it. And the incentive that you took away was the property 
improvement grants that we had in place. 
 
And you go into every town and every village and to the R.M.s, 
and they're having increasing problems. And your solution now is 
to penalize people to pay their taxes by increasing the interest rate 
on delay of tax payment, rather than having the incentive that we 
had there before. 
 
I want to ask the minister: have you received any representations 
in respect to the government's decision to remove the property 
improvement grants from the R.M.s? Have they in fact passed any 
resolutions indicating that they would like to see a reinstatement of 
the property improvement grants? Basically what it did, as I said, 
was to guarantee that payments would be made in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that most 
farmers would like any kind of a rebate that they could have in 
tough times. You take whatever you can get. And certainly that's 
been true. And I went on and I mentioned before some of the 
things we have done. 
 
One of the things that I did announce at the SARM convention, 
which I believe has been well received in Saskatchewan, in rural 
Saskatchewan, and it'll certainly be beneficial to our road system, 
we announced a regravel program, which I understand that they've 
asked for for quite a few years. And we announced it this year, 
feeling that it was probably the appropriate time to put in a 
regravel program. Maybe due to some of the taxes, some of the 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1446 
 
 

farmers having problems trying to keep all their taxes paid up, and 
just, you know, the way the weather's been. And also, it would 
also sort of revitalize those roads to some degree and at least keep 
them up into the standard they are. 
 
And so we've announced . . . It was a $6.5 million program. It'll 
allow all designated roads in all R.M.s in the province of 
Saskatchewan to put 100 yards per mile on at 50 per cent totally 
cost shared, and it's quite a substantial amount. It varied from 
about $10,000 at the least in one municipality to well over $60,000 
in some municipalities, so it's a substantial amount of money to 
most municipalities in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, as a result of your government's 
policies, one of the things that we have been seeing, and which is 
very evident, is that there has been a tax shift — that is a tax shift 
to the local taxpayers. And certainly it's indicative of the tax shift 
because what you did, and you representing the rural 
municipalities allowed it to happen and we're a party to it — a 
very substantial tax shift, in fact. Because what you did is remove 
the property improvement grants — $80 million across this 
province was taken away; a benefit, tax relief to people in rural 
municipalities in the towns and villages in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
And when we take a look at it, Mr. Minister, we find that in this 
tax shift what you did is, in respect to the rural home owner, lost 
$230; each small business lost $250. We find that renters lost 150. 
And then with farmers in a time when they need it most, as you 
indicated yourself, that there's tough times out there, do you know 
what this government did to the farmers? They took away about 
$675 from every farmer in the province by the removal of the 
property improvement grant and the education tax rebate. That's 
what you did. 
 
And what you did, in fact, is turn around and say, oh yes, there's 
increasing arrears and taxation in Saskatchewan, but times are 
tough out there. Well how do you justify in one hand saying that 
times are difficult for the farmers, and then your policy of 
addressing that is to remove the tax relief that you got under the 
property improvement grant? I ask you: can you give a 
rationalization in respect to why would you, in a time when the 
farmers need it, pass a greater tax burden on to the rural 
municipalities and the taxpayers in their rural municipalities? 
What is the rationale for that massive tax shift and the elimination 
of the property improvement grant — some $80 million in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you could go into a 
whole booklet of things we've done for rural Saskatchewan and 
the farmers. But just to touch on a couple of them: there's been a 
removal of the gas tax and it was about . . . It's 40 cents a gallon, 
approximately, to anything of personal use on the farm. And 
certainly wives on the farm, they drive to and from the skating 
rink, curling rinks, or just to town, and certainly they're the ones 
that travel a great deal. We've also removed the tax on children's 
clothing — in fact, all necessary supplies, you might say, because 
we removed it off of school  

supplies, we removed it off of power bills. And the clothing is a 
very, very major one. For farm wives who go to . . families who 
go to town to buy clothing, that was a substantial amount of 
savings. 
 
We've also certainly . . . We have a tax rebate to farmers for farm 
fuel of 4.6 cents a litre, and there's a federal discount now of 5.5 
cents. That's almost 50 cents a gallon on our farm fuel that's 
certainly coming back directly in the farmers' pockets, or being 
saved. 
 
And you know, we've put out 6 per cent money on a lot of other 
things — $125 a head for cattle, interest free, and many other 
things. So we've done a lot of things. 
 
It may not have been done directly in the form that the former 
administration did, but certainly a lot of money, millions and 
millions of dollars, have been put into the farmers out there — 
much, much more than the property improvement grant would 
relate to it in many, many ways. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well how can you, in a time when the farmers 
you indicate . . . You have to answer the question. Why would 
you, representing the farmers and the R.M.s and rural 
Saskatchewan, how do you justify though — that's what I want to 
know— how do you justify removing the benefits, even a part of 
your programs, of the education tax rebate program? I mean, 
farmers were getting up to 600, $700 annually in the rebate in their 
taxes, and what has happened now is that because of lack of 
additional funding what has happened is that, to support education 
and to support other costs, the taxes are increasing at the local 
level. What I wanted to know . . And similarly what you did in 
respect to the tax on used vehicles. Here is another one where, 
primarily, people buying second-hand are normally those that 
have less income and are buying used vehicles. And last fall, I 
know, in talking to rural people, because of the weather 
conditions, many of them had to buy a second truck for the 
purposes of drying their grain. And what you have done there is to 
tack on a tax on used vehicles. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think what you're doing here is really 
counter-productive. You've taken away a benefit of some $80 
million which the Saskatchewan taxpayers were benefiting before 
and farmers were benefiting the most — you've taken that away 
from them. You've put on a tax on used vehicles. You've 
transferred the cost of education with your zero increase in 
budgets for rural affairs last year. You've transferred more costs on 
to the rural municipalities. 
 
And so what I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is that rural Saskatchewan 
hasn't been doing very well under you. At the same time of 
increasing the taxes on the farmers, what you have done is transfer 
more taxes on to the local taxpayer in the perception that you're 
really helping rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to make it very clear to the people of Saskatchewan that 
while this government is indicating that it has policies which are 
beneficial to rural Saskatchewan that that in fact has not been true. 
Because under your government, Mr. Minister, we have seen the 
greatest imposition of taxation in the history of this  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1447 
 
 

province. And you can't deny it. And you stood by and watched 
the erosion of tax benefits to the farmers of Saskatchewan. You 
allowed your government to remove the 600 to $700 benefit to 
every farmer in Saskatchewan. You stood by and watched them 
put on a tax on used vehicles. And I'll tell you, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan won't forgive you for that unfair and unjust tax 
because they needed it. They had to buy used vehicles during the 
last harvest, as you may well know. And they said, if it is unfair 
and if this is the admission of being unfair, then why aren't they 
being rebated that unjust tax? 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, on behalf of all of those farmers 
that paid that unfair and unjust tax on used vehicles in their 
attempt to purchase second-hand used vehicles to get their crop off 
. . But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: are you prepared to make 
representations or have you discussed with the rural municipalities 
that your government will be prepared to rebate that unjust tax that 
you have taken, particularly from the farmers, in a time when they 
can so little afford it? Have you had discussion with them to pay 
back the amount of around $5 million that you extracted on the 
unfair used vehicles? Have you had any communications with the 
R.M.s indicating that you will, in fact, be prepared to make 
representations to your government to pay this unfair tax back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have representation 
and met with a lot of R.M. councils over the last six months, I 
would think in the neighbourhood of 100 to 150 R.M. councils I 
have personally met with over the last six months plus being at the 
SARM convention meeting with most of them. You talk about the 
rebate on the used car tax and certainly it was removed because 
we didn't feel it should be on there, but rebating of taxes has not 
been a policy of any government that I'm aware of in 
Saskatchewan or Canada. 
 
And when the former government had a succession duty tax on —
it amounted to about $28 million — it wasn't rebated and they 
removed it and certainly they said at the time it wasn't appropriate. 
So, you know, there's many types of taxes that are put on and 
taken off and I believe it's fair to say that governments usually . . . 
If the tax is collected, it's usually retained whether it's right or 
wrong. 
 
Certainly we have done some things in rural Saskatchewan that I 
believe are credible over the last four years, and it's been a pretty 
tight four years. You go back into the '78, '79, '80, and '81 when 
interest rates were extremely high, in the 20—some per cent, and 
there really was no relief for farmers, young farmers, or anybody 
else buying land. Now we have a farm purchase program of 8 per 
cent. We brought in 6 per cent money for short—term financing 
for farmers to put their crops in. So we've done that. 
 
Also the mill rate last year went down. In fact, it didn't raise. This 
year, with our regravel program, it actually should reduce, on an 
average, about 6 per cent across the province. That is a substantial 
amount of saving to the rural taxpayer. 
 
If you look back at what we have given to the municipalities over 
the last four years in conditional and unconditional grants, what 
the increase has been, it's  

been 24.4 per cent over the last four years, which is substantial, I 
believe, in view of the times and conditions. So we have done a lot 
of things, Mr. Chairman, that in fact helps out there. 
 
Nothing, Mr. Chairman, will fix the problem out there, only a 
better pricing for commodities that we've got to sell. And certainly 
that's an international market out there and it's really tough to deal 
with. 
 
We did make a presentation to the parliamentary committee 
travelling around the price of wheat, and our position was that it 
should be raised to $11 per bushel and it should be pooled all 
across Canada and then paid out as a payment. And our estimation 
would come somewheres, it depends . . And that would pay out on 
all wheats — all wheats — that's produced in this province, and in 
Canada, in fact. It would average somewheres between 40 cents a 
bushel all the way up to $1 a bushel. There would be a variance 
there, and it depends on how it would be paid. But that would be a 
substantial amount of income to our farmers, especially when the 
international price of wheat is down. So we've done some things to 
help —not fix, but help — out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked a particular question. Have you received 
representations from R.M.s requesting a rebate in respect to the 
unjust and unfair tax on used vehicles? Have you had any 
representations from farm groups or R.M.s in that respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, no, I have not had any 
requests from SARM or from any R.M. council in regards to the 
rebate of the used car tax. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I have been alluding to the fact that 
when we were in government we had the property improvement 
grants. In addition, you put in the education tax rebate on the home 
quarter. And as I indicated to you before, the benefit to an average 
farmer was between 6 and $700 annually. You know that and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
And so I ask you, under that particular system where you could get 
6 or $700 rebate back on your taxes on the average per farm, I ask 
you: that system which was in place which you have destroyed, 
would you agree that it was of benefit to farmers who were 
starting up and to smaller farmers? I ask you, Mr. Minister: is it 
not true that having the education tax rebate on the home quarter 
plus the property improvement grant, did it not direct, in fact, a 
reduction of tax most felt by smaller farmers, and also by 
beginning farmers? Because often they were the smaller farmers, 
as opposed . . . To those who may have the 30 or 40 or 50 quarter 
sections, it's not very meaningful. 
 
But I'll tell you, to those that were out there, the young farmers 
who were starting up with a relatively small land base, it was a 
significant amount. And to the family farm, the average family 
farm, it was quite significant, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what you have done is to remove that particular aspect of 
fairness of reducing the tax on the smaller farmers and the 
beginning farmers. And what you have  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1448 
 
 

done is turned it loose so that that benefit to the smaller farmer and 
to those that are just developing a farm base is removed. And what 
it is now, the benefit is passed over to the large landholder. That's 
what you have done — basically very, very unfair, what you have 
done. And when I talk to farmers throughout the province and 
many of the farmers in my constituency, they are saying and 
asking us: will you be prepared to bring back the property 
improvement grant and tax relief to those smaller farmers 
throughout Saskatchewan, the family farm, and those that are 
beginning farming on a smaller land base? 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Minister, you took it away and the farmers 
across this province appreciated it. You took $80 million out of 
their pockets, that's what you did. And I'll tell you when we get the 
opportunity, if you ever get the nerve to call an election, which is 
pretty evident that you're scared to, that I'll guarantee you that we 
will bring it back. We will bring it back, given the opportunity . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Since it's near 5 o'clock this committee 
now stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


