


















































December 22, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 22, 1986 
 
 

403 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I hereby present and lay on the Table the following 
petition: 
 
By Mr. Swenson of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport, in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Policy Concerning Department of Agriculture Leases 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Acting Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with the Premier’s 
decision to suddenly adopt a new get-tough policy with the 
Department of Agriculture leases. 
 
A few days ago he sent notices to 750 lands branch lessees 
telling them that if they didn’t clear up their arrears payments 
by the end of this month, they would have their leases 
cancelled. What brought on this sudden get-tough policy and 
why has the Premier given these 750 lessees less than 30 days 
notice to come up with the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’d like to ask the hon. 
members to refrain from hollering from their desks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the 
specifics of any new policy, and I would caution members to 
take at face value what we’ve heard. And I say that because 
simply based on history and my understanding of how lands 
branch has dealt with leaseholders, it’s always been extremely 
fair. And the government policy has always been one of 
walking the extra mile — in fact I would argue, the extra two 
and three and four miles. I have no doubt that the policy is still 
consistent with those fair and responsible themes. And insofar 
as the details of the policy, I’ll take notice on behalf of the 
Premier and we’ll get the details for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I have a memorandum from the 
Premier to all government MLAs dated December 5, 1986, re 
lease arrears on Crown land. I am just going to read from this 
document . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Would hon. members please allow the 
member to ask his question without interference. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saying that it isn’t, 
and I’ll quote the second paragraph: 
 

It is not acceptable to allow lessees to continue 
farming leased land which is in serious long-term 
arrears. Therefore I have recently approved a policy, a 
copy of which is attached, which take a firm stand on 
leases which are in arrears. Lessees will be required to 
be no more than one year in  

arrears by December 31, 1986. Failure to do so will 
result in further collection action including lease 
cancellations, where necessary. 
 

I ask the minister why this government, when they have used 
the excuse of tough times as an explanation of a $2.5 billion 
deficit, why aren’t tough times in agriculture taken into account 
when it comes into land branch lease payments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt, as I 
said earlier, that lands branch’s policy in terms of being fair and 
responsible and reasonable, given the economic conditions out 
there, the themes will still be the same in the policy. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that this government, this Premier, 
has recognized the hardships of the farmers out there, whether 
they be lands branch leaseholders or others. That is why we put 
in things like the $25 per acre production loan, Mr. Speaker; 
that is why we have the oil royalty pass-back, Mr. Speaker; that 
is why our Premier lobbied for the billion dollar — and 
received I might add, Mr. Speaker — the billion dollar 
deficiency payment; that is why, Mr. Speaker, over the past two 
or three or four years perhaps — and I’d have to have my 
memory refreshed — that lands branch lease rates have been, in 
fact, frozen. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, when the record is examined in totality, 
you will find that our government has been not only responsible 
but extremely fair with the leaseholders of this province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
policy that seems to be a double route of action going here 
when on one hand we see, as you have stated, some of your 
policies; on the other hand we have the actual document that 
says the policies are paper. The facts are that we are seeing 
people being pressed, and hard pressed, to get rid of their 
leases. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not find it rather heartless, rather uncaring, 
for your government to give more than 750 farm families this 
kind of news a few days before Christmas? Do you not 
understand that these families have been given less than 30 days 
notice to come up with thousands and thousands of dollars at 
the worst possible time of the year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, once again I do not 
accept at face value what the hon. member is suggesting. I do 
know that there are opportunities for leaseholders and others 
facing financial difficulties to use such tools as the counselling 
assistance for farmers. It is very much a process that was put in 
place some good long time ago. It’s proved very, very 
satisfactory to all parties, Mr. Speaker, and in fact I think we 
have a Bill before this House now where we are going to extend 
that provision because it has been one that’s been useful to 
farmers. 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

404 
 

And I could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker, and talk about 
things like cash advances and, as I said earlier, the $25 
production loan, to provide the needed cash for farmers out 
there, whether they be leaseholders or others, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Introduction of Variable Rates by Canadian National 
Railway 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address my 
question to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. But in his 
absence I address it to anyone on the front bench who has the 
courage to stand up and answer this question and, more 
particularly, the Acting Minister of Agriculture. 
 
And it deals with the report that the CN, the federal Crown 
corporation, is planning an application to introduce variable 
rates on our hard-pressed farmers here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
indicated that this application for variable rates will have to be 
proceeded with by December 31st to be effective for next year’s 
crop in August. 
 
And my question to you: will you, in the absence of the 
Premier, the Acting Minister of Agriculture — will you give the 
commitment and assurance to the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
you, in fact, will fight against the introduction of variable rates, 
which in fact will have an adverse effect on the farmers 
throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we have been, and will 
continue to be, behind the farmers of Saskatchewan on this 
issue and others. I know I, and some other of my colleagues, 
have been before transportation committees, standing 
committees in agriculture, and various other sundry federal 
bodies that have dealt with this issue and others over the past 
four years, and will be with them again in the future. 
 
As it relates to variable rates specifically, Mr. Speaker, our 
position would be unchanged. We have made our briefs, and 
forwarded our briefs, and stood behind our briefs, and presented 
our briefs in the past four years. Our view is unchanged that: (a) 
we’re not against lower rates. In fact, we’re in favour of lower 
rates, as we are in favour of any lower input costs for farmers, 
but we are in favour, Mr. Speaker, of lower rates at all points. 
 
We don’t want, if you like, the railways out there, on their 
agenda, designing how rural Saskatchewan should look like. 
We will have the farmers of Saskatchewan deciding how rural 
Saskatchewan should look, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker, to the, I guess, 
Acting Minister of Agriculture. If indeed there are applications 
made by the CN, the Crown corporation — the one run by your 
colleagues in Ottawa — I want to ask you: are you prepared to 
go to bat for the farmers of Saskatchewan by, in fact, putting a 
submission before them opposing variable rates? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if that 
issue has been dealt with yet in terms of our government 
deciding whether we will or will not, because I don’t know if 
there’s an application gone forward, but if there is one goes 
forward, our government will make the decision at that time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further supplemental to the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture. I wonder, Mr. Minister, are you clear as to why the 
Mulroney government would even permit a Crown corporation 
which it controls, the CN, to in fact apply for variable rates? 
Have you put that question to the Mulroney government, that by 
the very allowance of the CN, a Crown corporation, making the 
first move for variable rates, there is an implied consent by the 
Mulroney government that they’re in favour of variable rates? I 
ask you: have you been in contact with them, and have you put 
that proposition to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak for 
the Mulroney government as to why they may or may not have 
done anything. If my memory serves me correctly, I think it was 
a Liberal government that was propped up by a half a dozen 
NDP MPs at the time and allowed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Please . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . and allowed that legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, to in fact become a reality in this country. My 
understanding of what the Mulroney government has done at 
our Premier’s urging is to get, number one, a $1 billion 
deficiency payment for farmers . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I ask the 
hon. member who asked the question in supplementary to 
please refrain from interfering as the minister is giving his 
answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Whether he is giving the 
answer that you like or not is beside the point. He has the right 
to give an answer to the question, and that’s what he is doing. 
And he is not out of order. So I ask you to please allow him to 
answer the question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A final supplemental, just in case the minister 
didn’t hear the first supplemental that I asked him. And what I 
want to ask him: are you not concerned with the federal 
government, the Mulroney government, allowing a Crown 
corporation, the CN, to be the initiator of application for the 
variable rates? And does that not, in your view, as it appears to 
the public, be in fact an implied consent by the Mulroney 
government that they are in favour of initiating a position on 
variable rates? I ask you: have you been in touch with your 
federal counterparts, and will you take a strong stand to ask the 
Mulroney government not to initiate it through their Crown 
corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, his might be one 
interpretation; it may well not be mine or our  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

405 
 

government’s. As I said earlier, I think that legislation that 
probably allows for that provision was put in place by some 
others than Mulroney and, in fact, I suppose if we would have 
had our way at the time, maybe that legislation would never 
have been tampered with. Or certainly, if it was going to be 
amended, Mr. Speaker, it would have been amended based on 
the resolution, as I recall it, in this very legislature that enjoyed 
unanimous support, that is to say, both sides of the House 
outlining a certain number of principles, in fact, if it was going 
to be opened up. 
 
Our lobbying with the federal government will continue, Mr. 
Speaker. I hope we enjoy the same sorts of successes as we 
have in the past. There are lots of serious issues facing 
Saskatchewan farmers today, and this is among them. 
 

New Fiscal Regime for the Oil Industry 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Energy and I would like to ask the minister about an 
announcement that is presumably pending from her and from 
her department. The year is rapidly running out but this House 
remains in session. The Saskatchewan oil patch is anxiously 
awaiting an announcement from the minister about a new fiscal 
regime for the industry before the end of this year. I wonder if 
the minister can assure us that a specific announcement will be 
forthcoming from her, not only before the end of 1986 but 
while this House remains in session? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the energy policies per se 
have been under review for about six weeks now, as the 
member well knows, and the commitment that was given to the 
oil patch was: (1) that a decision would be made before January 
1, and it will be announced before that time. I cannot give a 
commitment that it will be announced while the House is in. I 
guess that depends on when the House sits and when it doesn’t, 
but it will be made before January 1. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I wonder if the 
minister could tell the House then, in the event that this 
announcement perhaps might come after the House has 
adjourned for Christmas — I wonder if the minister could tell 
us if she is looking at the kind of policy that would just be a 
simple extension of the royalty holiday approach that the 
government has pursued in the past, or will the approach be 
fundamentally different from that? And in her consideration, is 
she giving any serious thought to the establishment in 
Saskatchewan of some form of oil price stabilization scheme 
that might have been implied by some of the language used in 
the throne speech. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have been 
reviewing has been done in consultation with various 
associations of the oil sectors. Jobs is the first priority and will 
be taken into consideration on whatever policy is finalized. I 
can also tell the hon. member that we are looking at a structure 
that is price sensitive. And that will be the second component. 
The third will be that it must maximize investment for 
Saskatchewan people. So keeping mind jobs and investments, 
the decision will be taken for the best interests of Saskatchewan 
people  

and the long term of the future. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the 
fact that the study has now been going on for some weeks and 
the deadline for an announcement is rapidly approaching, would 
the minister, if she cannot give a firm commitment on a date, 
could she at least assure this House that she will expend her 
very best effort to ensure that an announcement is in fact made 
while this legislature is still in session to hear it before the end 
of the year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I already stated I 
cannot give a commitment on the House sitting. I don’t control 
that. Maybe he should be asking my good friend from 
Saskatoon Riversdale on that point. I can only assure the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that the decision will be 
made before January 1st of ’87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 
if the minister would advise the House why she called a press 
conference and then cancelled it. And what aspects of the 
program were firm early last week and became unfirm last week 
so that you were unable to advise the public and the industry 
where your government stands? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that was done for 
personnel reasons, and I might add personal to that. 
 
Resignation of Executive Director of Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 
and it has to do with the resignation of Ms. Donalda Ford as 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
I’m wondering whether the government has launched an 
extensive search for a new executive director and whether the 
position has been filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the resignation of 
Donalda Ford, I can advise the Assembly only that I was made 
aware of that by the chairman of the Human Rights 
Commission. The chairman of the Human Right Commission 
and the board of the Human Rights Commission do their own 
research and their own recruiting as to who they’re going to 
have employed with them, and they have nothing to do with me. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister 
aware then whether the commission has recruited a new 
executive director? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I could check to be perfectly sure on 
that. As I understand . . . I met with the Human Rights 
Commission on Thursday and they indicated to me that there 
was a new person that they were hoping that would be approved 
for that position. Whether that is in fact the case, the person’s 
name and background, etc., I could notice and get that 
information for you. 
 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

406 
 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister 
saying then that the approval is by cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I understand, it still, by legislation, 
must be approved by cabinet. But what I can tell the hon. 
member is that it certainly is not a whole lot of concern to me. 
We look at the chairman of the Human Rights Commission and 
that board, and they will go out and recruit and hire whoever 
they want and we would then simply approve it. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will cabinet then 
be reviewing the appointment to ensure that this individual has 
experience, extensive experience in the area of human rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I suspect that cabinet would 
probably review it in the event that perhaps a person would be 
seen as totally non-acceptable. But in the normal course I think 
what would happen is that the people that sit on the Human 
Rights Commission I think are for the most part very good, 
credible citizens. If they go out and do a search and come in 
with a recommendation, I would think it would have to be a 
very extraordinary type of recommendation for cabinet to do 
anything but simply to approve it. 
 

Vacancies On Board Of Human Rights Commission 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I understand that 
two— the terms of two commissioners have expired, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m wondering . . . and I also understand that the 
commission consists of seven commissioners and there’s only 
five acting on it now. I’m wondering whether the government 
will be filling these positions soon, and I’m also wondering 
whether they will be appointing a native person since I 
understand there has been no native person on the commission 
for approximately two years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can advise the hon. member that 
the government is responsible for several boards and 
commissions, I think something like 900 or 1,200 or something 
like that, and in the normal course those will come up for 
review. 
 
What we will be doing in the first of the year is looking at many 
of those boards and commissions and the appointments of them, 
and try to find a proper balance on each of them; (a) we seek to 
try to get more women on various boards and commission, 
whether they’re in crown corporations or something like the 
Human Rights Commission. 
 
Native people is obviously another one you would look at. 
You’d look at ethnic background; you’d look at a whole host of 
things as you try to balance those things off. But what we will 
do is look at that early in the new year, along with many other 
boards and commissions, and try to fill those in a fair and 
proper way. 
 

Staffing of Human Rights Commission 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker, and it has to do with the recent decision of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench quashing proceedings taken by the Human 
Rights Commission on the basis that there was  

a four-year delay between the complaint being filed, and the 
completion of an investigation. And the judge in his judgement 
made reference to the fact that the commission is short-staffed 
and that steps should be taken to rectify that problem. And I’d 
like to ask the Minister: what steps have you taken to provide 
the commission with the additional staff required to make sure 
that this kind of thing doesn’t happen again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think we’re taking as a given, the 
statement and the judgement of the judge which indicates that 
in this particular case there was an oversight in the 
investigation. 
 
I met with the Human Rights Commission on this past 
Thursday. The information I had from the Human Rights 
Commission was as follows: that they had a tremendous 
backlog of cases that had not been dealt with, going back to the 
time of their appointment, 1982; that they have been pursing to 
try to get that backlog up to speed so it’s current. Their 
recommendation to me is if they could get two or three more 
investigators for a period of six months, they would be able to 
bring it current. 
 
The particular case we’re talking about here, that particular 
complaint was made in 1982 and was not investigated. And I 
think that is somewhat shoddy work. I raised that concern to the 
Human Rights Commission. They indicated that some 
investigators were in fact doing some shoddy work, that there 
were some replacements, that they’re looking at getting proper 
investigators and a proper staff of investigators to bring it up to 
speed. 
 
Their advice to me is that if they could have some part-time 
investigators for perhaps six months, bring everything up 
current, that they would be able to probably handle the 
case-load at the present budget levels. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker, and this has to do with the comments made recently 
the chief commissioner of the Human Rights Commission. He 
urged that the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code be extended 
to protect people from discrimination based on mental 
disability, family status, or sexual orientation. 
 
Does the minister agree with the chief commissioner, and are 
we likely to see such amendments to the code at the spring 
sitting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well one would never want to speculate 
what you might see at the spring sitting. I could advise the hon. 
member that again that is not something that I would take as my 
own decision. It would be something that would go through the 
cabinet process and the caucus process. I could indicate to you 
perhaps in this way that at least one of those priorities could be 
dealt with this year. 
 

Proposed Grasslands National Park 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, and again it concerns the 
Grasslands park. I would like to ask the  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

407 
 

minister if he is aware that 1987 marks the centennial of 
wildlife conservation in Canada, and does he not see the 
creation of a new Grasslands park as an appropriate way to note 
that centennial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I’m aware that this is going to be the 
100th anniversary. But sometimes there are things more 
important than just anniversaries in making decisions as to 
when a new park is to come into being. 
 
I believe some of the members opposite will realize that the 
negotiating process has been ongoing for some time over the 
grasslands park. It’s still in that process. And there are a number 
of things that are most difficult to get a solution to. At the 
proper time, that park will go forward, but it will not go forward 
until the people of Saskatchewan’s interests are protected. And 
until that time I give no further promise. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Point of Order 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to bring 
forth my ruling regarding the point of order raised last Friday. 
 
On Friday, December 19, 1986, the member for Regina Centre 
raised several points in a point of order concerning question 
period at which time I deferred my ruling. 
 
The member asked questions on the following three points: the 
relevance of certain answers by the Minister of Health; answers 
made when taking notice of a question; and the role of the Chair 
in question period. 
 
I have carefully reviewed the verbatim record of the question 
period to determine whether answers dealt with the matters 
raised. In several instances where the answers did not relate 
adequately to the matter raised, I called the minister to order at 
the time. I refer members to pages 378 and 380 of Friday’s 
Debates and Proceedings. I find that the other answers given, 
while they may not have been what the questioner wanted, were 
within the practices of the House. 
 
I want to re-emphasize that the Chair cannot insist that a 
minister must answer a question in a certain way. As long as the 
answer is relevant, it is in order even if the answer isn’t the one 
the questioner was seeking. I define relevance in answers in the 
same broad way as in all debates in the Assembly. A remark is 
relevant if it deals with the topic raised. If members wish the 
Chair to apply the rules of relevance more strictly, I advise 
members to raise this issue with the Special Committee on 
Rules and Procedures. 
 
With respect to the second point regarding lengthy answers 
being given when a minister takes notice of a question, I would 
like to outline the current practices in this matter. 
 
In the early years, following the establishment of an oral 
question period, the practice was that when the minister took 
notice of a question no supplementaries were allowed. I refer all 
members to the Journals of the  

Legislative Assembly, session 1975 - 76, page 42, as follows: 
 

The purpose of a supplementary question is to seek 
specific clarification of the answer to the main 
question. It is therefore reasonable that if a minister 
replies that he will take the question as notice or asks 
the member to submit a written question, a 
supplementary question would then be out of order. A 
supplementary question can only be asked if an 
answer is given. 
 

Over the last decade the practice has been relaxed to permit a 
supplementary to a question that has been taken as notice. At 
the same time some leeway has been given to the minister to 
make a very brief but general response while undertaking to 
bring in a more specific and detailed answer at a later time. 
 
This practice, however, must not degenerate into giving a 
minister an opportunity to answer the same question twice and 
take up valuable time in question period. Therefore, I caution 
ministers to be very brief when taking a question to notice. By 
the same token, the supplementaries in such a situation should 
be without a preamble and narrowly worded for the purpose of 
eliciting further information. 
 
However, having said that, I remain unconvinced that 
supplementaries to questions to which the minister has taken 
notice should be allowed under any circumstances. Even though 
this practice has developed in our legislature over time, it is a 
practice which I will have to further consider. 
 
Finally, I want to address the question raised regarding the role 
of the Chair. I thank the hon. member for Regina Centre for 
raising this matter as it is central to some of the difficulties we 
have been experiencing in question period. It is indeed the role 
of the Chair to determine what is, or is not, in order at any time 
during the proceedings of the House. It is not the role of 
members from either side of the House to loudly and repeatedly 
call for order from their desks. This constitutes an interference 
with the proceedings that is itself out of order. The proper way 
for members to raise what they see as a breach of the 
guide-lines in question period is to raise a point of order before 
orders of the day. 
 
I refer all members to a ruling of the Chair, Journals of the 
Legislative Assembly, session 1984-85-86, page 183, where the 
Speaker stated as follows: 
 

It is my duty, my practice and my intent, to apply the 
guidelines for Question Period as fairly and 
consistently as possible without being so stringent as 
to unduly interfere with the cut and thrust of the 
process. 
 

This also is my intention. However, it should be pointed out to 
all members that the success of question period is dependent 
primarily not so much on the rules themselves, or on the power 
of the Chair, but on the attitude hon. members bring to the 
House. 
 
It has been evident to me since 1982, when I first sat in  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

408 
 

this Assembly, and since the beginning of the first session of 
the 21st Legislature that when members and ministers abide by 
the accepted principles for question period, those question 
periods have been fruitful, productive, and beneficial to all 
concerned. Conversely, when members and ministers do not 
consciously seek to abide by the accepted principles, then even 
though the Chair can call hon. members to order, the harm done 
to question period is irreversible. 
 
So while it is clear that the Chair must determine what is, or is 
not, in order, members, I am certain, realize that the less the 
Chair is called on to interfere with the proceedings of the 
House, the more productive the proceedings will be. 
 
Finally, I ask all members to co-operate with the Chair by 
making a conscious attempt to adhere to the principles of 
acceptable behaviour in the House rather than shouting and 
hollering from your desks. 
 
One last point — my door is open at all times, and I invite 
member to discuss these and any other matters with me as they 
arise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 5 — An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to further add to 
the debate on Bill 5, and during my portion of this debate I’d 
like touch on three things. Firstly, the reasons why we are 
entering this debate and why the New Democratic Party is in 
opposition to the passing of Bill 5. Secondly, I’d like to mention 
a flaw in Bill 5 itself. And thirdly, I want to talk briefly about 
what open government is and what open government means to 
all of us here in this Assembly. 
 
The reasons for this debate, Mr. Speaker, have everything to do 
with a power-grab that is going on — a power-grab for the 
cabinet opposite so that they may negate the goings-on of the 
Legislative Assembly, that cabinet may, in their own internal 
little wisdom, decide to dismantle or to start a new area of the 
government without having to come back in front of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
There’s a great deal of frustration, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the House with Bill 5. You may have guessed that because of 
the huge number of people that have spoken in front of me. And 
I can assure you there are more speakers lined up ready, willing, 
and able to speak behind me on this Bill. And the reason, as 
I’ve stated, is a frustration with the power-grab and what is 
going on. 
 

First we had in this legislation, we had a situation where the 
government tried to sneak a quorum, a change in quorum by us, 
through something that was ruled in your ruling to be not the 
correct way to make that change come about. And what I’m 
submitting is that Bill 5 is yet another extension of this 
power-grab — of an attempt by the government, by the 
Conservative government, to do what they can to circumvent 
Her Majesty’s loyal opposition, that is, the members of the New 
Democratic Party. Needless to say we are objecting, and will 
continue to object most strenuously to what is going on. 
 
There’s a second item in this. It was a question of the notice to 
the opposition. And it is yet another example of why we are in 
the process of fighting what is going on. It’s the all-pervading 
feelings of, if you like, ill will, Mr. Speaker, that is generated. I 
must admit to being personally somewhat disillusioned with 
some of the things that are going on in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Imagine what the people out in our constituencies across 
Saskatchewan must be feeling right now. Here we are; we have 
duly elected government and duly elected opposition trying to 
do what is best for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
At least we are, on this side. We are doing our job and we’re 
finding it very, very frustrating not being able to get at 
information, not having an open government on the other side. 
 
The road-blocks that are put in front of us just are totally 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. We must do what we can to stop 
Bill 5. And indeed I ask all hon. members of this Legislative 
Assembly to vote against Bill 5. The only people that will be 
served by Bill 5 are cabinet in their power-grab; cabinet that 
wants to consolidate all the power so that only a handful of 
people in Saskatchewan will make all of the decisions. And not 
only will the opposition be left out in the cold, but so will the 
back benches of the government. And that has to be a 
frustrating place to be. At least here we can vocalize our 
opposition. The poor back-benchers to the government cannot 
do that. 
 
I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 5 is a power-grab, and I will 
be elaborating a little bit further on that in my presentation. 
 
But I’d like to ask a fundamental question of the members 
opposite and of the Legislative Assembly. And that is: how has 
business been done in the past? How is it that all of a sudden we 
have to have this massive change, this grabbing of power for 
cabinet now in the name of efficiency? We are for efficiency, 
Mr. Speaker, but we are not for a power-grab. So, how is it? 
How was business done in the past? 
 
The other day I went home — actually it was Friday evening 
and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, you will appreciate my feelings 
were not all that great. I went home and my wife asked me, why 
are you so grumpy? And I said, well, you know I have been ill. 
And I had been physically ill now for five days, leading up to 
that time. But I said fundamentally the big concern, the reason 
that I am so grumpy now is I don’t feel good about what is 
going on in the Legislative Assembly, in that institution which I 
hold  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

409 
 

very dear. And I don’t feel good; that’s what I had to tell my 
wife and my children. And it’s not a pleasant feeling to have 
our obligations and our duties being circumvented in the 
manner that Bill 5 purports to do so. So it’s not a happy 
situation when it leaves members of the opposition not feeling 
good about what is going on and the business of the legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It would certainly make me nauseous 
too. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, 
pointed out in her address that there are things in Bill 5. . . Bill 
5 does some things, that the British statutes state, is not in there. 
I will save some time in the legislature by asking member to 
refer to Hansard to the things that the member for Regina 
Lakeview stated, and I believe that the points were stated more 
clearly there than I could if I were to take an additional 15 
minutes of the members’ time. 
 
But the one point that I do want to expand a little bit on that the 
member for Regina Lakeview pointed out, is that there is 
absolutely no guarantee that regulations will be published. What 
I submit that this allows — and I invite members of the 
government to tell if I’m wrong— but what I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that this will allow, when regulations do not have to be 
published, it will allow cabinet to pass an order in council; (a), 
it will allow them to pass a law, in their power-grab, and this 
law could be enforced and the public may not even know about 
the law. 
 
What I’m saying . . . I’ll bring it a little bit into perspective. It’s 
kind of like if you watch an American television program, you 
watch the policeman stopping the speeders and you see the little 
tiny print, speed limit 25 miles an hour, in what should 
obviously be a much faster area. And the policeman smiles and 
pulls the motorist over and demands immediate payment, and 
the motorist says: well, gee, I didn’t see that speed limit sign, 
and the copy smiles and says: ah, but it was there — ignorance 
is no excuse. And that’s what might happen here under this Bill 
where we can have laws being passed and no guarantee that 
regulations will be published, no guarantee whatsoever that 
regulations will be published. This, Mr. Speaker, allows, as I 
stated, cabinet to pass laws, and the public may not even know 
about them and yet the public wind up in trouble with the legal 
system. I find that unacceptable. 
 
How are we supposed to take a government seriously when the 
members say: trust us. They say: trust us on this. Bill 5 isn’t a 
power-grab. Just trust us . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member for Rosemont says they’re not saying anything and for 
the record that is true, but there has been some heckling during 
the debate from hon. members opposite saying, trust us, Bill 5 
is not a power-grab. I have heard it. I’m sure the member for 
Rosemont has heard it, as have many of us on this side. Trust 
us, they say . . . And they say one thing and they do exactly the 
opposite. 
 
How can we trust a government that originally said: ah, there’s 
so much more we can be. Of course, they weren’t talking . . . I 
don’t think at that time they were talking  

about balanced budgets, because you can'’ balance a budget 
more times than 11 out of 11 straight balanced budgets, which 
the New Democratic Party through the 1970s and up to 1982 
did. Eleven out of 11, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite 
said, oh, but there’s so much more we can do and we can 
balance the books; we can have so much more for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1445) 
 
Well they’ve failed on that, in that one — I’m reluctant to use 
the word — sacred trust, but certainly when we are asked to 
look after the taxpayers pocket, their purse, Mr. Speaker, we 
should be doing what we say we are going to do. And if we say 
we’re going to have a balanced budget, we should be able to 
deliver on a balanced budget. Members opposite have never 
delivered on a balanced budget yet, and I don’t think it’s going 
to happen. So how can we trust the members opposite when 
they have proven not to be trustworthy on many, many 
important issues. 
 
How can we, Mr. Speaker, trust a government that says, we 
believe in a down-sized government. We believe in fewer 
public employees and yet there are more public employees 
working in Saskatchewan today than there were five years ago. 
 
They say down-sized government, and then they wind up 
increasing the size of government . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The member for Rosemont correctly points out, minister’s 
offices have been expanded hugely, much faster than anywhere 
else. The political wing of the government, if you like, the 
political wing of the civil service has expanded at just an 
astronomical rate and yet the government members say, trust us. 
Trust us. There’s no reason why, on this side of the House, why 
we have any inclination whatsoever to trust them. 
 
We have mentioned political patronage in the legislature. In the 
past two weeks have talked about it fairly extensively. It’s yet 
another example of the trust-us mentality. Why should we trust 
the members when there’s patronage like we have never seen 
certainly in your lifetime or in my lifetime, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s more political patronage in this province now then ever 
— ever! 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have Weyerhaeuser now, and the government 
says, trust us. We have a deal where we have shown that not 
only was there no down payment in Weyerhaeuser, which is 
normal in the sale of any other. . . Well any normal sale, any 
commercial transaction, there is usually a down payment. If I 
sell you something, Mr. Speaker, I expect something in return 
from you. Usually it’s in the form of cash. And yet in this 
instance, it’s like I own PAPCO and sell it to you, and then I’ve 
give you $7.5 million to take my existing asset. It just doesn’t 
make any sense whatsoever. Why would I sell an automobile 
for the member for Regina North West, sell him an automobile 
for $5,000, and then I give him an additional $1,000 in cash in 
the glove box with the automobile, and he doesn’t give me any 
cash back. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll take two. 
 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

410 
 

Mr. Trew: — The hon. member says, I’ll take two. The thing is 
we don’t have two PAPCOs here in the province, we only have 
one. That’s why there’s only one $7.5 million payment, I guess. 
The credit union will be very pleased to know that I am unable 
to fulfil the terms of the deal that I just offered the member for 
North West. I’m off the hook. 
 
But the point I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is we have a 
government that says, trust us, and then they give us no reason 
to trust them — none whatsoever. They say, trust us, just like 
the more than 140 Saskatchewan highway workers that 
diamond Jim Garner transferred to the private sector. And he 
said, trust us, trust us; 140 — at least 140 highways workers 
transferred to the private sector. Many of those workers are now 
collecting welfare. Why? Because there aren’t jobs. The job 
creation record of the government, of the Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan, is so dismal that many people 
transferred to the private sector simply cannot find work. That 
is abhorrent. That is part of why we are fighting the power-grab 
by the cabinet right now, the power-grab that is represented in 
Bill 5, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet another example of a trust-us mentality. The government 
having sold a coal mine to Manalta Coal, the coal mine that cost 
$102 million to develop, and it was sold for $17 million in 
negotiables. 
 
Simple mathematics, Mr. Speaker, tells you that there’s $85 
million left that is owing to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
$85 million is in long-term, low-interest loans — long term, 
low interest. Plus, we guaranteed that Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation would purchase every lump of coal from that coal 
mine in perpetuity as long as there’s any coal there — every 
lump of coal. 
 
Why would we do that? Why would we do that? The 
government says, trust us. Trust us. While we line the pockets 
of our big corporate friends, they say: trust us; trust us. But it’s 
not simply the government’s, or the members opposite’s 
pockets that this money is coming from; it’s coming from the 
taxpayers in Regina North and in Regina Rosemont and in 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, even in Estevan. 
 
It’s coming from the taxpayers in Regina Centre, Moose Jaw 
North. I’ve mentioned Estevan already. It’s coming from 
Souris-Cannington, Meadow Lake, Kindersley . . . name it — 
it’s there. Moosomin. All these taxpayers. Every bad deal that 
the government makes is taking money out of the taxpayers’ 
pockets in those constituencies — every constituency in the 
province. And yet the members say, trust us. 
 
I’d just like to know where the line-up is. If Saskatchewan is 
able to sell a coal mine that cost $102 million to develop, and 
they sell it with the deal that I outlined, I’d like to know where 
the line-up is for coal mines; I want to buy one. Then maybe I 
could fulfil the terms of the $5,000 automobile in the example 
that I used for the member from Regina North just a few 
moments ago. 
 
And we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have also an example of 
$100 million worth of potash mining  

equipment that is sold — Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
mining equipment that is sold to an eastern Canadian financial 
institution and then leased back for 15 years. It doesn’t make 
much sense, does it? It’s, instead of me selling the automobile 
to the member from Regina North West for $5,000, I sell it to 
him, and then I lease it back for 15 years. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will purchase anything within 
reason from anybody if they’ll give me a guaranteed lease-back, 
particularly if that lease-back is 15 years. And you know that I 
will come out financially on top. And that is what is happening 
in this instance. And it’s the taxpayers’ money that is being 
squandered. It is the taxpayers’ money that is going simply to 
keep the profits and the big corporations going. 
 
That, we object to, Mr. Speaker, and that is the sort of reason 
why we are fighting Bill 5. We do not want cabinet to be able to 
make deals like this and not bring it back in front of the 
Legislative Assembly where we can quite properly point out the 
terms of the deal, and point out to the voters of Saskatchewan, 
and point out to the back-benchers of the government just how 
bad that deal really and truly is. We have to have the ability, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to bring items in front of the Legislative 
Assembly. We must maintain that right, and that right is 
circumvented by Bill 5. That right, that power-grab of the 
cabinet is something that we truly must fight. And the members 
opposite continue to say, trust us. 
 
We’ve seen Dominion Bridge, which is a long-time company 
right here in Regina . . . it has been here for many, many years 
— closed right up. Sold off, as I understand, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Dominion Bridge sold off the last of its assets just 
within the last 30 days. It’s a sad, sad commentary on the 
Conservative government that we can have a long-time firm 
close like that. And it meant a considerable loss of jobs. 
Memory serves me it was something like 80 jobs lost. And yet 
the members say, trust us. 
 
I recall being in the visitors’ gallery during the last session 
when the Leader of the Opposition stood up and asked the 
Minister of Highways to name a bridge project and to give it to 
Dominion Bridge in a last-ditch effort to keep those 80 jobs 
here in Saskatchewan. And I recall watching from the visitors’ 
gallery while the Leader of the Opposition was essentially told, 
no, why would you want to do something silly like that? After 
all, there is another firm that’s going to make considerable 
money. And the issue died right there, along with the jobs that 
disappeared, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And yet the members 
opposite say, trust us. Trust us. 
 
We’ve also got an example of Dad’s Cookies just east of town 
here, White City. Dad’s Cookies made cookies for many, many 
years — closed under this administration — closed. 
 
We have Supercart International, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we’re not just sure how long they’re going to be open for 
business. We wish them continued good luck because any jobs 
are welcome. We want to see Supercart International succeed 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we really have our doubts. 
 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

411 
 

And IPSCO is certainly not working well for the hundreds and 
hundreds of workers who are on lay-off. The hundreds and 
hundreds of IPSCO workers and their families who are on 
lay-off in a Christmas season — it is devastating. Mr. Speaker, 
the members opposite say, trust us, while we see IPSCO 
families going with fewer presents under their Christmas tree 
this year than ever before. The reason there’s fewer presents 
under the trees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply that when you 
don’t know when you’re going to work, you don’t expend that 
money. You save it because you might need it for your next loaf 
of bread. And that’s the situation that laid-off IPSCO workers 
are finding themselves in. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they say, trust us. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And they say, trust us, as the member for Regina 
Rosemont says. And they say, trust us. And we say, why? Why 
would we trust you in light of what has been happening, and 
now you want a further power-grab from Bill 5? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That looks good on TV. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. The member opposite says that looks 
good on TV. It’s an old trick I learned from my grandfather. 
When you aren’t quite sure of what you’re going to say next, 
you pull out the hanky and blow your nose. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, keep saying: trust 
us, trust us, trust us. It’s like an old tired and broken record — 
trust us. Cabinet, under Bill 5, can disestablish departments and 
has absolutely no obligation in Bill 5, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no 
obligation to reassign the duties anywhere else — nowhere. 
And they say, trust us. 
 
(1500) 
 
Departments can, as I say, disappear. The department that I’m a 
critic of, the Department of Co-operation and Co-op 
Development, can literally disappear. And I mentioned in my 
throne speech debate, the number of employees in the 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development 
have decreased from 102 down — the exact number escapes me 
at the moment, but it is certainly something under 80. And 
that’s a sad legacy for the present government to have. They 
will, I submit, under Bill 5, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will 
simply go the extra step and amalgamate the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development with Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs or some other department, and we will 
see the Department of Co-operation and Co-op Development 
disappear completely. And yet the members opposite say, trust 
us, trust us. 
 
It is certainly a departure from past practice, and it is all 
disguised in the name of efficiency. How can we have 
efficiency on one hand, and the legacy of the Devine 
Conservative government is that of nearly a $3 billion deficit? 
Three billion dollar deficit and they say, trust us, trust us, trust 
us. 
 
This Bill 5 does not represent a single efficiency. If it does,  

show us, tell us, explain it. That’s all we ask. Show us, tell us, 
explain it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They haven’t said a word. Not a word. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Nothing, not a word is right. There is nowhere 
that efficiency is addressed in Bill 5 and nor will it be. It is 
nothing other than a power-grab. And as I’ve mentioned, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Bill 5 will erode the power of the Legislative 
Assembly. And that we must oppose, and we must oppose it 
strenuously and vigorously. 
 
I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was going to talk about 
an open government and what that means to you and I and to 
this Assembly. To have an open government, to have an open 
anything . . . I’ll use an example, an illustration if you like. If I 
were to tell the hon. member sitting next to me to go to Estevan, 
he’s apt to tell me where to go, and it wouldn’t be Estevan. If I 
were to say, no, but go to Estevan, and if you go to the credit 
union there, I have a counter cheque drawn up in your name for 
$5,000. I’d like you to have that and have a merry Christmas. 
Then I’ve presented a reason for the hon. member to go to 
Estevan, and I believe he would quite happily go there. 
 
But it’s to do with openness. It’s to do with explaining why 
you’re going there. I might well not be using the crass 
commercial $5,000. I might rather say to the member, I would 
take it as very much a personal favour if you would go to 
Estevan and look up my relatives and explain to them why I 
cannot be there with them Christmas Day, and I would very 
much be grateful if you would do that. And then the member 
again might go. But it’s because I’ve given him a reason. It’s 
something to do with being open. 
 
What we need is for the government to be open — the 
government that has said it wants to run an open government. 
We’re simply saying, we’ll give you every opportunity to run 
an open government, but let’s do it. Let’s actually have an open 
and fair and honest government. 
 
I talked about the quorum for committees, and the government 
tried to change the quorum of the committees. That simply did 
not happen because of a ruling that came from the Chair, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And now we have cabinet control of 
reorganization of departments, and that done through Bill 5. 
Cabinet control of reorganization of departments and also of 
elimination, or as the legislation says, disestablishment of 
departments. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that cannot happen. We do not see any 
way that that is going to enhance democracy. That’s not going 
to enhance any of the members who sit in this Legislative 
Assembly, and it’s certainly not going to be a part of what the 
voters of Saskatchewan elected all of us collectively to be here 
and to represent. 
 
And the next item after Bill 5, some time perhaps this fall, some 
time perhaps in the spring, we understand there’s going to be a 
new boundary Act, a new electoral  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

412 
 

boundary Act. That was included in the throne speech, and it is 
yet another example of the power-grab that is going to be taking 
place. And because of the electoral boundary Act and Bill 5, we 
see the two of them tying in together as part of a greater picture, 
if you like, a “trust us” picture that the members of the 
government, and particularly the members of the cabinet, keep 
wanting us to trust them. We are opposed to both, of course. 
 
The duty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members opposite, the duty 
of the opposition is to oppose. The duty of the opposition is to 
safeguard democracy, and I’ll submit that our democracy never 
needed guarding more than it has needed guarding in this fall 
session — never needed worse. 
 
The duty of the opposition is to do that in the interest of all the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I say all the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we need an active 
opposition just as we need a good, active government. There is 
no question about that. But regardless of how people voted — 
whether they voted for members of the opposition or for 
members of the government — both have a role and a duty to 
fulfil, and both of us are simply saying — or I shouldn’t say 
both of us — we are simply saying, let us do it. Do not impose 
Bill 5 upon us. Let us do our jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Fairview 
mentioned in his presentation that in his view, Bill 5 is ultra 
vires or beyond the scope of this legislature to pass. In other 
words, even if we do, if the government imposes Bill 5 on us, 
rams it down our throat, then it still has some question as to 
whether it’s legally binding. It’s interesting to see the debate 
that carried on a Bill that we’re not even sure whether we can 
legally pass or not. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Fairview talks of Bill 5 being ultra 
vires, while the member for Regina Lakeview says that cabinet, 
under Bill 5 — and this is the real crux of the power-grab, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — cabinet, under Bill 5, may redefine objects 
and purposes — objects and purposes. And that has been 
pointed out; it is much, much broader than duties and functions. 
So when cabinet can redefine objects and purposes, it’s so much 
greater in importance that if cabinet can simply redefine duties 
and functions. And that’s part of our opposition to this 
power-grab that Bill 5 is. 
 
What we’re asking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members 
opposite, is: why use an elephant gun to kill a fly? And of 
course there can be no answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There can 
be no answer as to why use an elephant gun to kill a fly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Power . . . 
 
Mr. Trew: — Power-grab, of course. But there can be no other 
answer. 
 
I’d like to point out an excerpt that I got, a letter that was cc’d 
— carbon copied — to the opposition caucus. The letter is from 
SGEU, December 18th, and addressed to the Hon. Grant 
Devine, Premier of Saskatchewan, Legislative Buildings, 
Regina, and so on. 
 

And I’m just going to read one paragraph of this letter, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because I think it summarizes the crux of what 
this SGEU, this important union of working men and women, 
of Government of Saskatchewan employees, what they have to 
say on this particular Bill, on Bill 5. And the SGEU says, and I 
quote: 
 

The proposed government organization Act would, if 
passed, have the effect of overriding many pieces of 
existing legislation which guarantees the maintenance 
of government services to he public. It would allow 
the cabinet to eliminate or reorganize government 
departments and agencies without the knowledge or 
permission of the province’s elected representatives in 
the legislature. 
 

This paragraph, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sums up what I have been 
saying, very succinctly, very much to the point. And what it is 
saying is that it’s a power-grab by the cabinet. Simple as that. 
Nothing but a power-grab. And it will allow cabinet to 
eliminate or reorganize government departments and agencies 
without having to come back to the Legislative Assembly. And 
there can be no justification for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, none 
whatsoever. Never can you have a power-grab and justify it. 
 
Now what I’ve done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is I’ve given the 
reasons why we are in this debate and why the New Democratic 
Party is opposing Bill 5. I have given not one, but two flaws in 
Bill 5, and I have spoken briefly about what an open 
government is and what it should mean to all of us here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have spoken in some length about the frustration that I as a 
member have felt — the frustration, the lack of good will, the 
lack of good feelings about what is going on in this Legislative 
Assembly. And I can’t help but stress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the good will can still be had. It still can be, but do away with 
Bill 5. 
 
Why try and ram down a Bill that is obviously violently 
opposed by the opposition? Why, why have such a blatant 
power-grab? Why do it? Why set yourself up for all the ill will, 
all of the bad feelings, all of the wrath that the opposition can 
show a government over the next number of years until the next 
general election? Why do it? Why do it? Why the power-grab? 
Why pass this Bill at all? Let it die. Let it die. 
 
Bill 5 is a second step, if you like. The first was the change in 
the quorum question that was tried to be passed on the first day 
of the session. That quorum question was settled, and settled to 
our satisfaction. We said at the time to the members opposite — 
we said, don’t be silly. This changing of the quorum won’t 
enhance the legislative proceedings whatsoever. 
 
And Bill 5 will have the same effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill 
5 will no more enhance the proceedings here than did the 
quorum question of the first day. In fact, Bill 5 is much more 
dangerous because it concentrates power in a very, very select 
handful of people. 
 
I’ve mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question of  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

413 
 

notice of legislation to the opposition. And I have I believe 
registered my personal dissatisfaction with the lack of notice 
that the opposition has been given. It is somewhat disturbing to, 
on one hand, be expected to be presenting a coherent 
opposition, and then on the next hand we’re not just too sure 
what legislature is being proposed on any given day. 
 
We do not want to obstructionist; we want an open government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And an open government is precluded by 
Bill 5. That power-grab stops it. 
 
(1515) 
 
I have asked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how it was that business was 
done before Bill 5. And it’s a serious question and one that 
members opposite would be well advised to contemplate. How 
was it that business in the legislature was done before Bill 5 and 
before the power-grab? 
 
The member for Souris-Cannington has pointed out to us that 
bill 5 does nothing that the British law doesn’t already do and 
hasn’t done for some years. And we have pointed out repeatedly 
to the member for Souris-Cannington where that statement that 
he made in this Assembly was in error. We have pointed that 
out. 
 
How can we trust a government which says something that we 
can point out in black and white on paper that that’s not the way 
it is? And yet we’re being asked, trust us. Trust us on bill 5, 
Trust us. We cannot do it. We simply cannot do it. 
 
If statement were made and could be held as being rightfully 
made, maybe we could trust the members opposite. But in this 
instance we can’t, because we have proven that the member for 
Souris-Cannington was in error in his statement. If he was in 
error when he was introducing Bill 5, what other serious flaws 
are there in the printed Bill? How many flaws are there; how 
much of a power-grab is there? We’ve got some real serious 
questions on this side of the House, and we really just have to 
question how bad is Bill 5. How bad is it? 
 
I’ve pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that regulations do not 
have to be published under Bill 5. This allows the cabinet to 
pass laws and us . . . we may not even know about the laws. We 
may in fact be in serious trouble with the judicial system, and 
yet we don’t know why. When laws are passed under current 
law in Saskatchewan, the way things are set up now, the 
regulations have to be published before laws can be proclaimed. 
Under Bill 5, that’s not necessarily the case. 
 
I’ve pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have a 
government that has said, trust us. And I’ve listed a litany of 
problems, of areas where there’s been no reason for us to trust 
them. One is Weyerhaeuser and the $7.5 million that we have 
had to pay to Weyerhaeuser of the United States to take over 
our assets. And I’ve pointed out in my opening arguments just 
how ludicrous that deal was, and I’ve tried to tie it in, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with Bill 5. We have, on one hand, a group of 
people saying, trust us on Weyerhaeuser; trust us; we’ve made a 
good deal. And  

they’re saying, trust us on Bill 5; trust us; it’s a good Bill. And 
we’re submitting, it is not a good Bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a bad Bill. 
 
Mr. Trew: — As the member for Regina Rosemont says, it is a 
bad Bill, and I concur with his view. 
 
I pointed out the Manalta Coal deal and how much that’s going 
to be costing the taxpayers, and not just the taxpayers in my 
constituency of Regina North, but the taxpayers throughout this 
great province of ours. And I object. I don’t think that people 
should be paying for the errors and for the patronage and the 
plums that are being handed out by the present government. 
 
I pointed out that there’s some substantial mining equipment 
from Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan that was sold to an 
eastern Canadian financial institution, purportedly for $100 
million, and then leased back for 15 years. I pointed out how 
silly that was, and what a bad deal it was for the taxpayers of 
the province. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I tie it in. They 
say, trust us on this and trust us on Bill 5, and we can do 
neither. Both are bad. 
 
I talked about Dominion Bridge and Dad’s Cookies, both of 
which had been long-time firms in and around the Regina area; 
both of which are now not working. I also talked, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about IPSCO and how the many, many hundreds and 
hundreds of workers are laid off and are having a dismal 
Christmas. Laid off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of policies 
that the government agrees with; that the government initiated 
in many instances. And we’ve got so many people laid off that 
we have no reason whatsoever to trust the members opposite. 
 
Just before closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to again 
reiterate that under Bill 5 cabinet can disestablish — that means 
eliminate, terminate, wipe out, end, finish, whatever — 
disestablish departments, and it has no obligation to reassign the 
duties of those departments or people working in those 
departments to anywhere else. So in one fell swoop cabinet can 
end a department completely. 
 
I have used the example of the department for which I am critic, 
the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. And I would find it abhorrent, I would find it a 
sad, sad day for Saskatchewan if a major economic sector of 
our economy, that is the co-operative sector, were to find itself 
disassociated from the Government of Saskatchewan after 
many, many years of association. 
 
And a handful of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a handful of 
people in cabinet could end that department just like that. After 
years and years and years of that department being around, a 
handful of people could eliminate that department at the snap of 
a finger and we would have no recourse whatsoever. We in 
opposition would have no recourse in the Legislative Assembly 
at all. That would be a sad, sad state of affairs. 
 
I did point out that the duty of the opposition is to oppose, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it is a duty that I’m sure you can 
appreciate we take most seriously. We do not propose to  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

414 
 

be the Grinches who stole Christmas. Indeed, we will argue that 
it is the members opposite who are indeed being the Grinches 
who are stealing Christmas. 
 
This legislation is so bad that we will stay here, and stay here 
until it is withdrawn or defeated — one of the two. And that’s a 
grim sort of a statement to make, but I don’t know how else we 
in the opposition can make the point that Bill 5 is a bad one. It 
is inherently bad; it is patently bad. We have a government that 
says trust us, trust us, trust us. And they give us absolutely no 
reason to trust them, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m not sure I’d go quite so far as the member 
from Rosemont just said. His statement will stay off the record, 
if it’s all right. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Fairview pointed out this legislation 
is ultra vires and the member for Regina Lakeview secondly 
pointed out that under Bill 5 cabinet can redefine objects and 
purposes rather than simply duties and functions. 
 
So there’s a couple of things wrong with the legislation. One, 
we’re not sure if we can legally pass it or not. And the second 
one is what the powers this legislation purports to give to 
cabinet are. And again I ask the question: why would you use 
an elephant gun to kill a fly? 
 
I have pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition of the 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) to this 
legislation. And they very properly point out that it is nothing 
but a power-grab for cabinet — nothing other than an 
unmitigated power-grab. And we cannot support it in any way, 
shape, or form. 
 
I urge members opposite, particularly back-benchers, when the 
time comes to vote on Bill 5, for Heaven’s sake vote against it. 
Do not support it. It is a bad Bill. It is a power-grab that will 
eliminate . . . what little members of the government back 
bench can do now, they will be able to do even less. It is a 
power-grab for the cabinet. We will have a government run by a 
very select little handful of people rather than a broader 
parliamentary democratic system where everything is open and 
we can see it in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in concluding my debate on Bill 5, again I 
urge every member in the Legislative Assembly to see that Bill 
5 does not get passed. It is a bad Bill and one which we on this 
side of the House are prepared obviously to fight. We will fight. 
 
Let’ see that we pass good legislation. Let’s see, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we can have a spirit of co-operation. Let’s see 
that. But in order for that spirit of co-operation and that 
goodwill to happen, we have to see things like Bill 5 
disappearing. Bill 5 cannot be allowed to pass. 
 
I end my part of the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a final 
plea. Do not pass Bill 5. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter this debate this afternoon and to  

comment on Bill 5, the Act respecting the organization of the 
executive government of Saskatchewan. I’m particularly 
pleased to do this on behalf of the people of Saskatoon 
Sutherland and for them, to explain to them what this Bill 
means, what it purports to do, and how it will affect them. 
 
I should begin by saying I’m especially appreciative of the 
efforts of the member for The Battlefords on Friday, who 
outlined some of the specific effects of this Bill when it comes 
to privatization of government services. And I won’t address 
that subject because he did such a very good job relative to 
privatization. I however, Mr. Speaker, would like to address the 
larger issue of the constriction of power that is found in this 
Bill. 
 
This Bill purports to be innocuous and simply an efficiency 
measure, a reorganization of government, minor housekeeping 
details, if we’re to believe the Deputy Premier. 
 
Allegedly this Bill would actually assist the operation of this 
Assembly. How, we might ask, would it assist this Assembly? 
Well allegedly by relieving this Chamber of the necessity of 
examining legislation, of dealing with government structures 
and activities, and in eliminating that responsibility from this 
Assembly, transferring it to the Office of the Premier, to assist 
the Premier, allegedly, in the delivery of government programs 
and policy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this means, in short, is that this Bill 
would fundamentally change the operation of the Government 
of Saskatchewan. It would change the operation of the 
Saskatchewan government by doing two things simultaneously. 
First, it would diminish the role of this legislature and the role 
of decision-making on behalf of the public. And it would 
accomplish this, secondly, by enhancing the role of the Premier, 
and the decision-making process that is done in private. And 
this is my objection to Bill 5. 
 
(1530) 
 
This Bill, in a word, bypasses the Legislative Assembly. It 
bypasses the Assembly by giving enormous powers to the 
Premier; elevating the office of the Premier and his advisers by 
giving them sweeping powers which really go to a closed 
cabinet that makes decisions in private, in Executive Council. 
And at the same time as it does this, it robs the public of most 
of its access to the decision-making process by removing such 
decisions from the floor of this Chamber. And this then is what 
I find so offensive about this Bill. It robs the public of the 
power they have entrusted in us as elected members of this 
Assembly, while at the very same time aggrandizing the Office 
of the Premier. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this in effect is a move toward a 
centralization of power in one person, in one office — that of 
the Premier. It is a move, really, toward a presidential style of 
politics, a system whereby decisions are made by executive 
decree and not by the democratic process of debate. 
 
This is a fundamental distinction and an aberration of our 
tradition here in this Assembly. We have here in this  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

415 
 

Assembly a tradition and a system of power where it is 
deployed in the hands of elected representatives and not 
concentrated in the hands of a very few, or even one. 
 
So in a word, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill represents what we 
might say is a closeting of power within the Premier’s office — 
a closeting of power within Executive Council. In effect what 
this Bill does is to create in Executive Council a sort of 
executive closet, a substitute for this Chamber and its 
decision-making powers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that most of us here in this room, and 
most Saskatchewan people, know what closets are like. I think 
most Saskatchewan people will be able to envision what an 
executive closet is like. Like so many of our own personal 
closets in our homes, an executive closet is likely to be filled 
with more than it was supposed to hold. And like most of our 
closets at home, an executive closet is invariably, inevitably 
going to be filled with things that really don’t belong there. 
 
What sorts of things? Well this Bill 5 on the reorganization of 
the Government of Saskatchewan would fill the closet of 
Executive Council, according to section 5, with the power: to 
assign to any minister any power, duty, or function; to transfer 
any power, duty, or function to any other minister; to transfer 
any power, duty, or function imposed by law to any minister, 
any other minister, any department, or minister’s department — 
for any period, for any purpose, for any area of the province. 
 
In a word, this Bill goes beyond anything we’ve known before. 
In a word, anything goes with this Bill, and it goes into the 
executive closet. Now why — why would this Bill purport to 
give Executive Council such powers and prerogatives? Why 
would this government want to pack the Premier’s office and 
his Executive Council with the power to do almost anything but 
sell peanuts in Rosetown? 
 
Allegedly, for the sake of simplicity, in the name of efficiency, 
if we’re to believe the Deputy Premier who, incidentally, will 
be holding the keys to the closet of Executive Council. But 
perhaps there is some truth to this — that there is some 
efficiency in such a process. There is a simplicity to it. 
 
And again I refer to the closets that most of us are familiar with. 
We know only too well that when the house is in a mess and 
company is coming for a public inspection, there’s no simpler, 
more efficient way to clean up a mess than to throw things into 
a bedroom closet and to hide them to get them out of sight. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the truth of what this government 
would do with its mess of the public business and of the public 
purse with this Bill 5. It proposes in this Bill to get its mess out 
of sight so that it can be managed in secret — to get it out of 
sight as fast as it can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government proposes in this Bill to hide its 
dirty laundry in the executive closet; its mismanagement of 
public funds; its unfair taxation policy; its unfair labour 
practices; its deregulation; its privatization; its patronage 
appointments; its shuffling of departments back and forth so 
budgetary spending matters can’t be seen or considered; its 
advertising; its  

inordinate advertising spending; its cuts in social services. All 
these things will be thrown into the executive closet in a big 
mumbo-jumbo sort of government scramble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did this 
Assembly a service last week when he pointed out the provision 
in section 19 for the executive closet to have great and 
sweeping financial authorities, that: 
 

A minister may, for any purpose relating to any matter 
under his administration or for which he is 
responsible, provide financial assistance by way of a 
grant, loan, guarantee or other similar means, in 
accordance with any terms or conditions that are 
prescribed in the (the legislation) . . . to any person, 
agency, organization, association, institution or body 
with (Saskatchewan) or outside Saskatchewan. 
 

Just imagine the sort of dirty laundry, fiscally, that can be 
thrown into this closet. Yes, all this sort of dirty laundry can be 
thrown out of this public Chamber and into the Executive 
Council where it can’t be seen, where it can’t be touched, where 
it can’t be dealt with. But that doesn’t mean that it won’t smell 
and that eventually people won’t find out some of what goes on 
in that closet and some of what has been shunted into it to hide 
the mess of public affairs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that this Bill eliminates 
public accessibility and public accountability. This Bill actually 
encourages surreptitious decision-making. It grants 
extraordinary privileges and powers to the Premier and to his 
Executive Council — privileges and powers that belong 
properly to the floor of this Assembly which belongs to the 
people of the province. 
 
Here in this Chamber there is public accountability. There is 
full accountability. Here we have debate. Here we have an 
opposition. Here we have the cut and thrust, the parliamentary 
procedure. We have question and answer. There’s 
accountability. And the people of the province are entitled to 
this process and procedure. This is precisely what they’ve 
elected us to do . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — . . . to transact their business here in this 
Chamber, and not to see it in an Executive Council aggrandized 
beyond all measure. But that’s not what they’ll get with this Bill 
5, tabled in this legislature by this government. That’s not what 
they’ll get. Instead they’ll get a chamber closed to the normal 
discourse of decision-making and virtually no public review. 
And the only public review that will happen will happen after 
the fact, well after the fact, when hopefully the government 
would hope that it has been forgotten by the public. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Chamber is where the people of 
Saskatchewan have a window on government. Through their 
members, they can scrutinize the operation of government. 
Through the media of TV and the broadcasting of these 
proceedings, they have a window on the government activities. 
Through the print media,  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

416 
 

the written press, they have a window by way of reporting. But 
there are very few closets that have windows. And once issues 
and decisions and departments and regulations and policies are 
removed from this room to the Executive Council and its 
executive closet, the people of the province will lose their 
window on the operation of government. The media will lose its 
window on the operation of government. This opposition will 
lose its window on the operation of the government and won’t 
be able to see until well after the fact, if then, what this 
government is doing with the public trust. Indeed, even 
government back-benchers will not know until well after the 
fact what their government is doing by way of policy and 
planning and plotting. 
 
Well the way things are now, the way we operate now in this 
Assembly, the public can see. They can see not only what 
decisions are being made, but they can see how they are being 
made, who is making them, why they’re being made. This 
certainly won’t happen once the decision-making process 
retreats into Executive Council and is removed from the public 
arena of this Assembly. 
 
The situation the, that we have before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is not simply a reorganization of government — far from it. The 
situation we have before us is much more akin to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, or the Premier himself, 
demanding a blank cheque from this legislature and from the 
people of Saskatchewan — a blank cheque in terms of this Bill 
5 to establish or disestablish whatever departments or particular 
parts of departments the Premier decides to disestablish or 
establish; a blank cheque to assign any power, function, or duty; 
to transfer any function, duty, or power; a blank cheque, in 
effect, to usurp power properly belonging to the members of 
this Legislative Assembly and to the people of the province; a 
blank cheque that they are not entitled to. 
 
Any government has a public responsibility, has a public 
responsibility for accessibility, for accountability. And the 
people of Saskatoon Sutherland, I know, don’t want this 
legislature’s hands to be tied. They want this legislature, and 
not the Executive Council, to be establishing and 
disestablishing departments, so they know what their future is 
in the public arena. They don’t want an Executive Council 
doing that. 
 
And they want this Legislative Assembly assigning powers and 
duties and functions, and transferring them as well. The people 
of Saskatoon Sutherland, I believe, are entitled to the legislature 
doing this, as it has in the past, by means of the members they 
placed here. 
 
No blank cheque has been given to the Premier. No government 
can demand such a blank cheque, unless of course they intend 
to govern by executive decree, and that is precisely my point — 
to govern by perhaps divine right, by sort of a move to a 
presidential style, almost dictatorial, characteristic of a 
totalitarian state. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an old saying that says that power corrupts 
and absolute power corrupts absolutely. And that, I believe, is 
what we see with this legislation — a government corrupted by 
power, and now wanting more power to hide corruption; a 
government which is arrogant enough to demand more powers, 
to disregard  

the democratic process and to establish an autocratic process, a 
power unto itself, unanswerable by the public area. 
 
(1545) 
 
This government isn’t new to the process of experimentation 
with power trips. During its first term of office, Saskatchewan 
people saw the largest, most expensive, bloated cabinet in 
Saskatchewan history. They saw cabinet ministers, some of 
who are no longer in this Assembly, jaunting across the globe 
and enjoying winter holidays in sunny places far away. And it 
was full steam ahead for the gravy train. They saw a cabinet 
that wined and dined at the public expense to the tune of more 
than a quarter of a million dollars a year. Power hungry, at a 
time when this same government was cutting food subsidy 
allowances for people in the North. And Saskatchewan people 
took note, enough to change, to some extent, the balance of 
power in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now we have a second term for this government, a renewed 
mandate, a second term of office, and what do we see? I think 
we’re seeing, with this legislation, another power trip, but a 
power trip in a different direction perhaps. It’s in reverse, a 
power trip which will take them away from obvious excesses, 
from a large cabinet to a small inner circle. A power trip to 
restrict public accessibility and accountability. A power trip 
which will take them away from the public and back into the 
recesses of an executive closet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon Sutherland don’t want a 
government on a power trip. They don’t want a presidential 
style of government here in Saskatchewan, nor another power 
trip by the Premier. The people of Sutherland do not want a new 
concentration of power in the Executive Council. They do not 
want a Legislative Assembly whose hands is tied, whose power 
is constrained. They don’t want a decision-making process that 
is secretive, manipulative, or surreptitious. 
 
Saskatchewan people want a decision-making process, I 
believe, that is in keeping with the open and public nature of 
this province. We all know what it’s like to stand on the prairie 
and to see the wide-open skies and the panorama of land, and 
that is Saskatchewan. And that same openness ought to be 
characterized or reflected by government policy and practice. 
Saskatchewan people, I think, want a government that’s as wide 
open as the Saskatchewan sky, as wide open as wheat field. 
They don’t want their business constricted and conducted 
secretly. 
 
The process of a free exchange of ideas and political policies is 
what brought me, and everyone else here, into this Legislative 
Assembly. And I remain committed to that process — an open 
exchange of ideas, an open political arena. And that is why I 
speak against this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth of Bill 5, I think, is that this government 
can’t manage the public affairs, and the evidence of it is found 
in things like the $3 billion deficit and the give-away to 
Weyerhaeuser. And because the government can’t manage 
public affairs, it can’t face the  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

417 
 

public. It can’t allow public scrutiny. It can’t allow this 
Legislative Assembly to open its activities to the public or to 
the press. 
 
And therefore, we have this Bill 5 tabled. This Bill is a Bill to 
establish an executive closet. We don’t need or want an 
executive closet in Saskatchewan. This Bill needs to be 
completely withdrawn, or totally amended, to restore open, 
accessible, accountable government to the people who deserve 
that and are entitled to that — to the people of the province who 
voted for that in bringing each of us to this Assembly. 
 
And so I speak against this Bill. I speak for an open exchange 
of ideas and political policies. And I thank you very much for 
your attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into this 
important debate on Bill 5, a Bill which purports, Mr. Speaker, 
to be proposed before this Assembly to deal with government 
efficiency, if one is to believe the language of the Speech from 
the Throne. But I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has 
more to do with government secrecy and a grab for power by 
the Government of Saskatchewan than it has to do with 
government efficiency. 
 
Let me put this Bill, Mr. Speaker, into the context of a much 
larger picture, because I think in order to understand it, in order 
to have people truly understand the importance of this Bill, we 
have to look at it in the process of what’s we’ve been dealing 
with since we’ve called this Legislative Assembly to order on 
December the 3rd, and began with the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Now I had a number of people back in my riding, and I know a 
number of other members have as well, ask us why in the world 
would we be convening the Legislative Assembly three weeks 
before Christmas. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when you 
are convening the Legislative Assembly three weeks before 
Christmas, it’s for one of two reasons. Either because you have 
some routine business to take place, and we’ve seen a couple of 
Bills come before this legislature that would be of that nature, 
that provide protection for the agricultural people in 
Saskatchewan, and Bills which members on this side of the 
House support. But the other reason, the other reason that you’d 
convene the Legislative Assembly three weeks before 
Christmas would be because you intend to do some business 
that you would just as soon prefer that the public not pay a great 
deal of attention to, assuming and counting on the fact that 
people are getting ready for Christmas and they do not consider 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan their highest 
priority. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in my optimistic moments 
when I came to the first session, the first sitting of this session, 
that I believed initially that we were coming to deal with some 
routine business to extend the protection for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. But I’m disappointed to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
as I’ve sat here with my colleagues on this side of the House 
and the members opposite, that it has become more and more 
obvious that we are here to deal with business that the 
government  

would just as soon not have the people of Saskatchewan paying 
a great deal of attention to. 
 
And what have we seen? What have we seen since we’ve come 
to these halls together? Let me refer to three things that 
establish the context within which we’re considering this Bill. 
 
On the first day, within six minutes of calling of the Legislative 
Assembly, we saw the attempt to take power away from the 
opposition and transfer it to government members by the 
introduction of an amendment to the quorums for committees. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as that has been ruled on and found to be out 
of order, it is still significant to note, and let me reflect, that 
with that quorum change that was suggested, it was intended 
that it would enable the members of government, working in 
committees, whenever they see a subject coming before 
committee consideration to be not in the interests, in the 
political interests of the government of the day, to simply “serve 
the people” — and I use that phrase in quotation marks — “to 
serve the people” by walking away and not sitting and 
considering the important matters before the 10 or 12 legislative 
committees. 
 
However, that’s been defeated. That has been ruled out of order 
and that is no longer before us. But that is a part of establishing 
the environment, the atmosphere within which we consider Bill 
5 today. 
 
What else have we seen? In the Speech from the Throne we saw 
notice being given to introduce an Act to reconsider the 
electoral boundaries. And that’s an Act, Mr. Speaker, which I’m 
sad to say is being cynically referred to in my riding, and I 
know the ridings of many others, an Act cynically being 
referred to as the gerrymander Act. 
 
And I say that simply in the context of the fact that we have on 
the books in Saskatchewan today a Bill which empowers, in 
fact requires, that the electoral boundaries will be reviewed 
every eight years, and that time is up by the end of January — a 
very objective Act which provides for fair consideration of “one 
person, one vote” bringing effective and responsible 
representation to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now I don’t know what the specifics of the Bill will be when 
they are introduced in the spring session, I believe. But it does 
cause me to be suspicious, Mr. Speaker, and it causes a number 
of other people to be suspicious. And it would appear, when 
people are listening and taking note of what is being said in this 
Legislative Assembly . . . 
 
And I’m pleased to say that that’s happening much more than I 
had thought. I noticed when I went home this weekend that a 
number of constituents in my riding, as a matter of fact, have 
been watching the proceedings on television, have been reading 
their papers, and are asking what it is that we’re considering. 
 
And they’re referring, they’re even referring to the quorum 
requirement that was proposed for the committees, and they’re 
asking about Bill 5. And they’re  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

418 
 

speculating already, they’re speculating already upon the 
intentions of introducing the electoral boundaries review Act, 
because people are suspicious — suspicious that there is an 
objective, from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to transfer 
again to the government increased power and authority, and to 
take that away from a responsible opposition. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that brings us to this Bill before us referred 
to euphemistically as an organization Bill. And I tend to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is more accurate to refer to it as a 
reorganization Bill. It has been said by a number of people 
before me, and I don’t feel the need to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, 
ad infinitum, but has been said by people before me, it is a Bill 
which seems very, very clearly to create a shift in power, a shift 
to increase the power of cabinet, the of the Premier and cabinet, 
and to again shift that power away from the opposition to do the 
role in a democratic society of being critical thinkers — 
constructively critical thinkers — so that the rights of people 
are assured when this Legislative Assembly does its business. 
 
And what are people of Saskatchewan saying about the Bill? 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, most clearly of all I’d like to refer to 
an editorial written in the Regina Leader-Post on December 18, 
which summarizes what people have been saying to me. And let 
me refer, Mr. Speaker, to that editorial which says: 
 

The immediate intention of the bill (of Bill No. 5) is to 
combine (the Departments of) labour . . . 
 

And I point out combining with the Department of Labour, 
which has a significant responsibility for the Workers’ 
Compensation Board — the Department of Labour with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board — the department of Social 
Services with all its tentacles (and we’ll get to those later), the 
Employment Development Agency . . . 
 
And let me just pause for a moment and reflect on the 
Employment Development Agency, Mr. Speaker, because the 
people in Saskatchewan remember very, very clearly the 
announcement of the Employment Development Agency 
several months ago — it would be in excess of a year ago now 
— which was announced with great bravado, which was 
announced with the mandate being given for the Employment 
Development Agency to address this province’s number one 
problem, under — we were told — under the auspices of a 
single minister responsible for the Employment Development 
Agency. And here we have now being proposed in a 
reorganization that the Employment Development Agency will 
be lumped into what some are referring to as a department 
responsible for oppression. But included in here the 
Employment Development Agency, the Women’s Secretariat 
and Native Secretariat, and also let me point out, Mr. Speaker, 
including under the Department of Social Services, the senior’s 
bureau. At a time in which our senior’s population in 
Saskatchewan is growing and many people believe that it is 
sufficient a concern that there should be as a matter of fact a 
department, a department alone which is responsible for 
delivering services to seniors, we find it’s still a bureau  

located within the Department of Social Services and lumped 
into this total amalgamation again. 
 
So let me repeat, Mr. Speaker, and to quote the editorial in the 
Regina Leader-Post of December 18: 
 

The immediate intention of the bill is to combine 
labour, social services, the Employment Development 
Agency and women’s and native secretariats, into a 
new Human Resources Department. The bill’s 
potential for abuse, however, is too obvious to let it go 
unchallenged. 
 

Those are not my words, Mr. Speaker. Those are the words of 
the editor of the Regina Leader-Post, December 18th. And let 
me repeat them: 
 

The bill’s potential for abuse, however, is too obvious 
to let it go unchallenged. 
 

And the editorial goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

NDP House Leader Roy Romanow was quite right in 
charging: “It represents a great step forward in 
conglomeration of cabinet power.” 
 

(1600) 
 
And there are not many people in Saskatchewan, I suggest for 
your consideration members opposite, who would consider it a 
step of progress to step forward to conglomeration of 
Saskatchewan power. 
 
And finally, the editorial concludes by saying: 
 

We urge the government to reconsider. (We urge the 
government to reconsider). Streamline, yes; 
reorganize, yes; but do it in the open where it can be 
seen, dissected, and clearly understood. 
 

And that’s the nub of the issue we have here, Mr. Speaker, with 
Bill No. 5. And let me repeat that paragraph again: 
 

We urge the government to reconsider. Streamline, 
yes; (no one’s opposed to progressive reorganization); 
but do it in the open where it can be seen, dissected, 
and clearly understood. 
 

And that means very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that it needs to be 
done in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Well what does the government say about Bill No. 5? What 
does the government opposite say about Bill No. 5? And I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that’s most clearly understood by 
checking the record. 
 
About Bill No. 5, the government opposite says virtually 
nothing, virtually nothing; about the same amount that it said 
about the amendment to change the quorums in the committees 
— virtually nothing. About the committees, the government 
said, we want to change it; that’s all. We want to change it. No 
reasons. We just want it changed. And what did this 
government say about Bill No. 5? They say, we just want to 
change it. We’ve got more people here. We can out-vote you. It 
doesn’t matter what the  



 
December 22, 1986 

419 
 

reasons are — we’re not saying. We just want it changed. And 
so the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is saying virtually 
nothing. 
 
Well I refer . . . and you have to look hard to find some 
statements from the members opposite as to what the purpose of 
bill No. 5 is. But after a great deal of scrutiny I was able to find 
a single paragraph — a single paragraph listed in the Regina 
Leader-Post of December 19th. And let me quote that 
paragraph, Mr. Speaker. And we have to listen carefully 
because this is about all that has been said. And I quote. This is 
an article written by Murray Mandryk: 
 

While introducing the Bill last week . . . 
 

And I suspect that the reference there is to statements made on 
either December the 12th or December the 15th. 
 

While introducing the Bill last week, Deputy Premier 
Eric Berntson . . . 
 

This is the Deputy Premier who accuses himself of being 
uncunning: 
 

While introducing the Bill last week, Deputy Premier 
Eric Berntson said the legislation was needed to create 
the new department of human resources — a 
department encompassing minister Grant Schmidt’s 
portfolios of labour, social services, the employment 
development agency, and the Indian and women’s 
secretariats. 
 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if that’s really the reason this Bill is 
being introduced. Because if it is really being introduced to 
create a new department of human resources, labour and 
employment, would it not seem to be a whole lot more obvious, 
would it not seem to be a whole lot more out front, would it not 
seem to be a whole lot more open, to simply introduce a Bill to 
create the department of human resources, labour and 
employment. Would that not seem to be the obvious thing to 
do? If that’s what you want to do, why would you not introduce 
a Bill to establish that department the same way every other 
department has been established in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So that is a statement. That’s all we’ve been told. And it 
appears, Mr. Speaker, to be a bit of an arrogant statement 
because the government is not even waiting. It appears that it is 
not even waiting for the passage of this legislation to introduce 
the department of human resources, labour, and employment. 
 
And let me refer you, Mr. Speaker, to a memo that I received on 
December 10. Now let’s just check this for a moment. We all 
came together in this Assembly — let’s understand the big 
picture — we came together in this Legislative Assembly on 
December 3, and we heard a Speech from the Throne — 
December 3, December 3. And in the Speech from the Throne it 
talked about new efficiency, and reorganization, and, yes, there 
was reference to the creation of a new department of human 
resources, labour, and employment. December 3. 
 
On December 10, Mr. Speaker, I received a memo from  

an official in the department of what I thought was the 
Department of Social Services, but obviously the officials of the 
Department of Social Services have got their direction already. 
They’ve got their marching orders already, because this official 
refers to himself as being from the department of human 
resources, labour, and employment, in a memo on December 
10. 
 
We came together December 3. There is a Bill which, we are 
told, is to create the department of human resources, labour, and 
employment. It is before us now. Today is December 22. On 
December 10, an official who has obviously been directed to 
refer to himself as from the department of human resources, 
labour and employment . . . and in response to my request for 
some information, Mr. Speaker, I am a bit surprised, I’m a bit 
surprised to note, that I am advised to, and I quote: 
 

Please be aware that the Seniors’ Bureau, along with 
the Women’s Secretariat, and the Indian and Native 
Secretariat, and the Employment Development 
Agency, became (let me underline and repeat that) 
became part of the new ministry of human resources, 
labour, and employment as of December 1, 1986. 
 

We stand here on December 22, 1986, considering a Bill which 
we’re told is to create the department of human resources, 
labour, and employment — December 22. 
 
The Assembly was called together for a Speech from the 
Throne on December 3, and the officials have been advised that 
as of December 1 all of these things have been already 
amalgamated into the department that we’re told is the whole 
purpose, is the whole purpose — believe us — the whole 
purpose for considering Bill No. 5 before us. 
 
So what does the government have to say about Bill No. 5? It 
appears, Mr. Speaker, it has very little to say, and perhaps the 
actions of the government are saying more than the words are 
saying. It would not be difficult to say less because the words 
have said very little. 
 
And I would ask that in debating Bill No. 5 that there would be 
some members opposite — I would expect that the member 
who was appointed responsible for the newly-created 
department of human resources, labour and employment — 
should stand in this debate at some point in time and tell us why 
it is so important that in creating this new department, the one 
with the name human resources, labour and employment, it is 
important to introduce a bill that doesn’t just create that 
department. It can create a whole series of department. It can do 
away with a whole series of departments, or it can take 
departments that exist now and mix and match and make some 
kind of concocted “concorsion” that nobody will understand. 
 
So let me refer, Mr. Speaker, to some specific sections of Bill 
No. 5, and let me concentrate on sections 12, 15, and 17. And 
let’s look at these sections, Mr. Speaker, in the context as well, 
because I want to direct most of my remarks in the context of 
the disestablishment, which is a nice-sounding phrase for 
getting rid of — a nice-sounding phrase for wiping out. 
 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

420 
 

I want to refer most of my remarks and concentrate on the area 
of my critic assignments and responsibility as a member of this 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. And let us look at Bill 5 and section 
12. This has been referred to by a number of people, and many 
would see this is as the key. I would put forward for your 
suggestion, as well for all the members of this House, that there 
are two other sections of this Bill that are also very significant 
and cannot be ignored. 
 
What does section 12 of Bill 5 tell us? It tells us three things. 
That the cabinet can: one, establish, continue or vary any 
department and determine the objects and purposes of that 
department. Sounds reasonable. Any responsible cabinet would 
do that. You would establish departments, you’d continue them, 
you’d vary them. You determine the objects and purposes of a 
department — every department should have objects and 
purposes. It seems obvious. 
 
What doesn’t seem obvious to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is that cabinet would have the authority to do those 
things: to create government departments, to continue or vary 
them, and to determine their objects and purposes behind closed 
doors. I don’t think on October 20th that the people of 
Saskatchewan — those 45 per cent, those 9 out of 20 in this 
province who went out and voted and were significant in 
bringing representation to the Conservative Party to form the 
Government of Saskatchewan — I don’t think that those 45 per 
cent of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, had in mind 
that they wanted to elect a government which would, behind 
closed doors, without coming before the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan, without making itself available for the 
scrutiny of the members of the opposition that they would be 
able to establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine its reason for being, behind closed doors. 
 
I don’t believe that that’s what the 45 per cent said, Mr. 
Speaker. I point out as well that there were 11 out of 20 who 
said that they did not want the Progressive Conservative Party 
of Saskatchewan to form the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And I don’t believe for a second that those nine out of 20 who 
voted that way on election day, who made that decision said: 
you know what we’d like to have, we’d like to have a little 
more secrecy in cabinet. We’d like to have a few more 
decisions made behind closed doors. You know what? 
Government is a little too open; that’s the problem in 
Saskatchewan. Let’s get rid of open government and let’s make 
more and more decisions behind closed doors. I don’t think 
that’s what the people of Saskatchewan said. That’s point 
number one, section 12, Bill 5. 
 
Point number two from section 12, Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, says 
that cabinet, without coming before the Legislative Assembly, 
can — and listen carefully because this is another one of those 
nice sounding bureaucratic words — can “disestablish any 
department.” Nice sounding words which means you can cut it 
out, get rid of it, toss it aside, and you don’t even have to justify 
that act to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then point number three, and this is kind of  

interesting in light of what we’ve just heard, Mr. Speaker. If 
this Bill is passed, it says that the government have the 
authority to “determine or change the name of any department.” 
Well at some point, assuming that this may pass in amended 
form or some other, and that that phrase is still included, that 
means that sometime after December 22nd, cabinet can 
determine or change the name of any department. 
 
Now I find that a little difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker. 
When I consider the facts, I find it difficult to understand how 
cabinet will be able to do that sometime after December 22nd 
when the officials from the Department of Social Services have 
obviously already been directed to refer to themselves as 
officials from the Department of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. However, this may not be obvious to me; it may 
be obvious to the members opposite, and we’ll leave it to the 
people of Saskatchewan to judge whether it’s obvious to them. 
They’re telling me back home, Mr. Speaker, that it isn’t obvious 
now. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well let’s move, Mr. Speaker, to section 15 of Bill 5 and it says, 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

. . . a minister may engage the services of or retain any 
technical, professional or other advisors, specialists or 
consultants that he considers necessary. 
 

In order words, Mr. Speaker, I understand that to say that a 
cabinet minister responsible for a government department can 
retain the services, by contract or otherwise, with anyone he or 
she wishes to carry out the tasks that the cabinet minister 
considers necessary. 
 
Now that seems to me, Mr. Speaker — and as I talk to people in 
my riding and we talk to people around Saskatchewan — that 
sounds to me, Mr. Speaker, as though it’s saying that the 
cabinet ministers can engage in patronage — can engage in 
partisan political patronage. They can just get whoever they 
wish to belly up to the trough and to engage in whatever kinds 
of exercises or activity the cabinet minister considers necessary 
to carry out the objects and purposes of the department — those 
very objects and purposes which can be amended and created 
and wiped out behind closed doors. So section 15, it seems, Mr. 
Speaker, is the patronage section — the patronage section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moving right along, let us move ahead to section 
17, and this is a significant section for those, I would suggest 
. . . I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that section 17, it seems to 
me, is a very, very significant section for mayors, aldermen 
around the province of Saskatchewan. I suggest it’s also a very 
significant section for people who pay property tax. I suggest 
it’s a very significant section, Mr. Speaker, for those people 
who have been forced to rely on social assistance in order to 
meet their very, very basic needs. 
 
And let me read from section 17, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my 
understanding that this is something brand-new —new and 
different to improve the Government of  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

421 
 

Saskatchewan . I don’t know if it’s got new blue dots, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s new and different. And it says: 
 

A minister may . . . enter into agreements on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan with . . . (b) any 
person, agency, organization, association, institution 
or body within or outside Saskatchewan (within or 
outside of Saskatchewan) for any purpose related to 
the exercise of . . . the powers or the carrying out of 
. . . the duties or functions assigned or transferred to 
the minister by or pursuant to this Act or any other Act 
or law. 
 

What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Let’s take that 
legalistic-sounding phrase and translate it into real English — 
the kind of language that the people of Saskatchewan 
understand and believe. And what this says to me, Mr. Speaker, 
when I look at section 17 — brand-new, improved section 17 of 
Bill 5 — it says to me, and when I look at it through the eyes of 
the critic for Social Services, and I look at it in the context of an 
answer I received from the minister of whatever it is — Social 
Services or human resources, labour, and employment — in 
question period some two weeks ago . . . 
 
And when I asked the minister at that time in question period 
whether one of the options in restructuring the Department of 
Social Services and the delivery mechanisms, one of the options 
being considered, I said: Mr. Minister, is one of the options 
being considered to shift delivery of social services from the 
province of Saskatchewan to municipalities? 
 
And I remember, Mr. Speaker, that the minister stood and he 
said: we’re looking at all options; we don’t rule that one out. 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is most appropriate 
for the mayors and the councillors and the aldermen of the cities 
and towns and villages of Saskatchewan to think very, very 
carefully about the implications of section 17 of Bill 5 because 
this section says, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

A minister may . . . enter into agreements on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan with: any . . . 
 

Let’s listen to it: 
 

. . . any person, agency, organization, association, 
institution or body . . . 
 

Could we read that to say municipality? Could we understand 
that to say municipality? 
 

. . . for any purpose related to the exercise of any of 
the powers or the carrying out of any of the duties or 
functions assigned or transferred to the minister by or 
pursuant to this Act or any other Act . . . 
 

Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that section 17 would allow for Social 
Services to be delivered no longer by the province of 
Saskatchewan; to be delivered by municipalities, by cities and 
towns and villages in Saskatchewan? And that that change 
could be made behind the secrecy, the cloak of secrecy of 
cabinet doors? Could that be, Mr. Speaker, a possibility that is 
included in section 17 from Bill 5? I  

suggest that the answer is yes. 
 
And I don’t think that that’s a wild, or radical kind of logical 
extension to take when I consider the questions that have been 
asked in this House, the statements that have been made in this 
House. And I ask myself: why are we dealing with a Bill . . . 
Why are we dealing with a Bill that allows us to create and get 
rid of and alter any government department when we’re told 
that it has only to do with the department of human resources, 
labour and employment. Well that strikes me as a bit much for 
anybody to believe, Mr. Speaker, and I think that the people of 
Saskatchewan will find it hard to believe as well. 
 
Well let me look, Mr. Speaker, because this may be my last 
chance . . . This may be my last chance to make some 
comments about the Department of Social Services, because as 
I stand here today I’m not even sure if we have a Department of 
Social Services any more. 
 
But let me make some remarks, Mr. Speaker, and to concentrate 
the remainder of my remarks on the Department of Social 
Services, which has been described by some as the department 
that makes an octopus look like a simple piece because of the 
number of responsibilities and tentacles that extend from the 
Department of Social Services to the people of Saskatchewan, 
all across this beautiful province of ours. 
 
And I focus, Mr. Speaker, on the annual report of the 
Saskatchewan Social Services for 1984-86 — ’84-85, excuse 
me — which outlined the services delivered by the Department 
of Social Services. And you may ask, Mr. Speaker, why in the 
word would you be using the annual report from 1984-85? 
1984-85 ended in March 31st of 1985, and here we stand, 
December 22, 1986. That was over a year and a half ago, about 
21 months ago, Mr. Speaker. You may ask, why in the world 
would you be referring to the annual report of Social Services 
for 1984-85? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is very simple: because 
there is no report from the Department of Social Services for 
the year 1985-86. 
 
Does that strike you as a bit odd, Mr. Speaker? It strikes me as a 
bit odd. And I note as well that there was a time that you didn’t 
have to wait 21 months to get a report from a department, the 
Department of Social Services. But let’s go with the best 
information that we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, and let’s take a look at 
the Department of Social Services, if it exists, as it exists now. 
 
The mission — I refer to page three of that publication which 
describes the mission of the Department of Social Services, and 
it says simply this: 
 

The mission of the Department of Social Services is to 
promote human growth and development and, thereby, 
the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

And I think that that is a noble mission, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that is a mission that any one of us in this House could agree 
with. I think that is a mission for the Department of Social 
Services that the people of Saskatchewan would consider to be 
fair and 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

422 
 

 compassionate. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that after we 
have the new-fangled department, if it’s not there now, that that 
will continue to be a mission of the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
But let me move forward to what is described as the mandate, 
the mandate of the Department of Social Services, and it 
describes six — six items as being the mandate of that 
department. And let me quote. It says: 
 

Given the priorities of the Government of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 

And let me just pause there for a moment, Mr. Speaker, and 
scratch my head, and say, given the priorities of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the priorities of a government 
which in four and one-half years has brought us into three 
billion, three thousand million dollars of debt; the priorities of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which a year 
and one-half ago, under the pleasant sounding name of welfare 
reform — euphemistically referred to as welfare reform — 
which close to degrade and denigrate those people who are 
most suffering by the government’s failure to provide 
employment opportunities. 
 
So in a context, however, let us be fair, let us consider that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has the best interests of people in 
mind and let me quote then the mandate: 
 

Given the priorities of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the special needs of the people of 
the province, the department responds to its mission 
through: 
 

Six things, Mr. Speaker, six things: 
 

Providing financial assistance and related support 
services to persons who are unable to provide for 
themselves; (seems reasonable); 
 
Providing for re-entry into the work place for persons 
who are able to be independent of assistance; (that 
sounds commendable, Mr. Speaker); 
 
Protecting children against abuse, neglect and 
abandonment; (and none of us would disagree with 
that, Mr. Speaker); 
 
Providing substitute care for children, youth and 
families; (that seems sensitive); 
 
Providing rehabilitative and developmental services 
and promoting independent living for persons who are 
physically and mentally disabled; (and that seems to 
be a compassionate and reasonable objective); 
 
Supporting community-based services and initiatives. 
(and who could argue with that.) 
 

And so I ask, Mr. Speaker, would you like to see any of these 
taken away? Would the people of Saskatchewan like to see any 
of these mandates taken away? And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
the answer is no. And I would  

certainly say that in my opinion that they should remain. I hope 
they are not removed. But I don’t know. The people of 
Saskatchewan do not know, and they will not have the 
opportunity to know because reorganization will occur behind 
closed doors. 
 
So how does the Department of Social Services measure its 
performance? Every efficient operating organization or 
business, government department, should have a way of 
measuring how its performance measures up to standard, Mr. 
Speaker, and whether it is reaching its objectives or not. And it 
state: 
 

The department measures its success for gauging its 
ability to help people escape the dehumanizing cycle 
of dependency and to achieve as much self-reliance 
and independence as they’re capable of attaining. 
 

That strikes me, Mr. Speaker, as being a very commendable 
way of measuring the performance of the Department of Social 
Services. And that will continue? And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that we do not know. We do not know and we will not have an 
opportunity to know by considering the reorganization in this 
Legislative Assembly 
 
Well let’s just take a look, Mr. Speaker, at the kinds of services, 
because the people of Saskatchewan, are most interested in the 
services of the Department of Social Services. That’s the thing 
that touches the lives of our friends and our neighbours and 
those people who sent us here to represent them. 
 
And the services of the department, Mr. Speaker, are described 
— there are eight of them — there are rehabilitation services, 
by means of which institutions and support for 
community-based residential and other services for persons who 
are mentally or physically disabled are delivered through the 
division of rehabilitation services. 
 
Social Services also has child and family services, Mr. Speaker, 
which include the department’s foster care or adoption and 
child protection programs. Seems reasonable; makes sense to 
me. 
 
The department also has youth services, Mr. Speaker, which 
involve serving youth generally and carrying out provincial 
responsibilities for young offenders, including institutional and 
regional services and the referral of youth to community-based 
programs and residential services. No one would argue with the 
importance of that. 
 
There is the NGO or the non-government organization section, 
Mr. Speaker, which involves the support of provincial or 
community-based social service programs — community-based 
programs being delivered by people in their own communities 
for people in their own communities. 
 
There is the employment support and job-creation services, 
which include vocational rehabilitation and the creation of job 
opportunities, primarily for social  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

423 
 

assistance clients. And that seems to be an important task before 
us in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
There is the income security program, and what a beating it’s 
taken, Mr. Speaker — the income security program which 
includes welfare and income supplements for low-income 
families and senior citizens, another part of the services of the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
There is a day care program section which includes licensing 
and some start-up support for day care operations throughout 
the province and the subsidization of low income access to 
child care. And finally, there is a seniors’ bureau which 
includes communication, program consultation, and support for 
seniors’ organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to take a long time. It’s going to take 
a while. I don’t meant to take a long time to describe what the 
Department of Social Services does. But it takes a long time to 
describe what the Department of Social Services does because it 
does a lot of things. It does a lot of things for people, for real 
people, for the people who put us in this Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, and for their friends and their neighbours and their 
children. 
 
(1630) 
 
And somehow we’re lead to believe, even if we take it at face 
value, we’re led to believe that some reorganization, which will 
take all of these things that I’ve just mentioned — and we’ll 
look at it in a little more detail in a moment — all of these 
services, we’ll lump them together with the Department of 
Labour and the Workers’ Compensation Board and the Native 
Secretariat and the Women’s Secretariat and the Employment 
Development Agency. And we’re going to lump these all into 
one department and we’re going to call that efficient? We’re 
going to call that sensitive? We’re going to call that meeting the 
needs of those who are least fortunate in our society, those who 
are able to benefit the least form the opportunities that exist in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that even you, in your objectivity, may 
find that a little difficult to conceive. I know that I do. I know 
the members on this side do, and I certainly know that the 
members back home do. 
 
Well let’s take a look in a little more detail, Mr. Speaker, at the 
services that are actually delivered under the categories that I’ve 
just described, and let’s start with child and family services. 
Most significant, the children are our most valuable resource in 
this province. I don’t think anybody would debate that fact. And 
the family is the core and the structure of our society, and the 
Department of Social Services, surely, is an institution or is a 
department which will enable children to have their needs met 
and to look at their futures with optimism and hope, and which 
will allow for families to maintain that very, very important 
family structure. 
 
The department is responsible for child protection, single parent 
services, adoption, foster care and youth services, all of those 
included under the child and family services division, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Well let’s start with the child protection services. And this one 
will be of special interest to the former member for Saskatoon 
Westmount, Mr. Speaker. This will be of significant interest, 
and I don’t know whether she has communicated with the 
members opposite or not; if she hasn’t, I suspect that she will 
shortly. Child protection services, and let me quote: 
 

The department continued to be responsible for 
investigating all reports of child neglect and abuse and 
for taking the necessary steps to ensure the safety of 
children. 
 

And the rules for doing that are included under the child and 
family services division. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 
former member for Saskatoon Westmount will take a great deal 
of interest in this section and finding out that the rules can be 
changed behind the secrecy of the cabinet doors. 
 
Well, child protection services goes on to say that: 
 

The goal has been to reduce the child’s need for 
protection by assisting parents to deal with the 
problems contributing to or causing abuse or neglect 
or other risk to the children . . . Services include (Mr. 
Speaker) home making, parent aide, parent education 
or lifeskills training, emergency babysitting, 
recreational fees, assessment, counselling or therapy, 
and required transportation (in order to meet basic 
needs). 
 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, are these the kind of things that the 
people of Saskatchewan would like to see taken away? I would 
hope not, but we will not have an opportunity to review that 
before this Legislative Assembly, because that decision can be 
made behind cabinet doors. 
 
The Department of Social Services also has a foster care 
program, and it is intended to provide a substitute family 
environment for children who are in temporary care of the 
minister or who are permanent wards. And the role of foster 
parents in the lives of children is essential, Mr. Speaker. Foster 
parents are regarded as colleagues of the department in 
providing a stable family situation for children requiring care. 
Foster parents also play an important role in facilitating the 
return of children to their natural families, a principal objective 
of the department, and I suggest that that should continue. But 
will it? We don’t know, because that decision can be made 
behind the closed doors of cabinet. 
 
Single-parent services, Mr. Speaker, are provided by the 
Department of Social Services for: 
 

. . . information and referral and counselling and other 
pre-and post-natal support services to single parents. 
Assistance was given to mothers seeking to place 
children for adoption . . . 
 

although in excess of 90 per cent of single mothers choose to 
keep their infants. 
 
Services are also provided with the objective: 
 

To quickly identifying the young mother who 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

424 
 

 requires increased services or whose infant might 
require protection; 
 
To promote normal growth and development in infants 
who might be at risk; 
 
To increase parenting skills and the knowledge and 
understanding of young mothers in areas of child care 
and development; and 
 
To assist in maintaining the young family unit and 
prevent children from coming into the eventual care of 
the Minister. 
 

And isn’t that the most significant objective to “prevent 
children from coming under the care of the Minister.” And will 
these services be taken away? I hope not, but we don’t know. 
And we won’t know because it won’t come before this 
Legislative Assembly. That decision could be made behind the 
secrecy of closed cabinet doors. 
 
Let’s talk about adoptions, Mr. Speaker, because adoptions also 
come under the Department of Social Services: 
 

. . . a major responsibility of the department . . . plan 
of choice for children under the age of 12 whose ties 
to natural parents became severed and who had to 
come into the Minister’s care. The focus of this 
program continued to be to place each child in an 
adopt in home best suited to the child’s individual 
needs. 
 
The department remained responsible for the 
recruitment, screening and selection of adoptive 
families. In all cases, adoptive applicants were 
involved in a home study which included a series of 
interviews and meetings designed to assess the 
applicants and prepare them for the role of parenting 
an adopted child. 
 

An important task, Mr. Speaker. And could this be taken away? 
I hope not, but again we don’t know because that’s a decision 
that could be made behind the closed doors of cabinet. 
 
Well let’s move to youth services, Mr. Speaker. There’s a long 
list ahead because the department is responsible for a large 
number of areas. And let’s move to youth services and the 
services under The Family Services Act that was recently 
introduced: 
 

The department continued to provide direct services in 
teen-parent conflict counselling, support services to 
unmarried teen parents, voluntary and protection 
services to young teens up to age sixteen years and 
voluntary care agreements for young persons sixteen 
and seventeen years of age where parents were unable 
or refused to assist to care for the youth. The 
department also assisted young persons, up to 
twenty-one years of age, who were wards of the 
Minister, (in order) to complete their education. 
 

An important responsibility, Mr. Speaker. And will this be 
taken away? I don’t know. I hope not. But let us keep in  

mind that if we pass Bill 5, that can be changed behind the 
secrecy of closed cabinet doors. 
 
Youth services. And I won’t go through all of these in detail, 
Mr. Speaker. Let me just list some of them. They offer young 
offenders’ services, alternative measures for young people, 
judicial interim release, and probationary services. Because 
unfortunately there are a number of our youth in our province, 
for one reason or another, who have come in conflict with the 
law. 
 

The duties of a youth worker under the Act include 
supervision of offenders bound by probation orders 
(young offenders, and to assist them in) . . . the 
preparation and presentation to Court of the 
pre-disposition and progress reports (to make their 
sensitive recommendations to court, Mr. Speaker, to 
attend) in court to provide information and advice, and 
. . . other duties that the Provincial Director required. 
 

Are these important services? Clearly they are. Will they be 
taken away? I don’t know. I hope not. But if we pass Bill 5, 
they can be taken away behind the secrecy of closed cabinet 
doors. 
 
The youth services refers to another service called community 
alternative services, Mr. Speaker. And what’s that involve, you 
ask? 
 

The Community Alternative Services Program was 
intended to be community-based and a highly visible 
alternative to custody for short term, non-dangerous 
offenders (young people). The program provided the 
Court with the alternative of sentencing an offender to 
a specific community program . . . 
 

To do that instead of to a period of custody or in lieu of 
probation. Community programs instead of incarceration. 
 

This program gave the victim of an offence an 
opportunity to participate in the proceedings to the 
extent desirable, and (and that’s a noble objective), 
with a view to recovering where possible an 
appropriate compensation for illegal actions against a 
person or property. 
 

That sounds like a judicially sound principle to me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The program provided compensation to society as a 
whole where there was no identifiable victim. 
 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, is that an important service? And I suggest, 
yes. Would we ant it to continue? I suggest, yes. Will it be 
taken away? We don’t know. But I remind the member sin this 
House that if Bill 5 passes, that can be taken away behind the 
secrecy of closed cabinet doors. 
 
Well, let us move to day care, Mr. Speaker. We’ve covered two 
of the divisions. Let’s move to the day care division of 
Department of Social Services, and let us note that the 
department provides assistance to parents and parent boards 
wishing to establish local day care services  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

425 
 

in their own communities. It offers start-up grants for day care 
centres and family day care homes, annual equipment grants 
and special supervision equipment grants for centres providing 
care to children with special needs. It also, Mr. Speaker, 
provides consultation and support services, where available, for 
parents and those providing day care. 
 
And we have a large number in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
have family day care homes run by private individuals in their 
own homes, nearly 400 of those, accommodating nearly 2,000 
young children. We have day care centres with almost 4,000 
spaces. We also have, through the divisions of day care, Mr. 
Speaker, an income-tested subsidy which goes to assist parents 
to meet eligibility requirements. 
 
And I don’t think, I don’t believe, there would be a single 
member in this House, I would hope, who would say that there 
is something wrong with the Department of Social Services 
providing support for those who are in need of day care. But 
can it be taken away with Bill No. 5’s passage, Mr. Speaker? I 
am sorry to say that day care services could be taken away 
behind the closed doors of the cabinet office. 
 
Let’s move to the NGO, the non-government organizations, 
which many of the social services in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, are provided by hard-working, well-intending people 
in their own communities who care about others in their own 
communities. And so, consistent with its mandate to provide a 
broad range of social service to the people of Saskatchewan, the 
department works closely with many NGOs, non-government 
organizations, and service providers. It provides grants and is 
responsible for organizations responsible for providing services 
to children, youth, and their families. 
 
What kinds of services, Mr. Speaker? Classed as 
crisis-intervention services we have things such as after-hours 
crisis intervention, sexual assault services, services for the 
victims of family and personal violence— and aren’t we 
becoming more sensitive to the crisis that exists there? 
Transition houses to provide some support for women who are 
forced out of their homes, Mr. Speaker, because they live in fear 
of violence, and to provide a secure and warm environment for 
themselves and for their children. Short-term crisis 
accommodation for battered women and children in safe 
shelters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And would any of us want those taken away? I think not. But 
can they be? I don’t know. Because if we pass Bill 5, Mr. 
Speaker, once again that’s the kind of service that can be taken 
away. Without coming before this Legislative Assembly, that’s 
the kind of decision that can be made behind closed cabinet 
doors. 
 
The Social Services also provides trusteeship services and 
counselling and family supports and assists with services 
provides by Big Brothers and Big Sisters, and mediation 
diversion services, Mr. Speaker, for youth provided in some of 
the communities in this province. 
 
And are those the kinds of things that we consider to be  

important, to contribute to the quality of life, in particular for 
our young people of Saskatchewan? I say yes. But can they be 
taken away? And unfortunately they can be taken away with 
Bill 5 behind the secrecy of closed cabinet doors. 
 
Well let’s move to another division of Social Services, Mr. 
Speaker. And I am sorry that it is taking so long, but I am sure 
that you can appreciate, and the members opposite can 
appreciate, and most importantly the people of Saskatchewan 
can appreciate, the responsibilities to people that the 
Department of Social Services holds as its first responsibility. 
 
And let’s look at rehab services — rehabilitation services — 
which are responsible for providing comprehensive and 
co-ordinated services to people who are physically or mentally 
handicapped, to ensure that their physical, emotional, and social 
needs are met, and to assist them to live and function s 
independently as possible within their own communities. And 
that seems to me a very fair and a very sensitive commitment 
that the Department of Social Services would make to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are different kinds of ways that the department delivers to 
meet that objective, Mr. Speaker. Through the community 
social work and family support and the therapist services, it 
provides social workers in communities in four regions around 
the province. And family support services are designed to help 
the parents and their children in the initial adjustment to the 
realities of a handicap. And we can all understand the difficulty 
that a family goes through when they become aware that they 
have, within their circle, a handicapped child. 
 
The community social work services are also intended to 
diminish or eliminate obstacles which normal family 
functioning might be caused by the handicapped — to eliminate 
those obstacles — and to assist families in the community 
service system in establishing a developmental model at a very 
early stage as opposed to corrective model at normal school 
entry stage. What does that mean? 
 
(1645) 
 
That means that the Department of Social Services has, as its 
objective, to assist families, Mr. Speaker, to allow their 
handicapped children to experience the normal developmental 
skills that other children would have, instead of waiting until 
they become school aged and then we try and correct it — 
instead of waiting to close the barn door, Mr. Speaker, after the 
horses are left. And that sounds to me, Mr. Speaker, like an 
admirable objective for the rehab services division. 
 
And it also works to assist families and the family members 
with a handicap in making appropriate planning decisions about 
education, residential and life-style issues at appropriate times 
during their development. And can we ask, Mr. Speaker,: is it 
obvious that these services should exist and not be taken way? I 
suggest it is. But can they be taken away? And unfortunately, if 
we pass Bill 5, it is another service that could be taken away 
without coming before this  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

426 
 

legislature — a decision that could be made behind closed 
cabinet doors? 
 
The rehab services, Mr. Speaker, also provides institutional 
services at Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw for 675 mentally 
handicapped people, and at North Park Centre in Prince Albert 
for another 185. And these are handicapped people, Mr. 
Speaker, who require levels 2, 3, and 4 care — who at this point 
in time are largely not able to be accommodated services. And 
it is important to retain these, Mr. Speaker. I suggest it is. Can 
they be taken away by passing Bill 5? Unfortunately, the 
answer is yes. 
 
And that’s not beyond the realm of comprehension, Mr. 
Speaker. Because I point simply to the experience of Tranquille, 
out in British Columbia about a year and a half ago, in which, at 
the stroke of a pen by a cabinet minister, numbers of people. 
Literally hundreds of people who were not prepared to live in 
community settings, who did not have community settings able 
to accommodate their very special needs, were turned out of the 
institution at the stroke of the pen, without any notice. And I 
would dread to see what would happen to people who are living 
in our institutions now and the concerns that their families 
would have if this were to take place here in Saskatchewan at 
the single stroke of a pen. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the rehab services also provides a small 
hospital program, and it also provides early childhood 
intervention services. And this is a service, Mr. Speaker, which 
provides support to families, particularly to young families and 
to families in their pre-school and their development stages to 
help families cope with the crisis, to cope with the fears, and 
most importantly, to learn to be a part of facilitating for their 
children an environment in which they will be able to 
experience a developmental process that normal children 
experience. 
 
Rehab services, Mr. Speaker, also provides funding for activity 
centres which provide an adult day vocational program for 
individuals who are mentally handicapped, people who have 
limited motor and sensory development. And programming 
there, Mr. Speaker, addresses the development of life skills and 
socialization and recreation. The goal continues to be at this 
point in time for the individual’s attendance at activity centres 
to develop sufficient social competence to function in a 
community setting. 
 
And rehab services also, Mr. Speaker, provides funding for 
sheltered workshops, for handicapped citizens who may have 
slightly higher abilities to function, and provides specialized 
employment opportunities for those adults who have a fair 
motor development or minimal sensory limitations, provides 
training and the opportunity to engage in production and 
develop occupational skills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also point out at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, that 
those are people . . . And in case we think that we’ve got it all 
cased and there’s no room for improvement, it’s also worth 
noting that individuals, our citizens here in Saskatchewan who 
work in sheltered workshops, Mr. Speaker, do so without the 
protection of the regulations of minimum wage. And I think 
perhaps that there . . . I know,  

as a matter of fact, after having talked to a number of 
employees, handicapped employees who work in sheltered 
industries and sheltered workshops, that that is an issue that is 
important to them, and I think is one that bears the attention of 
the members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, rehab services also provides 
support for sheltered industries where handicapped people are 
working within the mainstream and within industry and I ask 
again: are these the kinds of services that the people of 
Saskatchewan feel are fair and compassionate for our 
handicapped citizens? And the answer is clearly, yes. Can they 
be taken away? We don’t know because once again it’s another 
kind of service that could be withdrawn behind the secrecy of 
closed cabinet doors. 
 
Well there are: “Residential Services for Disabled Children and 
Adults, “ Mr. Speaker, that are provided with the funding of the 
Department of Social Services as well. 
 

The primary objective . . . in the provision . . . of 
residential services for men and women with mental 
. . . (handicaps) remained to develop a broad spectrum 
of options promoting the degree of self-reliance . . . 
 

That’s maximum within their personal capabilities, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s referred to often as the principle of normalization, 
where we believe that our handicapped citizens have the same 
rights to opportunity and have the potential to develop their 
skills, their developmental skills, given the proper environment 
and training. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we had: 
 

. . . in 1984-85, 326 mentally (handicapped) . . . adults 
living in 48 group homes located in 23 
communities. . . 

 
The number is slightly larger than that now. I’m sorry I’m not 
able to quote you a more accurate figure. We had “forty 
children with mental (handicaps) disabilities,” who were, in 
1984-85, who were living in group homes and there were also 
. . . 
 

. . . six group homes for physically disabled men and 
women; (which serve 50 people) a total of 50 persons 
were served. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there were three training homes which provided 
support services, and still do, for 24 mentally handicapped 
adults; and approved homes around Saskatchewan, approved 
homes around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 191 of them 
providing accommodation for in excess of 400 people. 
 
Seventy children in foster homes. 
 
And a supportive living program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
which provides support for those mentally handicapped citizens 
of ours who don’t require to live in a home that’s owned and 
operated by the Department of  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

427 
 

Social Services or an NGO, but people who are capable, with a 
small amount of assistance, to live in their own apartments and 
suites in their home communities. 
 
All of those residential services, Mr. Speaker, for literally 
hundreds and hundreds of our handicapped citizens, are 
provided with the responsibilities of the Department of Social 
Services. Should they continue? Clearly, the answer is yes. Can 
they be taken away? We don’t know. We don’t know because, 
once again, that’s a decision that could be made behind the 
closed cabinet doors here in Saskatchewan if Bill 5 is passed. 
Respite services are provided as well, Mr. Speaker, through 
rehab services. 
 
Well let me move to what some think, Mr. Speaker, is the sole 
. . . some people will think it’s the sole responsibility of the 
Department of Social Services, and clearly it’s not. And I refer, 
of course, to the income security and employment division of 
. . . employment development division of Social Services, Mr. 
Speaker. Through this division, Mr. Speaker, funds are 
provided to individuals in need to meet the costs of food and 
shelter, utilities and clothing, and supplementary health 
services, and for their families — for those people who are least 
able to meet their basic needs. 
 
Now I point out, Mr. Speaker, that up until 1982, as policy of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, that these rates, as low as 
they were, that these rates were adjusted annually to meet the 
increasing cost for the basic necessities experienced by people 
with the least amount in our province. What’s happened since 
1982? We had an adjustment in 1984 and then we had another 
adjustment in 185. 
 
And so we ask: what has been the Saskatchewan government’s 
record when it comes to providing for rights and to meet basic 
needs? And I refer, Mr. Speaker, to a newspaper article which 
answers that question. It’s from the Leader-Post in March 27, 
1986 and the words of that article I think answer that question, 
Mr. Speaker. These are their words, not mine. It says: 
 

Study shows Saskatchewan cut welfare rates. 
 

And what does the article say, Mr. Speaker? Let me quote. It 
goes on to say: 
 

“Four provincial governments picked the pockets of 
the poor in the aftermath of the worst economic crisis 
since the Great Depression,” says a study of welfare 
rights made public Wednesday. 
 

This is back in March, Mr. Speaker. And it goes on to say: 
 

Calculations by the social planning council of 
metropolitan Toronto show that British Columbia, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Prince Edward Island 
reduced the real value (reduced the real value) of 
monthly welfare benefits between 1982 and 1985. 
 

Now just an editorial comment here, Mr. Speaker, because I 
think it’s interesting to note when we read that, that between 
1982 and 1985 — and it refers to the province of British 
Columbia, Social Credit British  

Columbia; Alberta, Progressive Conservative Alberta; Prince 
Edward Island, Progressive Conservative Prince Edward Island, 
between ’82 and ’85; and Saskatchewan, Progressive 
Conservative Saskatchewan — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
perhaps there’s a pattern — perhaps there is a pattern. It goes on 
to say that: 
 

David Thornley, the council’s program director, said 
the three westernmost provinces had welfare rates in 
1982 that were well above the national average. 
 

And then it continues. And I quote: 
 

We have generally argued that welfare benefits should 
be based on some realistic assessment of living costs. 
 

Thornley said, what the council’s latest study shows is that the 
1985 welfare rates weren’t high enough to give most recipients 
income anywhere close to the poverty lines. And I point out, 
Mr. Speaker, just simply on things like utility rates. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, people on social assistance are allowed 
up to $55 a month for utility rates. Now I had a gentleman from 
Saskatoon call me a week and a half ago and pointed out to me 
— and this is a fellow who does not live with exorbitant means, 
Mr. Speaker — who said that although he was allowed $55 for 
utility rates, and doesn’t have a telephone, that he has expenses 
in excess of $90. And let me just point these out, Mr. Speaker, 
because these do not strike me as being exorbitant; for his gas, 
he paid $60 — pays $60 a month; for electricity, another 15; for 
his water, 10; and for sewer, 5, and without a telephone, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s $90 a month. I don’t think that that speaks 
particularly well for the record of the government of 
Saskatchewan in allowing those least fortunate of our citizens in 
order to meet their basic needs. And the article goes on, Mr. 
Speaker, to say and I quote: 
 

Here are the council’s assessments province by 
province. 

 
And let me refer only to Saskatchewan. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan has been . . . 
 

And let me underline that word, “has been”: 
 

. . . one of the better providers for most categories of 
welfare recipients, but not for single employables. 
(And listen to this.) The rate for that group fell from 
$517 a month to $345 a month between 1982 and 
1985. 
 

From 1982 to 1985, at a time in which this province . . . we 
were experiencing an inflation rate in the neighbourhood of 
about 20 per cent, single, employable individuals in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, took a drop from 517 to $345 a 
month. And I ask: is that the sign of a government that acts with 
compassion and fairness? 
 
And when we look at the track record, Mr. Speaker, of fully 
employable people, whereby in 1981 we had in this  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

428 
 

province — and I’m not proud of this figure, but it’s a fact — 
we had 2,583 single, employable people. In August, and let me 
be kind, in August of this year, when the numbers are generally 
lower, we had 10,073 single, fully employable people who were 
unemployed, receiving social assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I ask, and let’s check the mentalities: does that mean 
that between 1981 and 1985, when the numbers of single 
unemployed, fully employable people rose fourfold, does that 
mean that Saskatchewan people became four times as shiftless? 
Does it mean that Saskatchewan people became four times as 
lazy? 
 
And I suggest not, Mr. Speaker. I think that in those four years, 
five years, that Saskatchewan people became four times as 
depressed, four times as disappointed, and four times as 
deserted by the government opposite in failing to meet its 
responsibility to provide employment opportunities for the 
people of Saskatchewan to provide for themselves and their 
families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And so when that’s the track record . . . that’s 
the track record, Mr. Speaker — in three years a drop from 517 
to $345 for an individual. And we ask ourselves, when that’s a 
responsibility of the Department of Social Services, is that fair 
and compassionate rates for those who are in most need? Is that 
something that will be met by the Department of Social 
Services? 
 
And I ask: is that the kind of assistance that will be taken away 
even further from the citizens of this province? And I hope not. 
But I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, that if we pass Bill 5 it’s possible 
to do that even further without coming before this Legislative 
Assembly, behind the closed doors of cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Being 5 o’clock this Assembly is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


	ORAL QUESTIONS

