


















































May 27, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 27, 1986 
 
 

1541 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you, a group of 49 students from the 
Wadena Elementary School. they are accompanied by teachers, 
Reg Glennie, Mair MacDonald; chaperons, Diane Gradin, 
Dorothy Wickstrom, Gail Norberg, Jeannie Elphinstone, Cathy 
Gradin; and their bus driver is Doug Griller. 
 
I hope that you have an interesting stay here today. I know you 
will enjoy question period. I'll be joining you later for pictures and 
refreshments in room 218. I'd ask all members to welcome them to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure at this 
time to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 27 grade 7 and grade 8 students from St. John's 
Elementary School. They're presently sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery, and they're accompanied by their teacher, Penny Sibbald. 
 
I'm sure that you people will find your visit to the Legislative 
Buildings very interesting, very educational. I will be meeting 
with you at 3 p.m. for pictures and drinks, and I would ask the 
members at this time to join with me in extending a welcome to 
these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, more than two years ago 
your government introduced a white paper on the need to control 
the operation of all-terrain vehicles, I guess more commonly 
known as ATVs, Mr. Minister. 
 
More than a year ago, in March of '85, your government made 
public a white . . . or you made public draft legislation which you 
promised to act on within months. That was in 1985, Mr. Minister. 
Fourteen months later we continue to see fatal accidents involving 
young people and all-terrain vehicles, and there's no sign of 
legislation coming forth from your government. 
 
Can the minister assure this legislature that the use of all-terrain 
vehicles — that you will have legislation in this legislature on the 
use of all-terrain vehicles later this week, and if not, Mr. Minister, 
why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can assure the 
hon. member and the public of Saskatchewan that this government 
is very, very concerned with the use of all-terrain vehicles, and 
you are quite accurate in your history of what this government has 
done regarding a consultative process with the public of 
Saskatchewan. 

We are still, today, consulting with numerous groups — be they 
women’s groups, manufacturers groups, user groups — we are 
still consulting with them today. Now I find it very, very strange, 
Mr. Speaker, that the member of the opposition would stand here 
at a time of bereavement of many families in Saskatchewan and 
all of a sudden — all of a sudden become very, very 
sanctimonious about this particular issue. 
 
Not once has the member opposite come to my office and ask for 
a copy of that draft legislation. Not once has any member opposite 
come to my office and inquired about the specifics of it. And I 
would ask the member opposite, if he is genuinely concerned — if 
he is genuinely concerned — to please come down and sit down; 
let's co-operate; let's talk about this proposed legislation, and I 
would welcome your input to it, sir. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the minister, Mr. Minister, you 
brought forward, or at least proposed, some legislation, draft 
legislation. Bring it into the House so we can deal with it. That's 
where we should be dealing with it. 
 
When the former minister introduced your government's white 
paper on ATVs (all-terrain vehicles) in 1984 — in 1984, Mr. 
Minister — he noted at that time that there were 14 young people 
under the age of 16 that had died while operating ATVs in this 
province between '81 and '84. And the former minister also said at 
that time, and I'll quote, Mr. Minister:  
 

I think it's time that we consider the need for legislation before 
additional young lives are lost. 

 
That was the former minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, since your government began studying this issue in 
March of 1984, many more young people have lost their lives 
operating ATVs, including a four-year-old here just last week near 
Hanley. Mr. Minister, how many more deaths of young people in 
this province will it take before your government will act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of 
today getting into the specifics of some of these very, very 
unfortunate accidents that have occurred. And I think it's fair to 
understand that when accidents of any type occur there are various 
reasons for those accidents, and I don't think it right that we go 
into the specifics of any of those types of accidents. I don't think 
that would be fair nor reasonable. 
 
I can say that this particular issue is a very, very sensitive one that 
requires a great deal of thought, and no matter what type of 
legislation we were to introduce, I can assure the member opposite 
and the people of Saskatchewan that simply by legislating certain 
procedures will not alleviate and stop all accidents. 
 
Now we will be considering all relevant details, and I assure the 
member opposite that we will indeed be introducing legislation. I 
will not at this time say exactly when that may be, but I could 
perhaps mention this; that  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1542 
 
 

if the member opposite would discontinue his practice of standing 
here in the legislature and having me run around all the province 
looking for bus number 749 and serial numbers and such, and on 
and on, if you'd get down to the basic issues of today, at that time 
we will get to some of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A question to the Minister of Highways. Mr. 
Minister, a lot of people can't understand why you're delaying 
important legislation. In 1985 your government released the 
results of a questionnaire which you showed 93 per cent support in 
the province for legislation to control ATVs, and 75 per cent 
support for legislation which would restrict the operation of ATVs 
on public property to those 16 years of age and over. I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, with that kind of apparent support and continuing 
list of fatal accidents occurring to young people across the 
province, I ask you: — when will you finally act on this important 
legislation and introduce legislation to the session here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I think I fairly clearly stated that we will 
be introducing legislation. I'm not prepared at this time to state 
exactly when, and I hope that the member opposite appreciates the 
very, very difficult job that we have in coming to grips with the 
type of legislation that is to be introduced. 
 
Now members opposite may say, okay, all-terrain vehicles are 
causing some deaths, perhaps we should ban all all-terrain 
vehicles. I don't think that that is a proper response. There are 
other groups who say, no, we should just leave it wide open and 
have no legislation whatsoever. 
 
We are trying to come to grips with a reasonable, common sense 
approach to this problem. And it will be dealt with in the very near 
future, but I am not prepared to say today that we are going to 
introduce legislation next week or the week after. But it will be 
dealt with at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask the minister, what are you precisely saying? You indicate .  . 
are you saying that by introducing the legislation you won't, in 
fact, make it safer for the control of these vehicles? Are you, in 
fact, saying that we shouldn't have laws for drinking and driving 
because we still have traffic accidents? Is that your perverted 
logic? Is he saying that we shouldn't have any restriction on the 
operation and trucks because people over the age of 16 get into 
traffic accidents? That's the perverted logic that you're using. 
 
No one is saying that it will eliminate all accidents. But, Mr. 
Minister, you have been derelict in your duty — and your 
government. For two years you have studied it. What we're asking 
you here, and the people want to know, is: — what is your 
timetable, or do you have one, or are you waiting till after the 
election and disregarding the safety of young people across this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
absolutely no right to stand in this legislature and for one moment 
infer that this government has not been very, very concerned about 
safety in this province. 
 

I can go on at great length — at great length about the many safety 
programs that this government has initiated, including the safety 
school bus stop-arm program and numerous other safety 
programs. There has been no government in the history of this 
province that has had a better record of safety, and our traffic 
accident statistics will support that. 
 
As it respects, specifically, all-terrain vehicle legislation, I can 
assure the member that it is going to be a very, very high priority 
with me, and I would ask for the co-operation of the members 
opposite. And I would ask not that the members simply stand up at 
a time of bereavement of a number of families and try and make a 
political statement just to gain political points. 
 
Legislation will be introduced here. And I'm not prepared to tell 
you exactly when it will be, but it will be good common sense 
type legislation and it will be introduced in due course. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you have . . . Supplement, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, you've had over two years to work on this 
important matter. I ask you: — if it is in fact a high priority with 
you, what are you waiting for? You have consulted with the 
public; you have put out a white paper; what are you waiting for 
now? Why aren't you concerned about the safety of young people 
across this province? Have you not got the political nerve to move 
forward prior to the election? Is that what you're waiting for? 
Opportunism, that's what governs this government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, once again I'll say how very, 
very strange I find it that the members opposite all of a sudden 
find this is a burning, pressing issue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — After two years . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — You're certainly right that we have, over 
the last two years, engaged in a very, very strong consultative 
process with a number of different interest groups, be they 
manufacturers, users, or women’s groups, and we have done a 
considerable amount of consultation with these people. And that 
consultation process is still ongoing, and we are on the verge of 
introducing legislation. But don't you stand up here today and all 
of a sudden, just because there are some very, very recent deaths, 
all of a sudden it becomes a burning, political issue with you 
people. 
 
And I ask: — how many of you people in the opposition benches 
have come to my office and asked for a draft copy of this 
legislation? I dare say there's not a member opposite that has taken 
the time to come even and review it and to give our government a 
little bit of co-operation and a little bit of assistance with the very, 
very difficult legislation that is going to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I'd like to differ with 
your interpretation of the fact. I want to say that when there are 
deaths, when there are deaths of young people, I say to you it's 
incumbent upon us to raise the dereliction of your duties in 
bringing in legislation. I ask you: — if it's a high priority, why 
haven't you brought it in? 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1543 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think I fairly clearly laid 
that out. We are still engaged in a consultative process. And there 
has been people from all over the province of Saskatchewan that I 
am still corresponding with, that I'm still having meetings with. 
People from every corner of this province have wanted to have 
input into this legislation because there is a divergence of opinion 
as to how much the state should become involved in legislating 
these types of vehicles. And we have taken a very reasonable 
approach to it, consulting with many, many people across this 
province. 
 
I might add that the only people that we have not consulted with 
has been the members of the opposition because they have not had 
the fortitude to come ahead and make their input known to my 
office. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have an example 
of the pot calling the kettle black. I will suggest though that, as a 
member of the transportation committee of 1983, this discussion 
was ongoing and at that time it looked like it may be resolved. 
And I will ask the minister if, in fact, as a result of the consultation 
that's gone on since 1983, is he not prepared to table legislation in 
this House in this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I have already stated, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are very, very close to having legislation prepared and brought 
into this legislature. I don't think it would be responsible for me to 
say, yes, we're going to introduce it next week or the week after. 
But we are very, very close to introducing that legislation. And I'll 
admit that it has taken some time, and perhaps it is unfortunate that 
we did not move a little bit quicker. 
 
But there are alternative methods of going about introducing 
legislation, and that is the methods that the opposition used for 
many, many years in that province, and that is standing up and 
invoking upon the people of Saskatchewan legislation, whether 
they were in agreement with it or not, whether they had consulted 
the people or not— simply invoking legislation that may or may 
not have been popular. 
 
It has been this government's attitude throughout its history that 
we will consult with the people of Saskatchewan on many, many 
issues, this one included. And I ask for the members' patience — 
to wait for just a short while, and we will have legislation 
introduced into this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Promised Arbitration Hearing 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, on May 11th  . . I'm sorry, May 
15th, and the question is to the Premier. He suggested that he did 
solve problems for Saskatchewan people — Father Larré, Les 
Hainstock, the Bryces. 
 
I would just like to remind the Premier, it's been 12 days since that 
statement was made in the House, and Mr. Hainstock's problem 
has still not been solved. In fact, he's been told that it likely will 
not be solved, simply because of your arbitrary decision and your 
interpretation of the Act. In fact, it covers the solution to his 
problem 
 

Mr. Premier, you stated in the House that you are willing to solve 
his problem. Is any action going to be taken in that direction? And 
will you commit another meeting to Mr. Hainstock and deal with 
the problem in a forthright manner that you suggest you deal with 
all problems that come to your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we have 
continued to work with Mr. Hainstock. We have . . . I said 
categorically that we are going to charge a royalty on trees that are 
cut, and that's the policy. And that's not going to change. 
 
With respect to how much we're going to charge rent on land, I'm 
quite prepared, and I believe that the process is under way to have 
it privately appraised to find out what it will carry in terms of 
livestock. If we get an independent person appraise it, then that 
will be what we'll go with. 
 
So with respect to the royalty or the stumpage, or whatever you 
want to call it, on trees for agriculture, I'm going to stay the course 
and it's not going to change. With respect to charging him rent for 
his livestock, I'm quite prepared to look at a private appraisal. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — You suggest here, Mr. Premier, that you had 
solved Mr. Hainstock's problem. Are you misleading the public of 
Saskatchewan with a statement like that? In fact, his problem 
hasn't been solved. And when are you prepared to solve his 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if an individual wants me to 
stop charging rent on land that the government owns, I won't do 
that; I'm going to charge rent. If they want me to stop charging 
rent on land that the government owns, I won't do that; I'm going 
to charge rent. If they want me to stop charging a royalty for the 
trees they cut and sell, I'm not going to do that. I am going to 
maintain the programs that charge rent for land and I'm going to 
charge royalty or stumpage fees for trees. That's the way it is, and 
that's not going to change. 
 
With respect to how much rent they should pay for livestock land 
and if there's some question how productive it is, let's have a 
private appraisal. I'm quite prepared to do that. But I'm also going 
to charge them some rent on public land with respect to how many 
livestock they can carry on it. Maybe it's more or less livestock 
that can be carried, and therefore more or less rent, and that's up 
for discussion and I'm prepared to look at that. 
 

Teachers' Superannuation Fund 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Acting Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, in 1980 legislation 
was passed to begin to cover the unfunded liability of the teachers' 
superannuation plan which, over the last 50 years, had been 
underfunded. 
 
One major step was to retain all of the excess earnings in the fund 
to help write down the unfunded liability, but this year for the first 
time, Mr. Minister, your government has changed that policy. 
Now you are taking all of the earnings, all of the excess earnings 
out of the teachers' superannuation fund and you're using it to help 
cover your government's massive deficit. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1544 
 
 

Can the minister confirm that $30 million will be lost to the 
Saskatchewan teachers' superannuation fund this year alone, under 
this change, and can you justify this kind of irresponsible action? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the Minister 
of Education will have more to say on this in more detail. But I 
would remind the hon. member, and I will remind you, Mr. 
Speaker, and all members of the House — that member who just 
took his seat was the minister of Finance in the former NDP 
government; that former NDP government ran the unfunded 
liability of the teachers' superannuation to $1.2 billion. And yet 
that former minister of finance under that former government 
would have the gall to stand here and accuse this government or 
any one else of a problem in the teachers' superannuation. I would 
say that that is hypocritical in the first degree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, now that the minister has not 
answered the question, let me ask him again. Mr. Minister, you 
know very well that it was in 1980, under the New Democratic 
government, that steps were taken to do something about the 
unfunded liability which had been in existence for 50 years in this 
province, Mr. Minister. You are now turning the clock back to 
what existed before 1980 by taking earnings from the 
superannuation fund and putting them in to cover your deficit into 
the regular budget. 
 
Now my question, Mr. Minister. A new question. The minister 
knows that the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation — because 
they have met with the Minister of Finance — has gone on record 
as being totally opposed to your government's attempts to skim off 
excess earnings of the fund to pay for your deficit. Your party and 
your members have screamed long and you've screamed loud for 
years about unfunded liabilities in pension funds, and yet you have 
taken a step in this budget to worsen the situation with respect to 
one of the biggest pension plans in our province. How, Mr. 
Minister, do you justify this action in light of your party's 
opposition to unfunded liabilities in any pension plan, and will you 
commit your government to the goal of a fully funded 
superannuation plan with the first step being the allocation of all of 
the excess interest earnings to the teachers' superannuation fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a good deal 
of detail, and for some of that detail I will take notice on behalf of 
my colleague, the Minister of Education. But, Mr. Speaker, a 
reminder once again, that former minister of Finance, that former 
minister of Education, former minister responsible for the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission in that other government 
— $1.2 billion, I remind you, Mr. Speaker, of unfunded liability in 
that commission under their government — and now he stands 
and says that. As I've said before, that is absolutely hypocritical. 
And then he would stand there and suggest that in a short four 
years this government should solve a $1.2 billion problem . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . He says we should solve a $1.2 billion 
problem in four years. An absolute hypocrisy, Mr.  

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to ask the minister how he proposes that his government will solve 
the unfunded liability of the teachers' superannuation fund by 
taking $30 million out of the fund to help to pay for the deficits. 
Will you answer that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the member 
suggests is absolutely false. And I would just remind you further, 
Mr. Speaker, and all members; it's not only in the teachers' 
superannuation commission where there's a problem with 
unfunded liability — something in the order of $3 billion 
unfunded liability in the public sector pension area. And for 
anybody from that former government who was in power during 
the days of heady revenues in this province to let it go to the stage 
that they did, and then even have the gall to raise the question, I 
cannot believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the 
minister deny that money was taken out of the teachers' 
superannuation fund this year, excess interest earnings, and put 
into government revenue in a way which was not true in, let us 
say, last year, or not true in 1981? Have you not made a change in 
policy which takes out of the teachers' superannuation fund excess 
interest earnings? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have done, and I'm 
not sure of the details of what happened, but I will say: — not only 
has the former minister of education and the former minister of 
finance — now we have the former premier, who was ultimately 
responsible for the $3 billion that I mentioned in public sector 
unfunded liability, standing here and suggesting that there's 
something in disarray in the teachers' superannuation fund. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there is not. Nothing is in disarray. The 
only disarray in that whole area of the public sector pension 
unfunded liability is what was created by you, sir, and what was 
created by your cohorts who were speaking before you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opinions of 
the minister are not what we're asking for. We're asking for simple 
statements of fact. I ask you, sir: — is it not true, is it not true that 
your government took out of the teachers' superannuation fund 
$30 million — $30 million — by a change of policy, a policy 
which was not pursued by your government prior to this year, or 
was not pursued by our government following 1980? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I've said, the unfunded 
liability and public sector pensions, including the teachers' 
superannuation fund, was a problem that was created over a long 
period of time. That very gentleman who raises the question, that 
gentleman who started to work in this building when I was in 
grade 8 — or was it grade 2? — something about that stage, and 
then he stands here now to a new government that's been in power 
for about four years and suggests that the problems  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1545 
 
 

of the unfunded liability of public sector pensions are somehow on 
our heads. It's an absolute fallacy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I first of all couldn't believe that that member would raise the 
question, and now that the former premier would raise the 
question, it's even more hypocritical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — May I take it then, Mr. Minister, that 
you're not denying that the $30 million was purloined from the 
teachers' superannuation fund and transferred to the Department of 
Finance in order to finance your deficit? Are you denying that? It's 
a fairly simple question, Mr. Minister. We don't need a little 
speech on what the shortcomings of the Anderson government or 
the Thatcher government or any preceding government . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, or any preceding 
government. 
 
I am asking you, sir, whether or not the policy you followed last 
year would not have resulted in that $30 million staying in the 
fund, and the policy you pursued this year means you're taking out 
the $30 million. Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member says, don't give 
me a little speech about the Anderson government, the Thatcher 
government, any of those things, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest to 
you the most apt name to the unfunded liability in the public sector 
pension area would be Blakeney's liability, and there's no other 
name to put on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 
orders of the day, I rise to seek leave of the Assembly to move 
down the order paper directly second readings under public Bills 
and orders. We seek leave in order that the Assembly may debate 
our three private member Bills, which would reduce the tax 
burden on the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore I seek leave of 
the Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Do I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, or does the member of the WCC 
from North West continue to yap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor. Mr. Speaker, or do I have to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well can I have some order in the 
House? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member has the floor. 
If he has something to say, I would like him to get on with it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I have something to say, Mr. Speaker, and I 
said it and you couldn't hear me. So I'm asking for order, and I 
wonder if the members across the way would come to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member, if he has 
something to say, to get on with it, or we'll take the next item of 
business. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I rise to 
seek leave of the Assembly to move down the order paper directly 
to second readings under the public Bills and orders. And we seek 
leave in order that the Assembly may debate our three private 
member Bills, which would reduce the tax burden on the people of 
Saskatchewan. I therefore seek leave of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce some guests from the Clayoquot Indian Band in 
Vancouver Island, British Columbia. They are guests of the Piapot 
Indian School. 
 
There are 22 students visiting with us this afternoon. They are, as I 
say, in the Speaker's gallery. They were accompanied by four 
supervisors from Piapot Indian School: — Stan Mustatia, Agnes 
and Brenda Tom, and, I believe, Tim Davies. 
 
I would ask all Hon. Members to join with me in welcoming the 
students to the Assembly. I hope their afternoon is enjoyable. I 
look forward to meeting with them for refreshments and questions 
a little later this afternoon, so please join with me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 9 — Refund and Removal of Sales and Flat 
Taxes 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the resolution before us, in 
which I will formally move at the end of my remarks, is in the 
following terms:  
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan Government to take 
steps immediately to refund the 5 per cent sales tax collected 
from purchasers of used cars, trucks and other used vehicles, 
and to remove the unfair flat tax which it has imposed upon 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, members will know that we, on this side of the 
House, feel very strongly with respect to the subjects continued in 
this resolution. The resolution addresses a central issue facing this 
legislature, and facing the people of Saskatchewan, and that issue 
is the issue of fair taxation and this government's unfair tax 
increases on ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
 
We all remember the political promises of 1982, and I will recount 
a couple of them. They promised to eliminate the provincial sales 
tax in the first term of office, and the promise to cut income taxes 
by 10 per cent; that these promises were made, cannot be denied. 
We have many, many examples of it. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1546 
 
 

I have here an ad put in The Kindersley Clarion on behalf of the 
member for Kindersley, and it reads in part as follows; it says that:  
 

This measure (meaning the elimination of the sales tax on utility 
bills) will be the first phase of a new PC government's 
commitment to the complete elimination of the sales tax in its 
first term of office. 

 
The complete elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office. 
That's what the member for Kindersley promised to his electors. 
 
I have here one that was inserted by the now member — in each 
case I will simply refer to the member — the current member for 
Shellbrook. And he says:  
 

We're going to phase out the provincial sales tax, and there's 
going to be a 10 per cent reduction in personal income tax. 
 

Ten per cent reduction in personal income tax. Now that is the 
comment of the member for Shellbrook. I have one here for the 
member for Maple Creek: 
 

.  . a 10 per cent across the board cut in personal income tax. 
 
A 10 per cent across the board cut in personal income tax. The 
member for . . . I've dealt with the member for Shellbrook. I don't 
want anyone to feel neglected. I've dealt with the member for 
Maple Creek. I have here the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, and again talking about eliminating the 5 
per cent sales tax:  
 

This measure will be the first phase of a new PC government's 
commitment to the complete elimination of the sales tax in its 
first term of office. 

 
It's a very familiar phrase — appeared many, many times. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I don't want to take the time of the House by reading 
all of the advertisements which contain those particular promises. 
There are very, very few members opposite who did not sponsor 
advertisements that contained those particular commitments. 
 
So we have these promises, the promises to eliminate the 
provincial sales tax in the first term of office, and the promise to 
cut income tax by 10 per cent. Those were pervasive in the 
election campaign of the members opposite. These were the 
promises. They were made; they have been broken. 
 
Just compare, Mr. Speaker, the promise with the performance — 
the promise of what was to happen with taxes compared with what 
has happened with taxes. Let's take for a moment this sales tax. 
The promise to eliminate the sales tax has been followed in the 
budget of last year by an extension of the sales tax to used cars and 
trucks. And this was very, very vigorously defended in this House 
by the former member for Regina South. 
 
The debate was long, and the debate was protracted. And it was 
over and over again insisted by the former member for Regina 
South that this tax was a good tax and fair tax, and any suggestion 
that it was contrary to the promises  

made in the election campaign was rejected. 
 
Now with respect to the promise to cut income tax, we have not 
seen the cut in income tax; we have seen instead the addition of a 
new and unfair income tax — the flat tax — all of this introduced 
in the budget of the member for Kindersley last year. 
 
And we all remember that budget, the manner in which members 
opposite proudly defended that budget as . . . One of their phrases 
was "the most intelligent budget in Canada." And one that talked, 
Mr. Speaker, a great deal about tax reform. We heard over and 
over again that these were measures to make our tax system fairer, 
that they were elements of tax reform. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the public didn't think they were very 
intelligent, and they didn't think that they were reforms, or not 
reforms in the right direction. And we hear no longer any talk by 
members opposite about tax reform. They have understandably 
and wisely, from a political point of view, stopped trying to 
represent — I might even say misrepresent, but certainly wrongly 
represent — these measures as any form of tax reform. They are 
reform only in the sense that they're changes, and every single 
change was a retrograde step making the tax system less fair, 
rather than more fair. 
 
We note that the PC government will not even agree to debate the 
private members' Bills that have been on the order paper for a 
good period of time, and we have made many efforts in order to 
bring them forward for debate. 
 
With this background, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the words of 
the resolution, and you will note that it deals specifically with the 
sales tax collected on used cars and trucks and other used vehicles, 
and it deals with the flat tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, turning first to the tax on used vehicles. It was 
defended by members opposite on the grounds that it was 
somehow fairer. I was totally unable to understand their arguments 
and still am unable to understand the arguments that they mounted 
last year in this Chamber. And I am still convinced by the 
arguments which we mounted which said that, on the average, 
people who buy used cars are less able to pay taxes than people 
who buy new cards. 
 
Everybody can come up with their own exception to that general 
rule, but I think there can be no doubt that people who buy new 
cards have, on the average, higher incomes than people who buy 
used cars. and that accordingly, if you shift a tax from new cars to 
used cars, you're shifting a tax from people who have higher 
incomes to people who have lower incomes. That strikes me as 
very, very obvious, and I wondered why members opposite were 
unwilling to accept that argument last year when we put it forward 
time and time again. None the less, Mr. Speaker, they declined to 
accept that argument, and they imposed this tax, a tax which we 
believed was unfair and we continue to believe is unfair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in due course, when it was very, very clear that the 
public also agreed that the tax was unfair, the government 
relented, after having collected something  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1547 
 
 

between four and $5 million from 60,000 purchasers of used cars 
and trucks. And they have not so far been willing to make any 
refund to these people. So far they have been unwilling to 
acknowledge that the tax was unfair; they have been unwilling to 
acknowledge that a mistake was made and that a refund ought to 
be made. And I want to say that we think the position of the 
government on this is wrong, and that the government ought to 
refund the tax which they collected from a tax which we said was 
unfair, and which I can only conclude they now believe is unfair. 
 
The whole tax system of this province has been characterized 
during the last several years as one which was rife with unfairness. 
We've seen a tax system based upon double standards, double 
standards of the grossest kind. We've seen huge tax breaks for oil 
companies, tax breaks of the order of $300 million a year for oil 
companies, and at the same time, the imposition of new taxes, new 
in the history of this province, on used cars and trucks. 
 
(1445) 
 
Now surely, Mr. Speaker, that is a perverse — a perverse 
application of tax laws. It makes taxes far less fair than they would 
be if we applied some just ordinary standards of fairness. We have 
seen special benefits and tax breaks to people like the Peter 
Pocklingtons and the Manalta Coals; and we have seen taxes 
imposed on people with modest incomes, many of them young 
people who buy used cars. 
 
This has been a defining feature of the tax régime of members 
opposite that they have sought ways to reduce the taxes of the 
wealthy, and they have sought ways to impose new taxes on 
ordinary people. 
 
I'm free to admit that every tax change has not moved in that 
direction, but overwhelmingly the tax system has moved in that 
direction. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a direction with which I do not 
agree and our party does not agree. And I want to say very, very 
clearly that a New Democratic government, when it is elected, will 
restore the property tax relief removed by this government 
opposite; we'll refund the used vehicle tax; and we'll repeal the 
unfair flat tax. Those are our commitments, Mr. Speaker, and 
those will be acted upon just as soon as a New Democratic Party 
government is elected and just as soon as this government has the 
courage to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are all anticipating 
that we may well have an election call today, and we are very 
hopeful that that comes about so that we may have some 
opportunity to test the people, the judgement of the people of 
Saskatchewan, on some of the issues which I have raised. 
 
I want to turn now to the matter of the flat tax. We have, as I 
indicated on the order paper, a Bill which would be designed to 
repeal the provincial government's unfair flat tax. I am not now 
debating the Bill; I am debating the idea that the flat tax should be 
repealed. It was introduced last  

year as part of the biggest and most unfair increase in taxes in 
Saskatchewan history. There is no question that a budget which 
withdraws property tax rebates to the tune of $100 million or 
thereabouts from a great number of ordinary people across this 
province; which imposes a flat tax, a flat tax which compared with 
other income taxes is very regressive — it hits poorest people 
hardest — an which imposes a sales tax on used cars and trucks 
and takes it off new cars, at least in part, is a perverse budget, a 
budget which is aimed in the wrong direction, and which is unfair, 
and properly is described as the most unfair budget introduced in 
the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
This year we have had a new budget with new Minister of Finance 
in an attempt to recoup some of the losses sustained by the last 
budget, and we have the flat tax being doubled. The flat tax for 
1986 is double what it was for 1985, and I think that those many, 
many taxpayers who were surprised and dismayed when they 
calculated their income tax last month and found that they had this 
substantial flat tax to pay will be surprised and dismayed still more 
when they find that next year that flat tax is doubled. 
 
Now the flat tax, Mr. Speaker, is going to take more than $100 
million a year from working people and working families. This 
from a government which had $300 million a year to give to the 
big oil companies at a time when oil prices were record high and 
when oil companies' profits were at record highs. And there's no 
doubt on either of those counts — oil prices were at record high, 
oil companies' profits were at record high, and that's the time this 
government chose to give to these oil companies a break of $300 
million a year and slap a flat tax on ordinary citizens of this 
province in order to recoup $100 million of that back. 
 
Now that's what was done. And I don't think anyone will deny it. I 
doubt very much whether anybody will stand up and give a 
reasoned argument against that analysis because that's what 
happened. That's what happened. The amount of money collected 
from oil companies as a percentage of the total value of production 
went down and down and down and down. And if, Mr. Speaker, 
this government opposite had collected the same percentage in 
taxes in last year as it did in its first year of office — if it had just 
followed its own rules, not the rules of any previous government, 
but its own rules — if it had done that, Mr. Speaker, we would 
have collected, not 300, but approximately $450 million more. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some members opposite may say, ah well, 
there might not have been as much oil produced. and they may 
well be right. There may have been some. So I think any 
calculation which says that it's only $300 million a year that these 
people gave to the oil companies is a cautious calculation and a 
conservative break for the oil companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me talk a little bit 
about the flat tax, a flat tax which is unfair, unfair for two reasons, 
unfair because it is a flat tax. There is nothing progressive about 
the rate. A person with an income of $25,000 a year pays that tax 
at the same rate as 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1548 
 
 

someone with an income of $250,000 a year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The same amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No. The member opposite asks if it's the 
same amount. No, not at all. They pay the same percentage, the 
same rate. The rate is not a progressive tax rate. 
 
The theory of the government opposite is that the person with an 
income of $25,000 a year can part with the same percentage of his 
income without any more pain as the person with an income of 
$250,000 a year. That's the theory of a flat tax, and I don't share 
that theory. 
 
I believe that people with an income of $250,000 a year can afford 
to pay a higher percentage of that income in order to support our 
common services than the person with the income of $25,000. 
Now this is . . . Our view is totally rejected by the government 
opposite, other wise they wouldn't have applied a flat tax. They 
would have applied a tax that had some measure of a progressive 
aspect. They did not do so. They selected a flat tax. 
 
I would venture to think . . . I know, for example, that this is the 
only income tax in Canada which on its rates is not progressive. 
Even the most conservative government in Canada, when applying 
an income tax, has always adopted the idea that the rich could pay 
a higher percentage of their income than the poor. That has been 
the universal rules until these people opposite decide they were 
going to break new ground, they were going to introduce tax 
reform, and as an element of their tax reform, they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that a person with an income of $250,000 a year should 
be called upon to pay only the same percentage of his income in 
tax as the person with the income of 25,000. Now that is the 
essence of a flat tax, and that is why it is unfair — that is why it is 
unfair, Mr. Speaker, that is one reason why the flat tax in unfair. 
 
The second reason why the flat tax in unfair is because it is applied 
on a tax system which is itself unfair, and they have selected as 
their tax base a calculation on the tax form which ensures — 
which ensures — Mr. Speaker, that the tax will be as unfair as 
possible. They have applied the tax to net income — not to taxable 
income, but to net income. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
why I think that is an unfair way to apply an income tax. 
 
I want to review for this House those things which can be 
deducted when calculating flat tax and those things which cannot 
be deducted while calculating flat tax. And you will note, Mr. 
Speaker, that in many cases — not all cases but many cases — the 
deductions which can be made in calculating flat tax are 
deductions which are characteristically available to the wealthy 
but not available to people of ordinary means. And the deductions 
which cannot be deducted for the calculation of flat tax, but can 
for the calculation of ordinary income tax, are deductions which 
are characteristically available to everybody — rich or poor. 
 
So we have, once again, this government deciding, in order to 
make sure that the wealthy get the breaks, we are going to levy 
this tax on net income so that the following  

things may be deducted. You may be able to deduct contributions 
to the Canada pension Plan or the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
And you can deduct registered home ownership contributions, and 
union dues, and professional fees, and the like; and you can deduct 
some child care expenses. Note, Mr. Speaker, what you also can 
deduct: — registered retirement savings plan premiums, which are 
used by many people but characteristically by the wealthy, and 
this all-encompassing one, practically, allowable business 
investment losses — allowable business investment losses — they 
are deductible; index security investment plan, money which you 
have invested in an index security investment plan; allowable 
capital losses, they are deductible. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
how many of the ordinary voters in the constituencies of members 
opposite are using the index security investment plan. I think not 
many; I think that one is available primarily to the wealthy. 
 
And then other deductions — and that one is one where you can 
deduct such things as film and video tax breaks, and other exotic 
tax breaks — you can put those under line 222. Some of the others 
you can put as deductions from income on page 1. Those, Mr. 
Speaker, are the deductions available when calculating the flat tax. 
 
Now let me tell you what deductions are not available — what 
deductions are not available — and I'll ask you whether or not 
these are characteristically used by people of ordinary means and 
not by people who are ordinarily using the index security 
investment plan. Well, there's the age exemption if you were over 
65. Now a lot of people are over 65, and you don't have to be 
wealthy to be over 65. But this one is not available for the 
calculation. You cannot deduct that when you calculate your 
provincial flat tax. Mr. Speaker, that one is not going to be 
available because, for some reason, members think that that would 
be unfair to give a break to people over 65. 
 
The married exemption, for having a dependent spouse; that is not 
available. That cannot be deducted for the flat tax. 
 
I want to make clear, Mr. Speaker, these are all deductions 
available for ordinary income tax, such as we have in this province 
and we have in all other provinces, but not available for this very 
special flat tax which has been imposed by the government 
opposite as the only such tax in Canada. 
 
(1500) 
 
Nor, Mr. Speaker, is the exemption for dependent children 
available. In this special tax, as an element of tax reform 
introduced by members opposite, the exemption for dependent 
children is not available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the special exemption for medical expenses, for 
higher than normal medical expenses — available with respect to 
income tax everywhere else in Canada — not available for 
deduction when calculating your flat tax. 
 
Charitable donations — here is another exemption, Mr. Speaker, 
which is available under every single income  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1549 
 
 

tax system in Canada, in every province, except the Saskatchewan 
flat tax which does not allow you to deduct charitable donations. 
 
Here's a deduction for blind persons or persons confined to a bed 
or a wheelchair. Now this one is another exemption available, or 
deduction available, in all other income tax systems in Canada, but 
not available under the Saskatchewan flat tax. An education 
deduction, an assistance with tuition fees for people going to 
university — this one also is not available for deduction under the 
Saskatchewan flat tax. 
 
There are a number of other fairly technical ones here — capital 
gains exemptions and the like — they also are not available for 
calculation of the flat tax. And I want, Mr. Speaker, to digress for 
a moment and deal with that little item. Because members 
opposite are perhaps not aware of the fact that while they say that 
you can sell a farm in this province, and if you realize a capital 
gain, it will not be taxable, they are not saying the truth. It is 
subject to the flat tax — it is subject to the flat tax — and members 
opposite have been unwilling at times to acknowledge that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it words rather simply. If you make a capital gain on 
the sale of, let us say, a farm, half of it is included in your income 
and you enter it on page 1 of your return, and then you were 
entitled to claim an exemption if it is a farm, which effectively 
removes the tax for the purposes of ordinary income tax. But of 
course our flat tax is calculated well up the form from this, and it 
works to tax all capital gains. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are a few of the reasons why I am of the 
view that the flat tax is an unfair tax. A nurse or a teacher or an 
elevator agent or a truck driver, virtually all of their income will 
show up on the tax form as net income. And they'll have to pay 
this year virtually 1 per cent of their gross income with relatively 
minor deductions. 
 
But the business person, he has the opportunity to lower his 
taxable income very substantially by the use of, as I say, film and 
video tax breaks or exotic tax breaks. Well, I am not quarrelling 
with people who use those tax breaks. People who use those tax 
breaks are merely using what the law permits them to use. We 
ought not to lay the blame on the taxpayers. We ought to lay the 
blame on the lawmaker. And that's what I am proposing to do and 
seeking to do. 
 
The lawmakers opposite made the laws with respect to the flat tax. 
If the business man takes advantage of the exemptions available to 
him, I do not quarrel with him; that's the way the tax laws work. I 
do quarrel with the people who permitted him to take those 
deductions. And certainly you can hardly find a tax where the 
deductions available are more unfair, as compared to people with 
high incomes and people with low incomes, than the 
Saskatchewan flat tax. 
 
The flat tax, as I say, permits you to deduct film and video tax 
breaks, but not any deduction you may have because you're a blind 
person or confined to bed or a wheelchair or because you make 
substantial charitable donations. 
 

No one that I know denies any of these assertions that I am 
making. They simply say that, ah, well, that's how we made it; it 
was tax reform; it isn't very good but, ah, well that's what we did. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a very, very unfair tax system — a very 
unfair tax system — and one, Mr. Speaker, which it doesn't much 
matter what members opposite propose to do about it. 
 
It doesn't much matter whether members opposite recognize that 
this is an unfair tax system. It doesn't much matter whether they 
are convinced by my arguments, because I am saying to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the ordinary people of Saskatchewan, just as soon 
as the government opposite, the government which is overcome 
by cold feet, screws up its courage and calls an election, we'll have 
a New Democratic Party government in this province; a New 
Democratic Party government committed to the repeal of the 
unfair flat tax, and committed to fair taxes for ordinary people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, no longer — no longer will 
Saskatchewan be the only province which has two provincial 
income taxes of this measure of unfairness. The time for tax 
fairness ha arrived in this province, and it will in fact come to pass 
just as soon as the election is called. 
 
Members opposite, who undoubtedly will be joining in the debate, 
will be attempting, I trust, to put up a defence of the flat tax. I have 
tried on many occasions to get members opposite to stand up and 
say it is a fair tax; it is a reasonable tax; and I'll tell you why. But I 
have not found anyone opposite to put up a reasoned argument 
based upon the tax, based upon who pays it, based upon whether it 
hits wealthy people as hard as it hits not wealthy people. 
 
We just will not get them to stand up and say why they think it is a 
fair tax. They just . . . Occasionally you can get someone to stand 
up and say: — I think it's a fair tax. But what they will not do is go 
through the application of the tax, see what is exempt and what is 
not exempt, and say that list of exemptions compared with this list 
of non-exemptions is fair and reasonable, and they don't do that 
because it isn't. It isn't fair; it isn't reasonable. It's unfair, and it's 
unreasonable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, from what I have said you will know that we 
believe that the 5 per cent sales tax collected on used cars should 
not have been collected. And I say again, Mr. Speaker, a New 
Democratic government will refund the money wrongly collected 
by the PC government under the used car and truck tax . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes we will. 
 
Members opposite are yet again talking about a death tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I hear from time to time 
people talking about a tax, which was once collected, which had a 
threshold of $500,000. You didn't pay any unless you collected 
$500,000; $500,000 in the 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1550 
 
 

mid-70s, by today's standards, would be well over a million 
dollars in current dollars. 
 
It is they who are saying we ought to be refunding money to 
people who had tax free . . . tax free what would amount to $1 
million by current tax dollars. And they compare that with a 
19-year-old kid who buys a used car and you've taken $180 from 
him. That is Tory philosophy over and over again. They say, well, 
if we refund it, that sales tax to a 19-year-old young man who paid 
$180 in tax on a used car that he bought, we would then surely 
have to refund taxes to people who paid taxes after an exemption, 
after an exemption. Yes, Mr. Speaker, after an exemption of what 
would now be $1 million. 
 
And they are concerned about people who would have in today's 
dollars, a million dollars. And it is because of their touching 
concern for these people, the belief that they would have to refund 
money to these people who got a million dollars exemption, that 
they won't give back the $180 to the 19-year-old young person. 
That is their argument. I've heard them make it over and over 
again and the member for Eastview just raised it again. He says it's 
the same principle. The same principle, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If any members would like to get 
into the debate, there will be plenty of opportunity this afternoon, 
and until that time when you stand, I would ask you to contain 
yourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — In principle, Mr. Speaker, the same 
principle they say applies to giving back $180 to a 19-year-old lad 
who has bought himself a car, a used car, and to someone who 
paid a succession duty 15 years ago after an exemption of what 
would be in today's dollars, a million dollars. Now that, Mr. 
Speaker, is an interesting and very clear statement of PC 
philosophy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. 
 
And it is because these people believe that their job is to protect 
millionaires and not to the same extent to protect ordinary people 
who buy $3,000 on used cars and therefore pay $150 in tax; it is 
because these people have willingly given $300 million to the oil 
companies year after year after year, and because they are now 
imposing a flat tax on a bus driver and allowing him not to deduct 
any exemptions for dependent wife or dependent children or 
because he has extra medical expenses; because of all of those 
things, I believe that this government has lost touch with what 
ordinary people expect of a tax system. I believe they are no 
longer interested in a fair tax system, fairness as seen by ordinary 
people. 
 
They have just talked to too many special pleaders in the tax area 
— too many special pleaders in the tax area who are looking for 
yet another tax credit, yet another tax break. Some of them had 
proved in the past to be spectacularly, spectacularly generous to 
the wealthy. And again I don't complain that the wealthy use the 
breaks. You cannot fault a person for using a tax break. You can 
most assuredly fault the people who made it possible. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, it is time that this legislature stop building 
into our tax system more tax breaks for the  

wealthy and stop applying more taxes on ordinary people. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move:  
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to take 
steps immediately to refund the 5 per cent sales tax collected 
from purchasers of used cars, trucks, and other used vehicles, 
and to remove the unfair flat tax which it has imposed upon 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 
My colleague, the member for Regina North East, is seconding 
this, and, Mr. Speaker, I am so moving. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
have the opportunity to second the resolution moved by the 
member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition, and say a 
few words in support of the resolution. 
 
I want to do that, Mr. Speaker, because I think we have here 
before us a resolution that has got considerably more substance to 
it than all of the legislation which this government has introduced 
in this House in this session up until this present time. It's a 
resolution that could affect, Mr. Speaker, if the government would 
recognize the importance of it, could affect a lot of people who are 
working very hard out there and struggling under some difficulty 
to provide all of the needs that their families have in this period of 
time; people who are struggling to try to raise children so that they 
can have a future that is promising, a future which they can look 
forward to. 
 
They have had some difficulty doing that under the policies of this 
government. And the introduction of the flat tax, the putting on of 
the sales tax on used cars, and other taxation measures, have 
contributed to that difficulty which those people have had in the 
last four years, now going on to five years, under this 
Conservative government. 
 
By now, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the fiscal mismanagement of 
this government is almost legendary. Wrong priorities, wrong 
policies, extravagant and wasteful spending, poor planning, or 
perhaps a total absence of planning — and there's some people 
who I submit would suggest that there has been a total absence of 
planning — together with the kind of tax increases which 
Saskatchewan citizens have had to suffer because of this 
government, it adds up to four years, now going on to five years, 
which have left this province with a very heavy tax burden — a 
very heavy tax burden. And on top of that you would think that 
with this ever increasing increase in taxation on ordinary people, 
that it would have contributed to lessening the amount of the 
deficit that this government has accumulated. But indeed it has 
not. 
 
In spite of all this taxation on ordinary people, the deficit in 
Saskatchewan continues to grow at an astronomical extent and 
rate. This deficit now is over $2 billion. And all of this gouging of 
the taxpayer by this Conservative government has not done 
anything about reducing that  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1551 
 
 

deficit, which supports the argument which I have made, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have had the kind of mismanagement which has 
never been heard of in this province before. 
 
And the government members, if they think that I'm mistaken, 
well I would invite them — or the Minister of Finance, if he 
chooses to speak in this debate on this resolution at some time 
today — I would like them to enter the debate, and give us a 
current estimate of that deficit and explain why it is there in spite 
of the kind of taxes that this government has imposed. 
 
The resolution before us, Mr. Speaker, urges that the government 
— and I will read it — that the government:  
 

take steps immediately to refund the 5 per cent sales tax 
collected from purchasers of used cars, trucks, and other used 
vehicles, and to remove the unfair flat tax which it has imposed 
upon Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is a reasonable and responsible 
resolution and any reasonable and responsible government would 
take some action on it. The policies, as it applies to taxation and 
what tax money has been used to pay for, have been wrong. 
They've been wrong-headed from the start. They've been 
wrong-headed from the beginning of this government in 1982, and 
they have failed. 
 
They collect a new double tax, the flat tax. People go and pay their 
income tax on income that they earn. And after they have 
calculated their income tax, they have a double tax put on top of it, 
on their net income, which this government has called a flat tax 
and then pretended that it was tax reform. That has contributed to 
the provincial treasury many millions of dollars. They brought in a 
sales tax on used cars. That too has contributed, not quite as many 
millions, but millions of dollars — I suggest, somewhere in the 
area of $6 million. 
 
And what did this government use that taxpayers' money to do? 
Well they paid $300 million a year to the oil companies by not 
collecting reasonable taxes from them. They took it from the flat 
tax and the sales tax and taxes on working people so that they 
could pay the oil companies $300 million a year. 
 
Ah, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake says, ah! But I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that's not fair, this kind of policy. 
He may think it is, and members opposite may think it is, because 
they take the advice of the treasury benches. I do not think that it's 
a fair policy when you tax working people, ordinary citizens who 
have to raise a family, more and more and more every year while 
you say to the oil companies, you can have $300 million a year. 
That is not my definition of fairness, and that's why I am pleased 
to support this resolution. 
 
What else, Mr. Speaker, has this flat tax, this increase in taxation 
through the flat tax and the sales tax on used cars, paid for? Well 
it's paid for $390 million in loan guarantees to Husky Oil of 
Alberta — of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 

A $140 million in loan guarantees to Manalta Coal in Alberta. 
What did Manalta Coal do? They came into Saskatchewan, these 
friends of this Conservative government and this Conservative 
party, and they said look, we got a deal for you. They said, we 
have a deal for you. You now own the coal fields of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation does. They use the coal to generate electricity 
for Saskatchewan people. Manalta came and said to their friends 
opposite in the government benches, we got a deal for you. We 
will buy this coal off your hands but you guarantee the money, the 
loan that we are going to use in order to buy this. 
 
Well that seems to be, Mr. Speaker, not a very fair comparison. It's 
a fair comparison but not a very fair policy. Tax people more; tax 
people who are struggling to make a living; tax people who are 
struggling to raise their families and provide them with an 
education and an adequate roof over their head; and then use some 
of that money to guarantee a $140 million loan to Manalta Coal of 
Alberta to buy their coal. Only a Conservative government in 
Saskatchewan could dream up that kind of unfairness and that 
kind of illogical business decision. 
 
They pride themselves about their business acumen. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they have shown time and time again that their 
knowledge of how business really effectively works has a great 
deal of shortcoming. What have been the results? If there had been 
some results which would have raised revenues for the treasury so 
that Saskatchewan people could then have better services and 
maybe ultimately have their taxes reduced, if there had been those 
results, maybe some people could have been convinced that there 
was some logic in what the government was doing. 
 
But what were the results? Well here's what some of them were. 
Investment in Saskatchewan declined over the past four years; the 
real, the constant dollar of investment, Mr. Speaker, has declined. 
In spite of the advertising and the boastings of this government 
opposite about what a great job they're doing economically, 
investment in constant and real dollars in Saskatchewan declined. 
 
Retail sales are flat. The small-business sector has been ignored by 
the open for big business policy of this government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and the member from Maple Creek asks, why 
don't I say something about jobs. 
 
Well I would like to accommodate the member from Maple Creek 
and I want to tell her that the jobless rate in Saskatchewan — the 
unemployment rate — has tripled since this government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We're on a fairly narrow 
resolution dealing with two taxes, and I would ask the member to 
stay on the subject that's before us today. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will do that, Mr. Speaker. I want to say 
that members opposite, when they ask me to make comments, I 
am tempted. But as long as you will keep them under control, I 
will continue with the subject at hand. 
 
The point I was making, Mr. Speaker — and I shall not  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1552 
 
 

repeat it — was simply that the government's taxation policies and 
the form of new taxes which this government has imposed on 
Saskatchewan people, when compared to what the people have 
received for those taxes, have been extremely unfair. And I can 
say that, Mr. Speaker, from firsthand experience. I have met 
literally thousands of people in the last several months, five to six 
months, in fact a year, and I have talked to them in their homes 
and at public meetings about what their concerns are. And you 
know what they say? They say a number of things, but leading the 
list, leading the list of concerns are jobs, the flat tax on income, 
and the refusal of this government to rebate the sales tax that was 
collected on used vehicles. 
 
Those are the leading issues that Saskatchewan people are talking 
about today. And I suspect maybe that's one of the reasons why 
the Premier and the government opposite have been reluctant to 
call the election. Because they don't want to deal with those issues; 
they don't want to deal with this resolution. 
 
I'm sure that members opposite will stand up and they will make 
speeches about what a great reduction in taxation there has been. 
Well before they do that I want to show to them, in the remarks 
that I am going to yet make, that indeed there has not been a 
reduction in taxation on Saskatchewan citizens; there has been a 
substantial increase. 
 
My colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, spoke about the 
promises which the Conservative candidates made in the last 
election, and there were many of them. There was a list of 
promises, Mr. Speaker, that could have filled a Mack truck. And 
most of them, Mr. Speaker, have yet to be implemented. Most of 
them have yet to be implemented. And those dealing with taxation 
are among that list. 
 
The promise to eliminate totally the sales tax — where is that 
promise? Well it's on a lot of advertisements that are around. It's 
on a lot of pamphlets that every one of those members opposite 
distributed to their constituencies in the hope that it would make 
people vote for them. 
 
But yet we have not seen any sign by this government that it's 
willing, in fact, to move on that promise. In fact, we saw a sign 
that it was going to do the complete opposite when it put in a sales 
tax on used vehicles. Now they have an amendment in the House 
to eliminate the sales tax on used clothing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the taxation gamesmanship, and this is 
the government gamesmanship that the people of Saskatchewan 
object to. They want a government that's going to be honest. They 
don't want a government that's going to say, one day, we're going 
to eliminate all the sales tax, two or three years later come in and 
actually put more sales tax on, like it did with the used vehicle tax, 
then find that it's got some political problems, and then come in 
and say we're going to remove the sales tax on clothing, still 
ignoring the initial promise. 
 
The kind of politicking that this government has done, Mr. 
Speaker, has turned the public of Saskatchewan against them, 
simply because the public of Saskatchewan believes that they can 
no longer trust them for another  

four years. They can no longer trust this government for another 
four years. And maybe that's why the government has decided that 
they want to take five years, instead of the normal four, of their 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate to the House what this change 
in taxation has done. It hasn't done anything to improve the fiscal 
situation of the province of Saskatchewan. It has done nothing to 
do that. As a matter of fact, I have here an article on which it is 
reported that — this is from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of very 
recent date, I think last week. And the article reports on some 
comments made . . . the article refers to some comments made by 
the investment rating agencies. 
 
(1530) 
 
And here's what the investment rating agencies say:  
 

Moody's Investors Service expect to send analysts to 
Saskatchewan within the next month. 

 
It's concerned with the deficit. They continue to say:  
 

"We're looking at the most recent budget, which seems to have 
a high deficit position," said Moody's vice-president Tis 
Crowell. "We've been concerned in the past with Saskatchewan, 
in the growth of the debt. They're starting at a low base, but 
there has been a growth in debt to meet operating and other 
expenses over time, and we see a continuation of this over 1986 
and 1987." 
 

No measure of taxation by this government has done anything 
about reducing or doing away with the serious problem that's 
about to face the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It goes on to say:  
 

Both firms lowered the province's international credit rating in 
the last year. In July 1985, Moody's reduced it to AA from 
AA-1, referring to the province's mounting deficit and "static 
economy." Saskatchewan had held the higher rating since 1981. 
 

And I don't need to remind the House who was the government of 
the day in 1981. 
 

In January, Standard and Poor's lowered the rating from an AA 
plus to a AA, citing "deteriorating trends in the province's 
budgetary position and its debt burden." The two firms set 
credit ratings for all Canadian provinces based on deficits, 
economic performance and outlook. 

 
I prefaced my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by highlighting or by 
pointing to the gross mismanagement of this government. I don't 
think that anyone needs any greater evidence than that which is 
presented by the rating agencies of North America. Those that do 
the credit rating for all of the provinces in Canada, they are 
concerned about what's happening to the provincial fiscal situation 
because of the mismanagement of this government. And I submit 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the taxation policies of this 
government and their  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1553 
 
 

mismanagement has contributed to the kind of reports that we are 
getting from the credit rating agencies. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan no longer 
believe what this government has to say, whether it's on policies 
dealing with social issues or whether it's on policies dealing with 
taxation. They no longer trust it, because the people of 
Saskatchewan want a government that's committed to fairness. 
That has always been the case in this province; that is the 
historical tradition of the people of Saskatchewan, who knew 
generations ago that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I will pause while the members opposite 
have what they want to say from their chairs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why did you lose? Answer the question. 
Answer that simple question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, are you going to call the 
member from Moosomin to order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or do you 
just call certain people to order? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that the people of Saskatchewan no 
longer believe this government, and when I say that, I seem to hit 
a very sensitive note over there. They all erupt in their seats. They 
all erupt in their seats and they scream and they holler — 
particularly right now the member for Moosomin who's not 
running again so I guess he doesn't care — and that only happens, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when members on the opposition obviously 
strike home. And he is certainly showing that we have struck 
home here this afternoon. The reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the people no longer trust this government is because they know 
it's not committed to fair taxation. The member from Elphinstone, 
the Leader of the Opposition, explained that very well. 
 
The members opposite are quite prepared to say people who make 
a great deal of money should be allowed to use all kinds of 
exemptions in order that they can reduce the amount of income tax 
that they pay. One of the members opposite, from Saskatoon, 
talked about what he calls a death tax. Well I think that that . . . He 
now knows it was a very unfortunate question to ask from his seat, 
because it was then pointed out by the Leader of the Opposition 
that in today's terms people could deduct $1 million before they 
had to pay any taxes. But on the other hand, under the used car 
sales tax, a teenager of 19-years-old, or someone who is on his 
first job — making a living — who bought a second-hand car and 
paid $200 or $150 in sales tax, cannot get the same kind of 
treatment. 
 
And that's what we're objecting to here today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We're objecting to that kind of unfair taxation policy 
which has grown and developed in this country over the years. 
And it continues to grow even more unfair under the present 
government of this tripe, both here in Saskatchewan and in 
Ottawa. And so the resolution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is one that I 
think is worthy of support by all members of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this motion is about a central issue facing the 
people of Saskatchewan today, and as I said it's about the unfair 
tax increases that this government has imposed. All across 
Saskatchewan — in cities, towns, and  

rural communities right across the province — we're hearing more 
and more people say that they are deeply disappointed in this 
government because it promised to cut taxes for working families 
and for farm families, but it broke that promise by imposing the 
biggest and the most unfair tax increases in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Now here in the legislature, even with its huge majority, this 
government refuses to even debate the three Bills which have been 
on the order paper for many, many weeks since the beginning of 
this session. Each time that those Bills can be brought forward 
dealing with the flat tax, dealing with the rebate on sales tax on 
used vehicles, this government does not allow them to be debated 
in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tells you something about the attitude of this 
government. And the Saskatchewan people are particularly 
disappointed about what they see as this PC government's double 
standard — one set of rules for the rich and the powerful and the 
political friends of the PC government opposite, and another set of 
rules for ordinary people. 
 
And I know that the members opposite, because they don't like us 
to talk about this subject, they shout from their seats. They don't 
want to hear how much more and more Saskatchewan people have 
become disappointed by this double standard which they have 
imposed. But there have been too many examples, too many 
instances where this government shows it had one set of rules for 
ordinary Saskatchewan people and a very different set of rules for 
its political friends. 
 
And Saskatchewan small-business people have some first-hand 
experience of this double standard when it comes to taxation and 
other policies. Just ask an architect, or just ask a consulting 
engineer or a contractor, Mr. Deputy Speaker; just ask them about 
open competitive tendering and political friends of the 
government. They understand the PC policy of patronage only all 
too well, for they have been its victims. Or just ask some 
small-business operators about the $10 million give-away to 
millionaire Peter Pocklington. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is straying 
considerably from the motion under debate, and I would ask him 
to come to order and stick onto the topic. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I will abide by your ruling. I 
think I have made my point about the double standard and the 
unfair taxation policies of this government, and the used vehicle 
sales tax which this government refuses to abolish legally, which 
collected more taxes from the people who could least afford to pay 
the, people who buy second-hand cars — not people who buy new 
cars like cabinet ministers over there — but people who buy 
second-hand cars because that's what they can afford. Those 
people were having to pay a new and an increased tax. But people 
who came in to set up some friends of the government, like Peter 
Pocklington, who came in, was able to get $10 million handed to 
him because he's a friend of the government. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is an example of unfair 
taxation. Those 18- and 19- and 20- and  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1554 
 
 

21-year-olds — those people who have families and bought a car 
that was second hand because that's what they could afford — did 
not expect that that tax that they paid should go to pay off a 
Conservative buddy from Alberta by the name of Peter 
Pocklington. That's the double standard. 
 
Those people do not think it's fair or correct that they should have 
to pay a tax, and they can use that money very badly and very 
dearly. They do not expect that they should have to pay that tax 
while oil companies, some of which haven't paid any taxes to the 
federal treasury for years and years because of tax deferrals, 
should get $300 million a year. 
 
There is nothing fair about that kind of tax policy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that's why this resolution is here today, because it's 
an opportunity to have it debated. And if the members opposite 
had any concern or had any desire to be re-elected in the next 
election, whenever they have the courage to call one, they would 
seriously consider supporting this resolution here this afternoon 
and then doing something about it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, tax increases in Saskatchewan, which 
include the sales tax on used cars, vehicles, and which include the 
flat tax, have had a significant impact on people who live here. Let 
me give you an example of the impact that these tax increases 
have had on two categories of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let us take the person who is earning $20,000 a year, and I will 
use the figures that are provided very kindly by the Minister of 
Finance, so they're not my figures, but the Minister of Finance in 
his budget speech, which I have here, has provided what kind of 
taxes and services a person who makes $20,000 a year, who has a 
spouse and two children, has to pay. Well you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in 1986 under the new budget, that person earning 
$20,000 a year because of these tax increases and others, is going 
to pay $761 more in taxes and charges than that same income level 
paid in 1982. 
 
And all I'm doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is taking the numbers 
from the charts in the 1982 budget, and the numbers from the 
charts in the 1986 budget. And you can do your calculations, and 
the members opposite who may desire to stand up and speak in 
this debate can do their calculations, and they will find that 
because of the conservative unfair tax policies, that person who's 
earning $20,000 a year with two children and a spouse — not a 
very high income in this day and age — that person in this year is 
going to pay $761 more in taxes and charges than he did in 1982. 
That seems to me to be a very unfair tax system. 
 
Now let's look at another comparison. Let's look at the same kind 
of family who has an income of $30,000 a year. Once again you 
can take the budget documents from 1982, and you can take the 
budget documents from 1986, and you can make the comparison. 
The charts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are identical. The same taxes and 
charges, and when I say taxes — just so the members do not think 
that I'm trying to confuse anybody — I'm talking about charges 
that the government makes on Saskatchewan citizens. And they 
include the following:  

provincial income tax, tax credits and rebates, health premiums — 
we don't have health premiums in Saskatchewan yet under this 
government — retail sales tax, gasoline tax . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gasoline tax. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm even including, yes, gasoline tax. The 
members opposite say, gasoline tax. For the sake of fairness, I'm 
including the gasoline tax in 1982, which doesn't exist in 1986. 
Keep that in mind. It also includes the car insurance which is a 
government charge; telephone, which is a government charge; 
home heating, which is a government charge; and electricity, 
which is a government charge. Those are the items. 
 
Considering those items, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remind you again 
that a family of four with an income of $20,000 a year in this year, 
under this election budget, is going to pay $761 more than it did in 
1982. Now when you consider what inflation has done to the 
purchasing value of the dollar that those people earn, the kind of 
price increases that they have seen in the food that they must have 
to buy, that is a very high increase in taxation. 
 
Now before I gave the outline of the items, I said I would give you 
the statistics for a person earning $30,00 a year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Let's have a little order in the Assembly 
so we can get on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm glad 
you called order because I really want the members opposite to 
hear this next one. And I'm going to talk about the person from a 
family of four with an income of $30,000. Do you know how 
much taxes that individual is going to have to pay more this year 
than they did in 1982? Seven hundred and sixty-six dollars — 
$766 more. Why? Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
chose to put on a new flat tax, which is a double taxation; they 
chose to remove the property improvement grant, which is an 
increase in property; and in return, they chose to mismanage the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which has created a debt of $8.7 
billion that these same taxpayers over the next generations are 
going to have to pay back. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not 
what I consider a fair form of taxation. 
 
Now it's particularly ironic when one goes back and considers 
what certain members of the opposition who are now the 
government had to say about deficits and taxes in years past. Here 
we are with an $8.7 billion debt and a fiscal budgetary deficit of 
over $2 billion. And what did the Premier have to say about that at 
one time? He said in 1982 in December, "Deficits are just a 
deferred tax that must be paid by future generations." 
 
Well, boy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he couldn't have been more right 
because future generations are going to have to pay for the 
mismanagement of this government. And people who have 
children in this province, and people who are young and just 
starting to make a living in the work-place are looking at this and 
they're saying they are  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1555 
 
 

not prepared to take a chance for another four years. 
 
What else did the Premier have to say? Well he said, "Deficit 
budgeting in Canada has to end if the country is to be competitive 
in world markets." The Premier, July 14, 1982. And do you know 
what it was called, this document that he was quoted from? The 
Evils of Deficits, Park II, by Grant Devine in the Regina 
Leader-Post. What a contradiction. What a contradiction! 
 
And finally I want to give you one more quote. 
 

I believe the kinds of things that we've initiated in this budget 
will be talked about for decades to come. 

 
And this is in reference to the 1985-1986 budget, that most 
intelligent budget, which removed the former minister of finance 
from his former position to his new position. That was also stated 
by Grant Devine, the Premier of Saskatchewan, with regard to that 
deficit. 
 
Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this resolution about doing away 
with the flat tax and rebating of the sales tax on used vehicles is 
proof that once again, in this case, April 17, 1985, the Premier was 
right. This issue will be debated. It's being debated today. It will be 
debated during the next election campaign because the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking that it be debated. The people of 
Saskatchewan are asking that it be debated, and they are saying 
that the flat tax, which is a tax on top of the income tax, has to go. 
And I want to put on the record, as has my colleague, the Leader 
of the Opposition, done, that when a New Democratic Party is 
elected, the flat tax will be abolished. 
 
And I want to say also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying that with regard to the sales tax on used 
cars, those people who had to pay it for six months shouldn't have 
to pay the price of a mistake which this government made. Why 
should a few people —not a few; many people — why should 
many people be punished because they bought a car within a 
six-month period that this government had the sales tax on used 
cars? Why should they have to pay that tax in the period of one 
fiscal year while the people who happened to buy a car in the other 
six-month period of that fiscal year don't have to pay that tax? 
 
That's what's so basically unfair. And I know that members 
opposite really, deep down, agree with me on that, but they're tied, 
the private members are tied by the dictates of their cabinet and 
caucus solidarity and all those kinds of fine things that happen to 
apply in our parliamentary process. 
 
I want to say very clearly, Mr. Speaker — welcome back — I 
want to say very clearly that when a New Democratic government 
is elected, if the people so choose, those people who paid a sales 
tax on used vehicles will have that tax rebated, because it's unfair. 
That's the commitment of the New Democrats. That's a 
commitment which we have put on the record in this resolution, 
and that's a commitment which we have put on the record in this 
debate. It's a commitment that reinforces our desire and our 
commitment to a fair tax  

system. Not like the members opposite who talk about a tax 
reform and then do the complete opposite, but a commitment 
which I know the people of Saskatchewan believe will be 
delivered under a New Democratic government, as have all 
commitments made by the New Democratic party been delivered 
after that party was elected as a government. 
 
Between 1971 and 1982, promises were made and promises were 
kept. Between 1982 and 1986, promises were made and promises 
were kept. And the highlight of this debate is the one that deals 
with, one, the promise to reduce income tax by 10 per cent, and 
instead we have a flat tax; the promise to eliminate the sales tax, 
and instead we had a sales tax on used vehicles, which some 
people should have rebated and have not. And because of this 
commitment of my party, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support 
this resolution, and I invite other members to support it as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Myers: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
speak on this motion put forward by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. To say what I've heard in a few simple words would 
be putting it bluntly to say that those two members have blatantly 
mislead the legislature — blatantly! — because I hold up here in 
my hand the 1981 General Tax Guide for residents of 
Saskatchewan. And I went through it, and I want to make it this 
clear to the public, I went through it. Here it is. In 1981, what is 
the Saskatchewan tax on income taxable at 5,000? it was $385.90. 
That was 1981. In 1985, which is the last tax year, and we've just 
finished filing for it, what was the Saskatchewan taxable tax that 
year? Three hundred and fifty-one dollars and thirty cents. If you 
added the flat tax to that amount, it is $9.60 lower that you're 
paying taxes last year than you paid in 1981 — $9.60 less, not 
more, not the $400 they're claiming on the radio. 
 
We've heard all their radio ads about the double taxation — $400. 
Do you know that you would have to make $80,000 a year to pay 
a $400 tax? It was one-half of 1 per cent, but those members 
mislead the public. They went around saying 0.5 per cent tax. 
Well the senior citizens in my constituency mistakingly took it to 
mean 5 per cent — 5 per cent. And they were misleading the 
public, the senior citizens. Typical misleading, blatant lies — 
blatant lies. Totally blatant. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm going to ask the member to 
withdraw that term. We don't allow that kind of language in this 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Myers: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for saying that. I guess 
what I meant was that the members opposite have been misleading 
the public, and by reference to the material that I've read out, that 
is a clear indication that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I ask the member to withdraw 
those words. 
 
Mr. Myers: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw those words, 
and I will continue. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1556 
 
 

For incomes of $10,000 taxable in 1981, it was $876.10. That's 
1981, Saskatchewan tax payable. In 1985, same category, $815.90 
plus the flat tax, which brings it up to $865.90, comes to $10.20 
less in tax payable this year than it was in 1981 under their 
government. 
 
Again, the facts — the facts are here. The facts are here in the 
1981 tax guide; the facts are here in the 1985 tax guide. And if the 
members knew anything about reading or going to the income tax 
payable, instead of reading out of their own propaganda, they 
would have gone to these two books and calculated the tax 
difference. And it shows clearly that we're paying less tax today, 
less income tax today, Saskatchewan side of it, than we were 
paying in 1981. 
 
And I will continue, Mr. Speaker. For the tax payable category of 
$15,000: — in 1981, $1,433.90 — do you hear that? — in 1985, 
$1,306.40, plus the flat tax brings it up to $1,381.40. That's $52.50 
less, and it's here in black and white. 
 
It's here in the federal tax books which are sent to every resident in 
the province. If anyone disputes what I'm saying, all they have to 
do is go back and check their records. They will find out they are 
paying less tax under this government than they were under the 
opposition when they were in power. 
 
Here's another one, $20,000 — because the member from North 
East mentioned the figure — $20,000 tax payable: — in 1981, 
$2,054.30; 1985, same category, $1,839.80, plus the flat tax brings 
it up to $1.939.18, $114.50 less. Not the figures he quoted out of 
his own propaganda book which they published in the spring of 
'82; it's right here. 
 
I would remind the member from Regina North East that these are 
taken out of federal publications that are sent to every resident in 
this province, and it's right here in black and white. And you have 
been misleading the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. When the hon. member was on 
his feet, he asked for orders that he could speak. And now I would 
ask him to give that decency to others. 
 
Mr. Myers: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to also quote from the tax 
category of $25,000 tax payable because he was alluding to that 
tax category as well. In 1981 the Saskatchewan portion of the 
income tax was $2,753.80. Black and white — I'll table it for the 
member if he would like to go through it. Obviously he doesn't 
like reading the truth. Same category in 1985, $25,000 tax payable 
category: — $2,437.50, plus the flat tax — half a per cent, not the 
5 per cent they were misleading the public with, half a per cent — 
$2,562.50, $191.30 less. Not more — less — less tax. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I invite anybody who's watching this on TV to write me, and 
I will provide them with a copy of the 1985 and the 1981 General 
Tax Guide for Saskatchewan residents, and they can make up their 
own minds as to who is telling the truth, who is misleading the 
public, and who is doing  

this out of purely political reasoning. Our tax record: — we 
promised to take taxes off, and we did. In the last budget, not more 
than two months ago, we eliminated the 5 per cent sales tax on 
clothing up to $300 — right across. Something they never did. 
 
I'll ask them: — when did they ever eliminate a 5 per cent sales tax 
in the 11 years under their government? Not once, not once did 
they eliminate it. Not once because they never passed it. A bunch 
of promises in that book which never became law. It was purely 
propaganda on behalf of your part. But we took off the clothing 
tax, or the 5 per cent tax on clothing up to $300, and that generally 
benefits the average person; that benefits everyone in the province, 
and particularly the lower income people. That's a general benefit 
to everyone — 5 per cent off clothing. They never did it. They had 
11 years to take the tax off, but not once did they remove any tax. 
 
We took the tax off power bills three years ago; took the tax off 
power bills, a tax that under their former predecessor, who was the 
CCF, had put on. They put on; we took it off. We'll make that 
clear that they put taxes on; we take taxes off. 
 
We took the tax off gasoline less than 10 minutes after the cabinet 
was sworn in. That was a general saving of $135 per man, woman 
and child in this province — the tax off gasoline. Why, when we 
were one of the two major producing oil provinces in the country, 
that we had to pay tax an dour neighbours to the west, Alberta, did 
not? 
 
And now when the Leader of the Opposition is questioned about 
the gasoline tax, he's telling no, we won't put it back on. Possibly 
they would come up with an idea of taxation on salaries — the one 
and one-half per cent taxation on salaries like they do in Manitoba. 
And who does that benefit? No one, no one. And that's a party and 
a government of the same political persuasion as they are. 
 
We've also introduced a tax credit for union investment. But if we 
really want to get back to it, when the member from Regina North 
East, he mentioned all the other things about being fair, being fair 
— was nine and five-eighths per cent interest rates to the Cornwall 
Centre, and some eastern developers, was that fair to the general 
public? Not fair. 
 
And he's sitting there. He was a minister of Finance; he's the one 
who signed this deal. Money to eastern Canada, money to his 
friends like Bob White; Bob White, the next leader of the NDP 
party in Canada. His friend, Bob White, centred around Ontario, 
and does not want to see any portion of the country grow except 
Ontario. 
 
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I will get back onto the issue of taxation, 
taxation indirectly into their government. They took $270 million 
out of our pockets to put $540 million into potash without creating 
one single . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. The member is speaking on a very 
narrow resolution. he's ranging much beyond it, and I would ask 
the member to come back to the subject. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1557 
 
 

Mr. Myers: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry if I'm ranging, but I'm just 
replying to topics that the member from Regina North East had 
brought up in his speech while you were absent from the Chair, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Taxation happens to be one of the games they play very well. 
They convince the general public, and they put advertisements on 
radio and TV, and they mislead it in ads and newspapers about 
taxation, about taxation. About the flat tax, they misled the public. 
I have had numerous complaints and questions from constituents 
of mine regarding the advertisement they ran on the flat tax and 
how they misled. 
 
I was talking to a constituent of mine not more than two weeks 
ago, and I asked him if he had any concerns. And he wondered 
why he was paying $1,500 in flat tax. And I said, sir, you must be 
wrong, you must be wrong; it was one-half of 1 per cent. And 
when I sat down with him, I showed him that it wasn't $1,500, it 
was $150 for the salary category in which he paid taxes in. And 
that was the 1985 tax form which he had in front of him. 
 
People who . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I just wonder whether the member would 
entertain a question. Would he? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the member entertain a question? 
 
Mr. Myers: — Mr. Speaker, the member had more than 30 
minutes to lay out his case when he spoke in the House, and if he 
wants to entertain any questions, I will do that outside the doors of 
this Chamber any time. So if the member would like to entertain 
any questions, I'd be willing to take them outside. 
 
But general taxation . . . They talk about the flat tax, the flat tax. 
It's the wicked, wicked tax. Well I'd like to remind the member 
from Regina North East that under their government over 600 
people who paid taxes — I shouldn't say paid taxes because they 
never did —over 600 people, when they were in government, 
never paid taxes — people who made over $50,000. And they call 
out for fair taxation when there's 600 people earning over $50,000 
and not paying taxes. It was their government that allowed it to 
happen, their government that didn't allow for fair taxation. The 
flat tax is to capture that portion of the market. 
 
And they talk about fair taxation. The people on low income talk 
about fair taxation. And the flat taxis one point in fair taxation 
where you capture everyone in the province; no one is exempt. 
Under their government, when he was minister of Finance, that 
was allowed to happen. Six hundred people didn't pay taxes, and 
that's a real shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since there are many more people who would like to 
speak on this topic, I will conclude my remarks by saying that if 
people want the real story about taxation, I would invite their calls; 
I will send them the material; they can see for themselves. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My full intentions this 
afternoon in the House was to listen to the debate, and try to listen 
to it as calmly and cooly as possible; however, some of the 
statements made by the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
from Regina North East have impelled me and compelled me to 
stand and refute some of those statements which are completely 
and directly misleading, as the member from Saskatoon South has 
already proven in his case. 
 
I do apologize in advance if I do sound a bit disjointed, and that is 
because the comments that came across the House this afternoon 
were disjointed. And I apologize for that in advance, Mr. Speaker. 
I may be ranging afield a bit, but that would be in terms of refuting 
what they had said. And I will not apologize for that, of course, 
because I believe some of the statements that they made demand a 
comment back and in terms of refuting what the statements they 
have brought up. 
 
You know my first impression this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, when I 
was sitting and listening to the debate by the Leader of the 
Opposition, was something that we're all familiar with in terms of 
a television show. And I don't intend to give a plus to any 
particular network, but here are many people who watch the 
Johnny Carson show. And by and large what will happen on the 
Johnny Carson show about once a month when he doesn't have 
any appropriate guests, he'll bring on some old hoofer from the 
1940s or an old singer from the '40s and get them up on stage and 
say, give it one for show business. 
 
And he'll get up there and he'll sing the old songs and dance the 
old dances, himself never having remembered that he's not 20 
years old any more and he's not 30 years old any more. He's 
carrying a couple of extra pounds around the waist. The voice is 
going off key. But he still gets out there and gives it the old song 
and the old dance. And the first impression we have when we see 
that, and we say, gee isn't that fantastic; you know, I can 
remember that guy from the '40s in the movies, and it was just 
great movies this guy was in. 
 
But then, you know, a little later as we're watching that 
performance, we start to get embarrassed sitting at home in our 
own little rooms watching that television show. And we're not 
even near California and we start getting embarrassed — we get 
embarrassed for this old hoofer. 
 
And then eventually what happens is, the respect that you had for 
the hoofer of the '40s who you admired in the movies, after awhile 
it doesn't become embarrassment any more; it becomes pathetic. It 
becomes absolutely pathetic, because here is a person living in the 
'80s still believing in the songs and the dances of the 40s, and it 
just doesn't wash — and it just doesn't wash. 
 
You know, the Leader of the Opposition started his comments by 
quoting from a lot of campaign literature. And I remember very 
clearly, and I believe Hansard will show me to be correct on this, 
he stated that the member of Shellbrook's literature said that they 
would phase out the E & H tax — the Progressive Conservative 
Party, once 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1558 
 
 

 in government, would phase out the E & H tax. And I agree with 
that; that is exactly what the literature said. 
 
However, he went on to say over and over again — and again 
brought back by the member from Regina North East — that we'd 
eliminate it. Now what is the story? Even that song and dance that 
we're getting from across the floor does not have the right words to 
the song. First they start out by saying we'd phase it out and then 
flip-flop real quick and say, eliminate it. And I would hope that 
they would get that straight so that they would be able to present a 
common and logical argument to the populace of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am amazed in talking about taxes, and particularly the E & H tax, 
Mr. Speaker. I do again want to quote the member from 
Elphinstone of a couple of days past when we were talking about 
just one component of E & H, not the total package. And of course 
a segment is part of the whole, so I want to continue on in this. 
And I will quote him verbatim. he said:  
 

The measures to remove the 5 per cent E & H tax on clothing 
up to $300 (and I will quote, says) it's relatively small. 

 
Relatively small. The Leader of the Opposition, the bastion of the 
ordinary people, states, it was relatively small. You know, when 
the housewife goes shopping for clothes for herself or clothes for 
her children over 14 years old and doesn't have to pay that E & H, 
I guess she probably thinks it's relatively small, especially when 
they are on pinched budgets, as the members opposite are alluding 
to. I suppose in her mind she says, well that's okay; it's just 
relatively small; the Leader of the Opposition said it's relatively 
small. 
 
The trade worker — again the champion of the tradesman, who 
has to buy coveralls, who has to buy work apparel — I'm sure 
when he goes into his store .  . And the Leader of the Opposition 
would have us believe that he's not going into Dorn's or Caswell's. 
No, because that's too expensive for them. He's going into 
Woolco. I'm sure that when this tradesman goes into Woolco to 
buy his coveralls, and he goes and pays his money at the till and 
the lady says, no, there's no more E & H on this and hands it back, 
I'm sure he says and he appreciates when he goes home to talk to 
his wife that afternoon: — gee, isn't that great; that was relatively 
small. That's what the Leader of the Opposition said; it was 
relatively small. 
 
The champion of the "ordinary person," to be able to stand in this 
House and say that — I would hope that some day, on a Sunday or 
a Friday, that you would go to a shopping mall. And if you would 
stand in front of one of those stores as every member comes out of 
that store with a purchase, and say to them, straight in the face; 
you ordinary person, I fought hard for you and I will continue 
fighting hard for you; and that 5 per cent E & H tax that you just 
had off of your clothes, don't worry about it; it's relatively small. 
 
That is ludicrous. It is embarrassing, as I stated earlier; it is 
pathetic. 
 
I could go on more about this E & H on clothing. But as I  

said, Mr. Speaker, it is a segment, being a segment of the whole. 
But I just wanted to get that point through, because it epitomizes 
the type of logic, and a lot of times disjointed and fractured logic, 
that I've heard in my four years in this House. 
 
(1615) 
 
The member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition, also 
went on to state this afternoon that a person who takes advantage 
— and that's not really the correct word, advantage — a person 
who, within his rights as a citizen of this province and therefore of 
this country, who can read a tax form correctly and can find ways 
of saving themselves some tax money which is theirs, that there is 
nothing wrong with that. Well, one of the rare times in this House, 
I will concur with that. I agree with you, Leader of the Opposition, 
on that. 
 
Then he went on to state that if there was anyone to blame for that, 
it should be — and I will quote again and Hansard will bear me 
out on that because I listened with great enthusiasm and 
attentiveness when the Leader of the Opposition, because I have to 
explain to my constituents what he really meant because many 
times they don't believe what they're hearing. So I'll quote: — if 
there is anyone to blame, "lay the blame on the lawmakers." 
 
Again I agree 100 per cent with him. That is part and parcel of the 
responsibility that I take as a legislator. When I, along with my 
colleagues in this Assembly, pass laws, I have to be willing to take 
the responsibility for laws that are unpopular, laws that may at one 
time seem just and a little later on may be unjust. So I agree 100 
per cent with the Leader of the Opposition. Well I would like to 
quote: — "lay some blame on the lawmaker." And I will even 
underline that. I would like to lay some blame on "the" lawmaker, 
the past premier of this province. 
 
What type of blame should we lay on a government that increases 
personal income tax from 34 per cent to 51 per cent? We have the 
member from Elphinstone stand in this House and berate a half a 
per cent flat tax, berate 5 per cent E & H tax on used cars — 
which is his right — but do it with such an angelic face, almost a 
saintly demeanour, and forget in all honesty and integrity to 
remind the people what lawmaker should be blamed for the 34 to 
51 per cent increase in personal income taxes while they were 
government. 
 
We've heard the expression "crocodile tears." I've made the 
allusion to the "wolf in sheep's clothing." I far prefer that 
television show I was telling you about earlier. 
 
But you know, a lot of times when you're talking to the public, per 
cents are sometimes difficult to be understood. And then the 
Leader of the Opposition alluded to that. He said, you know, the 
tax forms are hard to understand. Sometimes they're difficult to fill 
out correctly, to come out to the best advantage of the taxpayers. 
So instead of just talking bout that 17 per cent, I would like to put 
it in a little bit clearer perspective. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1559 
 
 

The first year of office of the members opposite, personal income 
tax revenue in this province that was brought into the coffers was 
$63 million. When they left — and, I might add, not through their 
own volition — in 1982, personal income tax brought into the 
province of Saskatchewan under their increases was $511 million. 
Sixty-three million dollars to $511 million. Over 800 per cent 
increase in actual dollars — 800 per cent! and to stand there, with 
that angelic countenance, and tell us that we are the lawmakers 
that should have the hands of blame laid upon, well, we'll let the 
public make their judgement on that. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition also went on to state that the taxes 
that have been imposed by this government are totally unfair — 
totally unfair. And again, it is his right to state that. Again, when 
we look at something we see it from two different perspectives. 
But what about E & H tax on utility bills — is that fair? No. Who 
put them on? Who took them off? What about phenomenal 
increases in utilities to the users — was that fair? No. 
 
But I think I have to be more specific on that, more specific on 
that. They made this allusion to the oil companies and the gas, and 
how much it costs and all that. Let's talk a little bit about that. We 
are all familiar in this province with the huge profits from SaskTel 
when you were in government. And your members have stood up, 
the member for Shaunavon stood up in this House many times and 
states, we couldn't help but make money in those days; things 
were just great. A farmer couldn't go poor in those days; the crops 
were great and the prices were high. But you made sure and 
ensured that in those great days, that you brought utility rates, not 
so much commensurate with that, but above that profit margin. 
And here is a party, a party that does not believe in profit. 
 
I'll tell you what your party believes in. Your party believes in 
capitalizing on profits, but socialize every loss you can find. That's 
what your party believes in. But anyways, the natural gas to heat 
our homes — and I'm only picking a few years. If I took the whole 
11 years I think even the member from Athabasca would leave 
this Chamber in shame. I'll just pick a few, just a few: — 27 per 
cent in crease in 1975; 17 per cent in '77; 15 per cent in '81 — over 
60 per cent. 
 
Natural gas rates: — over 120 per cent in that same time frame — 
120 per cent. But with the illogical kind of thinking, that's fair: — 
the same kind of comment and the same kind of logic that would 
suggest, as I mentioned earlier, when that person comes out from 
the supermarket and you touch the hand of that ordinary person 
and say, don't worry; when there's a 5 per cent tax taken off of 
your clothing, that's relatively small — that's relatively small. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition also went on to state 
that of course we're going to defend the oil companies. We're 
giving all this money away to the oil companies instead of their 
proper taxation rate for them. The member from Elphinstone, the 
Leader of the Opposition, full well knows as past premier of this 
province, as past Finance minister of this province, that the highest 
royalties in oil and gas in this country are in  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Now who's gouging who? Who's taking advantage of who? He 
also full well knows — in terms of moneys that come to the 
coffers in which the governments can use to spend on programs 
for the people of this province — he full well knows that over 25 
per cent of the revenue that's generated in this province comes 
from the oil sector. But he won't state that. He will make them 
look like corporate criminals — corporate criminals — instead of 
stating the truth. 
 
You know, I don't mind as a member, after four years in this 
House of having people say, look, you did give tax breaks to the 
oil companies for drilling. I don't mind that; it's truthful. And when 
I do see my constituents, I can tell them that. You don't have to be 
embarrassed or hide from the truth. I don't mind that. 
 
But for Heaven's sake, Mr. Speaker, you would think that all 
honour — and we do have that appellation as Hon. Members in 
this House — that in all honour that you would be able to give the 
full story of the truth, and tell the people that those big, mean oil 
people out there give us over 25 per cent of our revenues to build 
hospitals, to build nursing homes. But no. 
 
Now it's amazing, Beauchesne's, the book that we go by, the 
referee's guidebook in this House, states that there are certain 
words that cannot be used in this House because they are 
unparliamentary. Mr. Speaker, if I had an opportunity to edit that 
book, there would be words in there that may be 
non-parliamentary, but at least they would be honest, that could be 
used in this House. Because there are certain words that should be 
used to describe those members opposite, which I can't in this 
House without having to sit down. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition also states, and takes the time to 
politicize a bit — and I don't really have any difficulty with 
politicizing, whether it's out on the streets or in the Assembly. I 
mean, that's the business we're in. We're in the business of politics. 
We are not here to exchange recipes, but we're here to talk politics. 
So the member from Elphinstone stands up and says, but we're 
here to talk politics. So the member from Elphinstone stands up 
and says, but if we are government. You know, a nice little 
campaign speech from the Assembly. We'll beat this; we'll do that; 
we'll do this; we'll do that. 
 
Well my mother always told me that I would be judged by the 
character of the company that I keep. So let's just look at the 
company that is kept by the members opposite. The only — the 
only — comparison that I can make, because there are no other 
NDP governments in Canada, the only comparison I can make is 
the Government of Manitoba. Now let's just judge the character of 
the companions that we keep. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to come 
back to the subject of the debate. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can appreciate your 
ruling. It's always precise and it's always correct. I apologize for 
straying from that field. However, I did want to talk about tax. It 
has to do with E & H tax. And if you should rule me out of order 
again, I will darn well  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1560 
 
 

accept your ruling. 
 
The E & H tax of Manitoba, up 5 per cent . . . 6 per cent. Talking 
about taxing ordinary people, they tax ordinary people to go to 
work. They have an employment tax in Manitoba — ordinary 
people, ordinary people. 
 
You know, another comment made regard in taxation in this 
province. There's been a lot of comments made about taxation in 
this province in so far as whom should we tax. Let's go out and tax 
all those rich people. Let's get all those rich people taxed. Let's get 
at it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what income members 
opposite are, but I want to tell you I don't know very many rich 
people in this province. There aren't very many rich people in this 
province. To quote the Leader of the Opposition, there are a lot of 
ordinary people in this province, but there aren't very many rich 
people in this province. 
 
But let's pretend that there are a lot of rich people in this province. 
Well let's just keep taxing them, and eventually with that type of 
mentality what happens is we've got a lot of poor people in this 
province because you can only go to the wells so often. And you 
full well know it from your years of experience, as soon as you 
went out with the gaff to get those rich people by the gills, those 
people left this province. And when they left this province, jobs 
went down with it. But no, you would bleed them of every cent 
you could to equalize the so-called "socialization" of this province, 
in terms of fairness and equality. There aren't that many rich 
people here. 
 
(1630) 
 
You know, I do not for a moment apologize or am embarrassed by 
my stand on my type of philosophy, my type of thinking. I've been 
lambasted, and I've been castigated for being a free-enterpriser for 
thinking that way. At least the members of the opposition would 
have me believe that there's something wrong with 
entrepreneurship. Well first of all, I don't make apology for it 
because I do believe, and I do believe the majority of the people in 
this province, in terms of their heritage, in terms of the trials and 
tribulations they went through to open up this province, firmly 
believe that by putting effort and hard work into any enterprise — 
whether it's a farm, whether it's your teaching job, or whether it's a 
business — you will get ahead. And the majority of the public out 
there do believe that. 
 
But let's talk about that. If I was of a different philosophy, this 
great equality of tax reduction, this great equality of tax payment 
by the taxpayers, as the NDP would have me believe . . . Well if I 
really believed in this socialization — which some call socialism, 
which some call the NDP party — but if I really believed that, and 
I was a member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I'd want to sell half 
my farm and give it to the ordinary people. If I was drilling wells 
in Shaunavon, I might want to share some of that money . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to stay 
on the subject. You've been drifting several times now, and I 
would ask you to get back to the subject of the debate. 
 

Mr. Weiman: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, I apologize. You're 
absolutely correct; I have to agree with you. Mr. Speaker, I know 
I'm not supposed to question the Speaker, but are the terms . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — I'll probably be called for unparliamentary 
language on this, but I would say to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: — grow up, will you. 
 
In terms of taxation of the rich — and that was brought forward by 
the member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition: — 
let's tax the rich. Well I don't think it's ever been stated publicly, 
because I don't know if politicians want to take statements like 
that. But, you know, it is the rich that help keep this province 
going, and I will say that publicly. 
 
The person who has the million dollars does not run off to Dairy 
Queen to buy snow cones; he takes that million dollars and he 
reinvests it right back in this province if the climate is appropriate. 
And when he reinvests it back into this province, he creates jobs, 
and those people who have jobs can pay taxes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You're in fantasy land. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — It is not fantasy land, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not continue 
with that type of topic because the members opposite consider that 
fantasy land; when you create jobs, that's fantasy. You see that 
goes along with their thinking about tax breaks being relatively 
small and not amounting to anything. That's fantasy also. So I will 
not continue on. I just want it to be on the record that the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg considers job creation fantasy, and it 
is not important. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition also went on to state that there 
should be some reform to the taxes and to the tax schedules. And 
then he also went on to state that the average person does not 
understand it or can take full advantage of it, and I agree with that 
part, with that part. Unfortunately, not all of us in this province are 
Nova Scotia lawyers who can look at a tax form and figure it out 
sufficiently to our benefit. 
 
But you know, the public, I am convinced — and I am willing to 
take the retribution for any comments I am about to make 
regarding that public right now — the public, I am convinced, is 
not so much concerned about what can be written off, what can be 
used as a tax dodge. what they are more concerned with — and the 
member from North East who was so in touch with that mass out 
there of ordinary people should well agree with me — what the 
majority of the public are concerned with in terms of their tax 
dollars is how judiciously is it spent. Because if they believe that 
it's fairly spent and correctly spent, then they are willing, as good 
citizens in this province, they are willing to pay their  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1561 
 
 

fair share of taxes. It is only when they think it is not fairly spent 
do they get angry, and justifiably so — and justifiably so. And I 
will be talking about the fairness — the fairness to answer that 
concern of the taxpayer of where it is judiciously spent. I have a 
few more . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I've called for order several times 
now, and I'm going to ask the members to contain themselves. I've 
given this side of the House the opportunity to speak. Now give 
this side the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again very precise 
and correct . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Regina North east — and I usually do not allow myself to be 
entrapped in catcalls from the opposition — but the member from 
Regina North East has suggested that I should check the galleries 
because I guess the implication is that that is the stage and that's 
who I should be speaking to. 
 
That's not important. What is important is that I speak through this 
Chamber, not to the press gallery, not to visitors in the gallery, but 
to members of my constituents and tell the truth. There are more 
comments I would like to make in refuting the Leader of the 
Opposition, but my fellow colleagues have more than enough on 
their plate. 
 
However, I do want to turn my attention to the member from 
Regina North East. He made reference that money spent by this 
government through our taxation policy, " . . . has been wasteful 
spending. Wrong priorities." 
 
He talked about deficit and fails to remember — fails to 
recall - the dictate of his own leader. Again we have this flip-flop 
and again we have this schizophrenic type of logic. One day it's 
Dr. Jekyll; the next time it's Mr. Hyde. He fails to recall the Leader 
of the Opposition has stated publicly that . . . And I will quote as 
close as I can: — " . . . that in tough times there are necessities for 
deficits." But no, that doesn't matter, you see, because that's not 
the comment at the time. He was trying to prove his own political 
point. 
 
But anyway, coming back to the wrong priorities, wasteful 
spending. Spending is wrong. "Gouge the taxpayer." Well let's talk 
about gouge the taxpayer. Let's talk about gouging the taxpayers. 
Rural gasification for farmers so that their heat costs go down, 
which comes from taxpayers' dollars — is that gouging the 
taxpayer? Is that money well spent? Lower the interest rates for 
farmers — is that gouging the taxpayer? Is that money well spent? 
Stabilization programs for the farmer, flood assistance, aid in time 
of grasshopper pestilence — is that gouging the taxpayers? Is that 
money well spent? 
 
Go out to the rural areas occasionally — and I appreciate that you 
and I are both city boys — but go out into the rural areas 
occasionally and ask farmers if they were gouged by our tax 
increases. You ask farmers whether our taxes and our taxation 
policy has been fair to them in terms of the expenditures that we 
spent on them. Go out to the rural areas and ask them that. 
 
And I'll tell you what the farmers will say to you. You would not 
dare go ask a farmer that because the farmer is very well aware 
and has a strong memory of Russian  

thistles. And the last thing they want to see you get is another 
Russian thistle. 
 
Let's talk about the old folks and our taxation policy. Let's talk 
about the old .  . because you brought up senior citizens. And the 
taxes that we generate, whether it's through income tax or whether 
it's through E & H tax, and then we spent on programs for the 
citizenry of this province. Go ask a senior whether a $1,000 
program to upgrade their house — which would not only upgrade 
their house but enable them to stay in a home environment as 
opposed to a senior citizens' home — ask them if that was an 
unfair tax. Ask him if he was gouged. 
 
Go to a senior citizen in my city, because obviously you're not 
talking to the senior citizens in your city. Go to the senior citizens 
in my city and ask them whether our taxation policy — which 
allowed for the building of a 238-bed nursing home in my 
constituency which I'm very much proud of, which allowed them 
some hope of getting into adequate nursing home facilities which 
were not available to '75 with your moratorium — ask them if 
that's gouging; ask them if that's unfair spending of the tax dollar. 
 
You mentioned now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Regina North East is now crying because I am bringing this 
up, and begging upon the Speaker to sit me down because I'm 
straying afield. You brought up unfair tax policies; you brought up 
the topic of spending unwisely, and I will quote you: — "not only 
spending unwisely, wasteful spending; wrong priorities; gouging 
the taxpayers." 
 
Putting up two new high schools in the city of Saskatoon after 15 
years of no high school was like putting blinkers on and stating 
there were no increases in high school students in the city of 
Saskatoon for 15 years, and you're telling me that was wasteful 
spending? The opening of multiple schools throughout the city of 
Saskatoon is wasteful spending? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I know that both sides of the 
House have strayed at times from the subject of the Bill but I 
would ask the member now to stay on the subject of the Bill for 
the remainder of his topic. He has had plenty of latitude, and stay 
on the subject herein. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You've run out. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Oh no, I'm not run out. I'm not run out. the 
stories that could be told in this Assembly and told to the public 
would be more in length than the Thousand and One (Arabian) 
Nights stories. I could keep the stories going for a thousand and 
one nights. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going . . . I have things to say, yes, 
definitely. It's just that I am trying to say them in such a way that 
allows me to continue on in terms of talking about E & H tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . (inaudible) .  . the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — I would never disagree with the Speaker,  
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1562 
 
 

you know that full well, because there have been occasions when 
I've had to sit as the Deputy Speaker and I would never disagree 
with that Chair, unlike certain members in this House who will try 
to bait. 
 
As I stated, I want to discuss topics in terms of the 5 per cent, the 
flat tax, taxation policy, and how moneys are spent — how 
moneys are spent. 
 
We have heard references to the types of taxations that we have, 
and we've had references of taxations that the opposition members 
have had. Now the opposite members would not want us to bring 
up the succession duties because they said in terms of . . . well it 
was $1 million before any taxes went on — $1 million before any 
taxes went on. 
 
You know, it wouldn't matter - it wouldn't matter whether that 
money was 100,000 or 50,000 or 25,000. When a person goes out 
and through their lifetime's toil generates an income and savings, 
and have that eroded and taken away from them at a time when 
the whole family is most susceptible — and that time is the time of 
death — and then turn around and ask for interest upon this money 
if that money wasn't made available immediately, I think that is 
why the farming community has this great mistrust for the 
members opposite, and why the members opposite would be 
unwilling to go to the farm community to talk about programs that 
were initiated these last four years — $28 million — 28 million. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen many taxes collected in this province 
— and I have in my short lifetime — that were totally unfair. And 
again I'm being very careful because of only responding to what 
they termed unfair tax increases — unfair tax increases. 
 
If I purchase something and I have to borrow the money in order 
to do it, and then I have to increase taxes to pay for the borrowed 
money that I borrowed plus its interest, I think there is a direct 
correlation there in terms of taxation. And I would think that the 
whole Assembly would agree with me on that. 
 
Now if I go out and borrow .  . Well I won't turn it around a 
different way. The greatest tax increase in this province came to a 
billion dollars, a billion dollar tax increase of which the members 
opposite will not shout too proudly about. That billion dollars was 
made up of over $600 million borrowed on the open market in 
New York, and $400 million borrowed in that same market to buy 
potash mines, to buy uranium mines, but did not create one extra 
job. I know it's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, yes, the member has lots to say, 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition do not want to hear 
about their taxation. Fair. That's fair? There may be at times when 
I have strayed afar and I've already apologized to you for that, but 
I had to try to make a point. Because you see there isn't much 
difference in the spectrum of past, present and future; and the 
game of politics goes exactly that route. Because as you've done  

in the past, your tendency is to do in the future. I can only talk 
about my present administration and the good things that we have 
done. But yet, if the members opposite are willing to use scare 
tactics on that public, I have to talk about the past and the present. 
 
However, I will not go any further on it, Mr. Speaker. All I would 
remind the Assembly and this House is that I am proud of the 
policies that we've brought forward. I'm proud of the programs 
that we've brought forward. My colleague from Saskatoon South 
has indicated the fallacy, the hypocrisy — if not the outright 
misleading of the Assembly — in terms of the taxes paid in '81 
versus '85, with the flat tax included, I think we have done 
exceptionally well. 
 
And we have done exceptionally well in times that were not this 
flush rich times of the '70s that you were in power, but times in 
which there were downturns in the economy — times in which 
segments of our society not only needed tax relief, but help. And 
no matter how sophisticated and smug we get sometimes, when 
we think in terms of the great diversity of this province, of oil, 
potash, gas, uranium, there is a . . . It's coming together. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. When I'm on my feet, I'm going 
to ask the members to be quiet. If the member has anything further 
to say on the topic, I'll hear it. Otherwise we'll move on to the next 
member. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — I'm still here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I first of all . . . First of all, I 
abjectly apologize, and I will specifically go to the taxes. 
 
All I was wanting to state is the farm community is very important 
to us, no matter how sophisticated we get, to think that we're just 
city. However, in conclusion, in conclusion, I think the message 
that has to go out to the public of this province regarding taxation, 
in so far as the costs with the flat tax included, require a review. 
 
And so I just want to state one last time . . . in fact, the first time 
for myself, Mr. Speaker. In 1981 a person making $5,000, their 
income tax load under the past administration, for the provincial 
side of the tax, was $385.90. In 1985, under the Progressive 
conservative government, that same person, at $5,000, would have 
paid $351.30, which is a decrease, and which the members 
opposite are stating isn't much. It's that relatively small thing that 
the Leader of the Opposition had indicated regarding the E & H 
tax — relatively small. And I can appreciate that 85 take away 51 
looks like $34. But it was a $34 decrease. But in terms of the 
inflation rate, in terms of 1981 up to 1985, that $34 is more than 
the $34. A person having to pay tax on $10,000 in 1981 — 
$876.10. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not asking for order; that's not my role. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think they were very much taken by the Johnny Carson 
story, because they're asking me to repeat that again. And I don't 
think you will allow me to because I've already stated about the 
old duffer, so I would ask them and invite them to read Hansard 
tomorrow for the conclusion of the Johnny Carson story. I think 
you'll find it enlightening. 
 
  



 
May 27, 1986 

1563 
 
 

At any rate, 1981, somebody paying taxes on $10,000 — $876.10. 
In 1985 it was $815.90, which again is a decrease; it looks like a 
decrease of $61. And again they would call that a decrease, 
relatively small — $61 that is in your pocket to spend. And again, 
taking into account the inflationary spiral from '81 to '85, that $61 
would be more than the $61. 
 
In 1981 on $15,000, Mr. Speaker, it was $1,4330.90, again taken 
from the tax supplement that comes in your taxes in 1981, the 
Saskatchewan portion of it. In 1985 it was $1,306.40, which is 
over a $100 reduction. With the flat tax, with the half a per cent 
flat tax included, it's still a $100 reduction. And again in terms of 
the spiral of inflation from '81 to '85, it is worth well more than the 
$100. In 1981 the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — In 1981 a person paying on $20,000 is 
$2,054.30; in 1985 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would caution the member from Regina North 
East that this is about the fifth time that I have asked for order and 
you continue to shout, along with others, but I want you to 
maintain order. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That is over a $200 
decrease at $20,000. Now I know that in this province there are a 
lot of people not making $20,000, but there are a lot who do. 
 
Again, taking into account the inflation spiral from 1981 to 1985, 
that would be worth more than actual $200 decrease; it would be 
far larger than that. And that's only if we took the percentage 
increase in the economy year by year, '81, '82, '83, '84, and '85. 
 
In 1981, for a person having to pay tax on $25,000, would have 
paid $2,758.80; 1985 it would be — and it was, rather, not would 
be, it was, on that $25,000, $2,437.50, which by my reckoning is 
over $300 decrease, which again is more than the $300 if you take 
into account the inflationary spiral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this proves very well that the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan, in whatever category they wish to quote or spout, 
is paying less in 1985 than they were in 1981 under their term of 
administration, and yet they would have the public believe 
otherwise. As the member for Saskatoon South has indicated, he 
would make readily available to any person in this province these 
statistics — so would I — to show and prove the point, I would 
hope that constituents of the members opposite, their 
constituencies would ask them for a copy, and as well-meaning 
and good MLAs they would present that and show it fairly and 
truthfully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much more, there's so much more I would 
like to continue on. I would love to talk more on tax reform. I 
would love to talk more on E & H . I would love to talk more 
about future plans, and I would just leave the House with this last 
question: — what would you really do? I mean, tell the folks, what 
would you really do? Now don't just keep harping on what we did, 
which we have already reviewed and shown, and you have misled  

the House, but what would you do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's so much more I wish to say. However, with 
the time approaching 5 o'clock, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


