


















































December 9, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 9, 1986 
 
 

97 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today and present my inaugural speech as a 
member of the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — From April 1982 to September of 1986, I 
didn’t have the opportunity to fully participate in the debates of 
the Saskatchewan legislature. I would say, though, that I 
perhaps listened to more speeches in four years than any other 
member here. So from that point of view, I think that it’s time 
that I get even and I have a chance to make a speech. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to congratulate our new 
Speaker on his appointment to the Chair. I’m sorry that he’s not 
here at this point. I’m sure that he will enjoy the opportunity to 
be Speaker of this Assembly, and he will bring a lot of class to 
that Chair, and will do a good job. I just ask the House to bear 
with him for a few days until he works into the job — and I’m 
sure he’s doing that — and I look forward to a good four years 
with Arnold in the Chair. 
 
At this time I also wish to congratulate His Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, for his excellent representation since 
being appointed in 1983. In my term as Speaker of the House, I 
was very impressed with the dignity and the enthusiasm shown 
as the Lieutenant Governor conducted his duties throughout the 
province. We are fortunate in this province to have such a 
strong, principled individual as the Queen’s representative. 
 
I would like to convey my thanks and congratulations to the 
mover and the seconder of the throne speech. As two new 
members to our Assembly, I congratulate you on a very fine job 
that you did in bringing your maiden speech in this legislature. 
You did a commendable job, and I trust that as the years roll by 
that we’ll hear you many times representing the government of 
Saskatchewan and the people of your constituency. 
 
I would now like to take the opportunity to thank the people of 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency for their very fine support 
again in this election. This is the third time that they have 
elected me as their representative. I appreciate very much the 
opportunity and the honour it is to represent that fine 
constituency, and so I want to say to them that through the next 
four years I expect to be in their communities many times and 
to have the opportunity of rubbing shoulders with them and 
speaking to them and 

hearing their views. And I will do my best to represent them 
through the term that lies ahead. 
 
I would like to also congratulate our Premier on his fine 
visionary leadership over the past four and a half years. We are 
privileged to have a premier of Saskatchewan, a person with the 
fine qualifications and experience of our Premier, Premier 
Devine. 
 
The Premier not only understands agriculture and the 
challenges associated with it, but he also has a solid grasp of the 
economy and its relation to both rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
With the Premier’s background in farming and agriculture and 
with his educational training in economics and with his 
leadership qualities sharpened over the past five years, I am 
proud to be associated with him and with his government. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Premier on the direction 
that our government is taking and has taken since 1982. I am 
pleased that our government will continue to assist individuals, 
communities, and businesses in developing and diversifying the 
province of Saskatchewan. Our commitment remains as well in 
the protection of Saskatchewan people from events beyond their 
control. 
 
Also, I look forward to doing what the people in this province 
want us to do — increase the efficiency and the effectiveness of 
government administration. And as a farmer in the Beechy area 
for more than 30 years, I know that Saskatchewan’s greatest 
strength has traditionally been the agricultural industry. I have 
seen good years in agriculture and I have seen some bad ones, 
and we know that farmers have been seriously affected in recent 
times, whether it be by low commodity prices, unfair 
international competition, or as a result of drought, flooding, or 
grasshoppers. To highlight the importance of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, we realize that agriculture and food processing 
industry produces over 40 per cent of the province’s exports. 
That accounts for about two and one-half billion dollars 
annually. But since 1981, international commodity prices have 
declined, and by this year they were at a low point — one of the 
lowest in many, many years. The results of declining 
commodity prices have been significant. 
 
The throne speech pointed out that a 30 per cent drop in world 
grain prices has cut billions of dollars from farm business 
revenues. Drought and grasshoppers have not made the 
situation any better. Tied to all this is a growing tendency on the 
part of foreign nations to restrict access to their markets and to 
subsidize their exports. We can see that this kind of 
protectionist tendency has already meant a drop in 
Saskatchewan farm incomes. 
 
On that note, I’m glad that the Premier, as Minister of 
Agriculture, will be introducing legislation this session to 
extend The Farm Land Security Act and The Farmers’ 
Counselling and Assistance Act. I believe it’s important that 
Saskatchewan farmers are treated fairly and are not 
unreasonably foreclosed upon, and that they receive appropriate 
counselling and loan guarantees. This will ensure that the 
farming community has every opportunity to remain strong and 
viable. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

98 
 

I am proud of our Premier for he has taken the issue of 
agriculture and the food industry to the first ministers’ 
conference for the first time. And not only that, but as Minister 
of Agriculture he recently piloted his idea for a national 
agriculture strategy to a successful conclusion at the recent first 
ministers’ conference in Vancouver. I’m pleased that this 
strategy will address both the short-term problems and longer 
term opportunities for Canadian agriculture. 
 
Agriculture has assumed a much greater role in our national 
economic discussion since 1982 because of a Saskatchewan 
leader and a government that understands the food producing 
industry and the importance of the farming community in our 
province and to the rest of the country. 
 
I was indeed very pleased today with the announcement made 
by the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister of 
Agriculture. A 1 billion payment to Saskatchewan and to 
Canada is going to mean more than most of us realize. 
 
Remember that this payment comes on top of the regular 
amount that each one of us would normally receive for the grain 
that we sell. This grain comes at the top edge which means that 
it makes the difference in whether or not we make a profit or 
take a loss. Many of our young farmers are going to find that 
this payment that does not have to returned is the type of 
payment, and the amount of money, that will likely make the 
difference for them whether they will survive or whether they 
will have to go bankrupt. 
 
Along with that payment is some 850-some-odd million in grain 
stabilization that has been paid out in the past year. In the next 
few days people can expect a cheque from the federal 
government through the stabilization program. This cheque will 
average something like $5,400 for those who paid the 
maximum amount in to the stabilization program. Any that paid 
the maximum amount last year will, during the year 1986, 
receive something in excess of $16,000 each. That is a very 
significant amount of money and is much appreciated by the 
people in my community and throughout the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency, and I might say, throughout the province. 
 
I’ve listened with interest tonight, on different talk shows over 
the supper break, and I hear people saying, oh, $5,000 means 
nothing to me, or $15,000 would mean nothing on my farm. I 
think these people are not being very realistic. They’re very 
much like what I heard the opposition saying today that $420 
million was really not meaningful in our society. 
 
I think sometimes people have to pause and reflect upon what 
they’re saying before they open their mouths. Here we have a 
very major payment coming into our province, one that is going 
to give many of our farmers the opportunity to show a real 
profit in the past year. I look forward to receiving it as a farmer, 
and I’m sure that all of you here who are farmers, or have farm 
members as family, are going to see a difference. And those of 
you who live in the cities, when that money comes into the 

 province and is spent within the province, it’s going to mean 
much to Saskatoon, Regina, and to all urban ridings the same as 
it does in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You may well ask why I’m spending so much time on the area 
of agriculture, and the reason is twofold: one is because I am a 
farmer and farming has been my lifelong occupation. I believe 
that agriculture in our province will continue for some time to 
be the mainstay of this province and to carry the cities and the 
industries on its back. And for that reason I think that all of us 
may pay very close attention to what’s happening in agriculture 
and to work and to do the best we can to see that the agriculture 
industry is stable and that the farmers are turning a profit on 
their investment. 
 
Agriculture has been a part of our economy for many, many 
years and I look forward to it again becoming the proud 
industry without the need of government subsidies in the very 
near future. 
 
I’m proud of our government’s accomplishments in agriculture 
over the past four and a half years. Highlights such as the farm 
purchase program, providing 57,000 young farmers with low 
interest loans to start up or to expand; the production loan 
program, providing 6 per cent help to those young farmers that 
needed money to plant their crops last spring — and as I 
campaigned through this last election campaign, it was 
mentioned almost at every door how much they appreciate it, 
and how much they needed that kind of help at this time in their 
farming careers. 
 
The introduction of the natural gas program in rural 
Saskatchewan has helped over 10,000 farmers at this point. And 
as they convert their homes and their dairy barns, their hog 
barns and so on, to natural gas as a heating source, many of 
them tell me that their cost of heating has dropped to about 45 
per cent of what it was before. They appreciate the opportunity 
to be served with natural gas and as the program goes forward 
many more will have that same opportunity. 
 
The farmers oil royalty refund program, providing farmers with 
21 cents per gallon rebate this year, is a significant help in 
reducing the cost of farm inputs. It’s much appreciated in all 
segments of the agricultural society. 
 
Since 1982, thousands of acres of farm land have been irrigated 
in an effort to reduce the serious effects of droughts. This is an 
area I wish to talk about for a few moments because of my 
position as minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. Since the water corporation was established two 
years ago, it has proved to be a great asset to many towns and 
villages in developing effective and efficient water and sewer 
services. 
 
The water corporation has done a fine job in managing one of 
the province’s most valuable resources. Much of the credit must 
go to the staff of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. These 
men and women have formed a strong and cohesive unit since 
coming together from a few different government departments 
in 1984, and they provide a great deal of technical assistance to 
farmers and municipalities throughout Saskatchewan. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

99 
 

(1915) 
 
Saskatchewan Water also provides financial assistance through 
a number of popular programs. The well test drilling program 
assists individual water users to attain information on the 
availability of relative long-term ground water supplies before 
well drilling begins. In 1985 close to a half million dollars was 
provided to more than 500 people. Deep well assistance has 
meant $102,000 to 112 water users as of December 1 of this 
year. The community well assistance plan helps rural and small 
urban municipalities in developing pump stations at existing 
water facilities, or the drilling of community wells. This 
program provided almost $100,000 last year. Saskatchewan 
municipal waters assistance program allows towns, villages, 
and hamlets to develop capital water works and sanitary sewage 
facilities, and so far this year more than $3.1 million have been 
used by 132 communities in the province. 
 
Another major project announced and promoted by Premier 
Devine is the development of the Souris River Basin through 
the proposed Rafferty and Alameda dams. This project will not 
only provide irrigation for thousands of acres in south-east 
Saskatchewan, but also increases the recreational opportunities 
for people in Saskatchewan. We are working to maintain our 
water supply while helping our American neighbours with flood 
protection and a more constant flow of water. These 
negotiations have been proceeding for some time with a view to 
reaching satisfactory agreements on the issues involved as soon 
as possible. 
 
But I’m most excited about the irrigation projects currently 
under way in our province, and about the five year, $100 
million irrigation agreement we recently signed with the federal 
government. This will give a number of Saskatchewan farmers 
the opportunity to participate in irrigation farming. I’m also 
pleased to say that the first project designed under this program 
is in the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
The $20 million Luck Lake proposal is going ahead at this time. 
Some of the groundwork has already been completed and in the 
very near future tenders will be called for the necessary pipe to 
install the system. This new system is going to be quite a 
change in irrigation for Saskatchewan. This will be the first 
time that pressurized water has been delivered by pipe right to 
the farm. This will enable farmers to operate, I believe, at a 
more economical rate than if each one had to provide his own 
power and his own electric motors. 
 
If this new program is as satisfactory as I think it’s going to be 
— and we intend to have it up and running by 1988 — then I 
would see that many of the areas of the province are going to be 
looking ad demanding to have the same kind of service. 
 
I would like to point out that this irrigation that we’re proposing 
at this time is not imposed by the government, but is 
farmer-generated. So it is only those groups in agriculture that 
see the need for irrigation, and that come to the government 
with their proposal and make a request that irrigation water be 
provided . . . Those are the only 

ones who will be serviced. So I’m pleased to see it going that 
way, and the interest that’s being shown by people out there. 
It’s encouraging and I find it exciting. 
 
I just want to mention the Luck Lake project again. A 
gentleman by the name of Roy King at Birsay is chairman of 
the Birsay Water Users Association, which is involved in the 
Lucky Lake project. And recently in the Outlook paper he said, 
and I quote: 
 

Farmer interest in irrigation has been high in the Luck Lake 
region for several years. We’re excited about the project 
design and about the potential for our area. 

 
It is clear in these statements that our government strongly 
believes in working with the farm community before programs 
are started. This is the kind of spirit of co-operation and 
participation that Premier Devine was referring to in the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
I’m pleased that Premier Devine announced specific examples 
in the Speech from the Throne of promoting economic 
development and diversification; encouraging the local 
manufacture of agricultural chemicals and fertilizers, thereby 
reducing input costs for farmers and creating new jobs for 
Saskatchewan people; providing greater diversification through 
industrial incentives and venture capital. Loans to small 
business have been most valuable, and through the youth 
entrepreneurial program — providing Saskatchewan small 
business with 50 million over the next five years to equip 
themselves with the most effective and efficient technology 
available — a commitment to ensure that our students are 
obtaining the necessary skills to compete on the national and 
the international markets. 
 
Since 1982, this government has taken unprecedented steps to 
encourage development of a strong industrial base. These steps 
will continue in 1987 and beyond. 
 
Over the past four and a half years, Premier Devine and his 
government have made a determined effort to reward senior 
citizens for the contributions that they have made to our 
province and for the solid foundation they have built for us. So 
many of the opportunities and freedoms we now enjoy were 
provided for by the hard work and initiatives of our seniors. It’s 
no wonder then that grants to low income seniors have been 
increased by as much as 100 per cent and new enriched seniors’ 
heritage program is helping seniors throughout the province. 
Nursing home and enriched housing construction has been 
undertaken at a pace never seen before, and other programs 
relating to seniors have been upgraded and expanded. 
 
In my own constituency of Rosetown-Elrose, I’m proud of how 
this government, under the compassionate leadership of Premier 
Devine, has helped literally hundreds of seniors — projects 
such as an enriched housing unit in Milden; a combined facility 
in Lucky Lake; and a new combined facility soon to open in 
Dinsmore; the promise of new nursing home to go under 
construction early in the spring of 1987 in Elrose; and a 
combined hospital and nursing home facility approved for 
construction in 1987 in Kyle.  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

100 
 

It’s no exaggeration to say that the health and welfare of our 
seniors is a top priority of this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, ever since I’ve know the Premier, I’ve 
been impressed with his commitment to the family union. 
Premier Devine and his Progressive Conservative government 
believe that no institution is more important than the family. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
whether you would advise the member about the rules of the 
House in not permitting the use of the name. I’ve heard it six or 
seven times, and I thought perhaps you might advise the 
member of the rule. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It’s traditional in the 
House . . . I’ve heard it on both sides of the House today, and I 
think in our maiden speeches maybe it could be overlooked. 
The debate continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
appreciate very much having some liberties that others don’t 
seem to have. 
 
The Premier and his Progressive conservative government 
believe that no institution is more important than the family. 
Societies are only as strong as the individual family unit. With 
all kinds of negative forces bombarding families in this day and 
age, the Premier and his government are tackling the problems 
head on and are determined to protect Saskatchewan people. 
 
More than $1.2 billion is being provided in health care. A drug 
and alcohol rehabilitation centre is going ahead at Yorkton. An 
increase in education and university spending; the 
Saskatchewan pension plan providing retirement income for 
home-makers, part-time workers, and small-business 
employees. 
 
Mortgage protection at nine and three-quarters per cent for 10 
years — it allows people to move into their own home and 
know that they can afford to stay there because they have that 
kind of protection for long term. And helping owners through 
the home improvement grant and the low interest loan program 
— creating thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan’s people. And 
that is not just in the cities but that spreads out through every 
town and village in Saskatchewan. Every business that is 
involved in the house construction and home repair program are 
finding that their biggest job is keeping up with the demand, 
and in many cases they’ve had to take on numbers of extra help 
to meet the need of the community in which they live. 
 
The elimination of sales tax on clothing under $300 has been a 
big addition to the help provided to many of our families and 
it’s appreciated by all. An increase in the funding over the past 
four years to handicapped persons. Protecting families and 
protecting individuals — that’s 

what our Premier and this government is all about. 
 
Our Progressive Conservative government sees the protection 
of our environment for future generations as a major priority of 
all Saskatchewan residents. We are responding to this shared 
concern by setting high standards of environmental protection 
throughout the province and by responsible development of our 
natural and mineral resources. As the Minister of Environment, 
I am pleased to see the high standards Saskatchewan has set in 
emission control. It’s higher than most jurisdictions across our 
nation. 
 
These are interesting times for a Minister of Environment. Just 
last month, The Globe and Mail ran a front page article stating 
that Canadians appear to be more concerned with environmental 
issues than job creation. That’s indeed a change of direction in 
our time. It’s clear to see that concerns for the environment did 
not disappear with the passing of the ‘70s, and our government 
is certainly aware of the importance of our environment. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan there are a number of major projects in 
the works. The heavy oil upgrader here in Regina will help us 
become more self-sufficient in oil production, and in the 
process is creating thousands of jobs. This upgrader would not 
have become a reality if it wasn’t for the Premier of this 
province and the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
The Rafferty and Alameda dam projects were announced earlier 
this year by the Premier. This will provide Saskatchewan 
people with more electrical power, plus another source of 
recreation in the Souris Valley. Our government is working 
hard with people in the area and with the Americans to bring 
these plans to fruition as soon as possible. 
 
Another major project that we are excited about is the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation power line in northern 
Saskatchewan to be developed from Uranium City to Rabbit 
Lake. This is an effort to bring electrical power to people in an 
isolated area; something we all take for granted and even 
consider it a right. We are concerned that people throughout the 
province are treated equitably. 
 
Since becoming Environment minister, I took the opportunity of 
visiting as many people in the department as I could. I was 
impressed with the quality of the professionals there — people 
who want to ensure that our environment is safe and workable 
for generations to come. 
 
(1930) 
 
I’ve also had the opportunity to meet a number of staff in the 
technical safety service branch which looks after gas, electrical, 
and boiler inspections as well as fire prevention. I mention this 
area because it has moved from the Department of Labour to 
Environment. The people in this branch carry a lot of 
responsibility in completing thousands of inspections each year. 
This has been increased somewhat as a result of our 
government’s rural natural gas program, the burying of 
electrical lines, and  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

101 
 

from our successful home renovation program. I’ve been 
impressed with the professionalism and dedication shown by 
these employees in keeping the safety of the public first and 
foremost in their minds. We will be monitoring this situation 
very closely to ensure that inspections occur as promptly as 
possible. 
 
In conclusion, I am pleased with the Speech from the Throne 
and the direction that the Premier and the government is taking. 
The three themes stressed by the Premier, economic 
development and diversification, protection from Saskatchewan 
residents, and effective use of government resources, are ones 
supported by people throughout this province. It is this 
government’s intent to work with people throughout the 
province to build a stronger and more secure future. 
 
I urge all members to support the Speech from the Throne. Mr. 
Speaker, I will be supporting the speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am going 
to describe to the House tonight the constituency that I 
represent, and I am also going to describe to this Assembly 
some of the views and opinions of my constituents as I have 
gleaned them in the last year or so of canvassing on my way to 
this Assembly. 
 
Before doing that, though, I would like to compliment the 
mover of the motion, my friend, the hon. member from the 
Eastview constituency. I intend to refer to some of the remarks 
that he made as I talk to you about my constituents and how 
they feel, and I will be returning to that in due course. 
 
The Saskatoon Fairview constituency is one of those that has 
grown considerably since the last distribution with the result 
that we now have over 13,6000 eligible voters. That, I think, is 
about twice the size of some of the voters eligible in the 
constituencies represented by members opposite, which is a 
situation that I believe is going to be corrected following the 
work of the electoral boundaries commission beginning next 
March. 
 
There is a high concentration of ordinary wage and salary 
earners in Saskatoon Fairview. There are communities included 
in that constituency which do not have a great number of 
wealthy people among them, where there are many, many 
young people -—many children, a very prolific group — 
crowded schools, and I might note in passing, no high school. 
Now I say that, feeling on solid ground, because my 
predecessor who was a member of the Conservative caucus in 
the last legislature raised that point again and again with his 
colleagues without success. And the House Leader is indicating 
that he remembers the representations and I want to redouble 
them on behalf of the constituents there, and urge this 
government and the new Minister of Education to petition the 
school boards in Saskatoon with a view to resolving that very, 
very serious problem. They are having to transport their 
children for miles and miles to go to high school. They take 
long bus rides which have to start early in the morning and 
which end well into the supper hour in order to attend high 
schools, and it’s a situation that 

simply must stop. 
 
So again, I would urge the Minister of Education to take this 
representation at least as seriously as he took it from my 
predecessor, and see whether that problem can be resolved. 
The high concentration of working people in my riding includes 
probably the largest concentration of trade union members in 
Saskatchewan, and it is with a great deal of provide, of course, 
that I represent those people, as all people, because of the 
particular kind of a law practice that I’ve been engaged in the 
last few years. 
 
We also have a surprisingly high concentration of native people 
in the riding, and those native people have expressed views to 
me as I canvassed them which I’ll be pleased to share with you 
in a little while tonight. 
 
We have a relatively small but growing number of retired and 
elderly people in the constituency. We also have a large number 
of new Canadians, new citizens, and people who have recently 
come to this country and have received landed immigrant status 
and are looking forward to achieving their citizenship in due 
course. 
 
Unfortunately in the riding we have a very large number of 
unemployed people. We also have an alarmingly high number 
of people who receive social welfare and I want to particularly 
address their concerns later on in my remarks tonight. 
 
Now in 1982, the voters in Saskatoon Fairview voted for the 
government opposite in large numbers. The margin of victory 
for the Conservatives was over 3,000 votes, and that was rather 
a surprising result considering the kind of riding that it was. At 
least it was certainly a surprise to me as the candidate. 
 
Now in 1986, however, we found the most massive 
turn-around, I believe, that occurred in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And rather than a conservative victory of in 
excess of 3,000 votes, I enjoyed a margin of victory of over 
3,000 votes. There was a turn-around . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m accepting that applause modestly. An 
exceptional turn-around, and it is because of the size of that 
turn-around that I chose the particular approach that I did 
tonight to try and describe to you just what these people in 
Saskatoon Fairview were thinking about as they changed their 
mind from 1982 to 1986. 
 
Now I make these remarks in the context of the remarks of the 
hon. member from Eastview. Now in moving the motion that is 
before the House, the member said, I think, everything that 
could be possibly said by anyone in support of the record of the 
government opposite. And the question that ran through my 
mind as I listened to his remarks is, if that record was so good, 
why didn’t it sell in Saskatoon Fairview? Why did the people in 
Fairview reject it so resoundingly? 
 
And then I thought further about the voters in Eastview, and 
Saskatoon Eastview has been, I’ve been told by 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

102 
 

Conservatives, regarded as a safe seat for the Tories in 
Saskatoon. And yet that safe seat for the Tories, when it came 
down to the wire on election night, was won by my friend by 
something less than — what? — 2 per cent? Anyway a very, 
very narrow margin of victory indeed. So it occurred to me that 
the voters in the safe seat of Saskatoon Eastview weren’t really 
buying that message very resoundingly either, and indeed that 
was the case throughout the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Why did this turnaround occur? I think that it occurred because 
the people came to one or more of three conclusions about this 
government. First of all, by the time I got there to canvass them, 
they had pretty much all come to understand that the 
government was no competent. Secondly, they shared to a very 
large extent the view that the government was not fair. And 
thirdly, and probably most importantly, they had come to the 
conclusion that this government did not represent their interests 
and their concerns. 
 
Now let me just fill in a little bit of detail under each of those 
headings. First of all, the question of the competency of the 
government . . . and let me remind members that these are not 
my thoughts that I’m expressing to you but thoughts that were 
expressed to me over the past year. You may not have heard 
them; I’d be surprised, but you may not have. 
 
By far and away the most important issue in my constituency 
was the issue of unemployment. It was an issue that 
overshadowed all others to the point where it was hard to find 
the second one. Everyone agreed that unemployment was the 
main issue. And that includes not only the people who were 
unemployed, because the people who are employed for different 
reasons feel insecure about their job. They feel insecure because 
the company they’re working for may be getting into some 
economic difficulty. They feel insecure because other people 
who work in their work place have been laid off. They feel 
insecure if they work for government because they see people 
being fired and laid off for reasons that are not known to them. 
They have the opinion that this government has no idea how to 
cope with the unemployment problem. 
 
Every once in a while they’ll hear a government spokesman, a 
minister most usually, who will make a public statement 
announcing all kinds of new jobs, or announcing that 
unemployment in Saskatchewan is not as bad as it seems to be 
by the numbers, or that there are more jobs in November than 
there were the previous April, or there are more jobs in April 
than there were in November, or something like that — 
statement, after statement, after statement. But it just had no 
impact on the people because the people know that 
unemployment in their community is the major problem. 
Someone in their family, someone in their neighbourhood, 
someone known to them has become unemployed in the last 
short while. Some other of their friend will have been 
unemployed for two or three years, and have been looking for 
work constantly, and be unable to find work. 
 
So they got the impression that this government had no plan, 
had no idea how to resolve the problem, and furthermore, 
weren’t really very committed to the  

resolution of the problem. 
 
Now, the second major issue that bears on the competency of 
the government had to do with the deficit. Now I know some of 
the political insiders were saying that the deficit wasn’t an 
issue. Well I don’t know what the situation was in other 
constituencies represented by members of this House, but in my 
constituency the deficit was an issue. 
 
The people had the perception that the government had bungled 
the finances of the province. The people had the impression that 
the government had created a public debt which would sap the 
vitality of this province for years to come. 
 
Now when the government opposite took office in the spring of 
1982, it inherited a budget surplus of $139 million. After 11 
consecutive surplus budgets under the New Democrats, the new 
PC government had inherited this surplus of $139 million. 
 
Now today that’s just a pleasant memory. The unpleasant 
reality is that after five consecutive deficits brought in by the 
people opposite, Mr. Speaker, the cumulative budgetary deficit 
of this province is somewhere in the order of $21.5 billion. 
 
Now that’s a lot of money for a person who depends upon their 
pay cheque as people do in Saskatoon Fairview. It’s almost an 
impossible number for people to grasp. But it concerned them 
because when they thought about it, they realize that that’s 
money that some day has to be paid back. 
 
It’s not an amount of money that just is magically going to go 
away. It’s a mortgage on our future. It’s a mortgage on the 
future of our children and our grandchildren. 
 
(1945) 
 
And while it has to be paid back, in the meantime we have to 
pay interest on it. Interest that is money flowing out of this 
province to the bond dealers and the banks, and is money that 
ought to, and has for years, been available in Saskatchewan in 
order to do things. 
 
Now if you assume that our money has been borrowed at the 
rate of 10 per cent, we’re talking about an annual interest 
payment of $250 million, and I think that’s an accurate figure. I 
think that the estimate in the last budget for interest was $200 
million on the deficit they were expecting at that time. And I 
think the deficit that we’ll find is actually going to be higher 
than that. 
 
So using a figure of $250 million a year for interest, you can 
then think about how much that is each day by dividing it by 
365, and you come down . . . you come out then with a figure of 
$685,000 a day. 
 
Now to a man earning $30,000 a year, he can kind of get a 
sense of how much money $685,000 a day is, and then he can 
relate that to the fact that five years ago there was no such 
payment necessary by the province of Saskatchewan to the 
bond dealers and to the banks. He can think about what could 
be done with that money if  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

103 
 

we kept it in Saskatchewan. 
 
He can think that with just three days of that interest, you could 
double your occupational health and safety program in the 
Department of Labour. And with just 10 days of that interest, 
you could provide high-quality, accessible day care for working 
families in every community in Saskatchewan. And with just 
one money of interest — if you hadn’t rung up that deficit — 
with just one money of interest, we could provide about 700 
additional nurses in the hospitals across Saskatchewan. With 
four months of interest — four months of interest — we could 
restore the property improvement grant for all home owners, 
renters, farmers, and small businesses. And one other number 
— with five months of interest, you could eliminate the flat tax. 
 
Now the people blame you directly and entirely for getting us 
into this awful mess, and they regard you as incompetent for 
having gotten us there. 
 
On the question of fairness, let me just briefly touch on the 
reasons why the people in my constituency came to the 
conclusion that you were not a fair government. First of all, 
they saw patronage being raised to an art form. Patronage in the 
hiring of people, in the promoting of people within the public 
service; reverse patronage in the firing of people — competent, 
career public servants wrecked because at some time they may 
have smiled at the Leader of the Opposition in the crosswalk. 
 
They saw patronage in the awarding of contracts. They saw 
patronage actually happening in relation to places where they 
worked or people that they knew. And of course they saw the 
abuses in the tendering processes that went on for some time 
under this government, and they did not regard that as being 
fair. And the people, I tell you, are not prepared to put up with 
an unfair government. 
 
The government opposite also hit the people in an unfair way 
with respect to their tax policy. The people felt that the 
cancellation of the home ownership grant was not a fair policy. 
And further, the imposition of the flat tax was not regarded as 
being fair to the wage-earners. They felt they were already 
paying their share, the increased taxation ought to be paid by 
people who could afford to pay it better than them. And that’s a 
good point. 
 
You know the reality is out there in the houses of the working 
people of this province, and these are the places that I now 
know best because these are the homes on which I’m calling. 
There isn’t enough cash by the time they’ve taken their pay 
cheque home. They’ve had all the deductions taken off their pay 
cheque. There just isn’t enough money to go around. They 
make their mortgage payment. They make their car payment. 
They buy their groceries. They buy the clothing, and they make 
a few other payments, perhaps, and there just isn’t any money 
left. The people don’t have money any more to do anything. 
 
And in those circumstances when they get a surtax laid on 
them, like what happened in the budget with the imposition of 
the flat tax, the people just recoil from it. And naturally they do, 
because it’s requiring them to put up what they don’t have any 
more, and that is cash —  

disposable income. 
 
Another theme that was struck repeatedly was that this 
government gave the impression to the people of favouring the 
big guy, of favouring the people that didn’t need favours done 
for them, of favouring . . . Pocklington’s a name that everybody 
uses. It’s a name that conjures up all sorts of things. But he’s a 
good example and one that the people often use. And many 
other examples that the government would come with an 
announcement about some plant or something like that, and the 
people would see it as an example of the government helping 
people who didn’t really need help. 
 
And they, operating their small business — and I’m talking now 
of people who are in business — they just simply weren’t able 
to turn anywhere for any real help at all. And they felt that that 
was not fair. 
 
Now the trade union members have a particular axe to grind 
with this government in terms of fairness. And I harken back to 
the amendments to The Trade Union Act, which are known as 
Bill 104, which raised such a furor across this province. 
Whatever those amendments were intended by the government 
to accomplish, it was certainly not to make a more fair, 
collective bargaining system. And it didn’t do that. 
 
All it did was lay road-blocks, obstacles in the road of trade 
unions and trade union members as they try to make their way 
in the world, as they try to get adequate representation and 
resolve some of the problems that they encounter in the work 
place. Whatever those amendments were intended to 
accomplish, it was not to introduce fairness. And indeed, the 
amendments were seen as being grossly unfair, and that had a 
lasting impact among the people who live in my constituency. 
 
So it cuts, Mr. Speaker, right across the whole piece. The 
working people, the people who many of whom work at the 
minimum wage and have seen the minimum wage increased by 
25 cents in the last five years. You convert that to percentage 
terms and you get some laughably small figure that doesn’t 
even begin to touch increases in the cost of living. And those 
people wonder why that happens. I mean if things are supposed 
to be so good in Saskatchewan, if this is supposed to be . . . 
things are rolling along the way my friend, the member form 
Eastview describes them as being, all up and away and we’re all 
rolling along in high gear, then how is it that the 
minimum-wage worker is still earning 25 cents more an hour 
than he was earning five years ago? He doesn’t think . . . that 
person doesn’t think that this is a fair government at all. 
 
I can’t leave this subject without mentioning the attitude of 
many of the women in my constituency who did not see this 
government as representing their issues, their concerns, at all. I 
don’t know who it is on that side of the House who is the most 
sympathetic to what we commonly refer to as women’s issues. 
 
The Minister of Labour has indicated by raising his hand that he 
is that person. I wonder whether there is anyone on that side of 
the House, for example, who supports the concept of equal pay 
for work of equal value. I wonder 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

104 
 

whether there is anybody over there. I wonder if there is 
anybody over there who is determined to enrich the day-care 
system in our province and make that more accessible to the 
ordinary working people, particularly the low-income people in 
Saskatchewan. The people in my constituency were not able to 
think of anybody on the government side of the House who 
shared their views on these matters. Nobody. And as a 
consequence they came to the opinion that you did not share 
their concerns, and you did not represent their interests in this 
House, and so they did not vote for you. 
 
And finally . . . Not finally, next to finally — I’m not finished 
yet —next to finally . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The young people. Now in 1982 my 
experience was that the young people in my constituency 
supported the government. They went for the gas tax promise, I 
think, chiefly, but in any event they voted for the government. 
This year I’m proud to tell you that the young people in my 
constituency voted New Democrat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And they did it because one of the 
impressions that you were able so successfully to convey to 
them is that under your stewardship their opportunities were so 
severely limited that they practically didn’t exist. 
 
They were alarmed by the level of youth unemployment. Youth 
unemployment in my riding is at a staggering number. It’s just 
really depressing the number of houses you go to where you 
find young people who have graduated from high school and 
have been hunting for a job for a year or two, or in one case, 
four years. Young people who are the kind of people who, in 
the 1970’s, would have found a job just like that. And yet these 
people are not lazy; these people are not shiftless; these people 
are not unambitious. These people just simply can’t find a job. 
 
And they go downtown into Saskatoon day after day, month 
after month, some cases year after year looking for work and 
are not able to find steady work. Sometimes they can find a job 
for a short term; sometimes they can find a part-time job. But I 
say to you that it is just incredibly depressing to note how many 
of them are at home in the afternoons, having completed 
another few hours of searching for a job without success. And 
these are people who are approaching the age of 23, 24, 25 
years old and some of them have never worked at a regular job. 
 
Now what’s to become of these people? Surely these people 
should be the number one concern of all of us in this Assembly, 
and surely it must be one of our most important priorities to 
ensure that something is done to ensure that these young people 
can get a useful, valuable work experience so that they have 
some chance of living a full, productive life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m not going to speak at length about the 

problem of the native people tonight because I feel I’ve used up 
too much of your time now. So just let me sum it up this way: 
the native people who live in Saskatoon Fairview just simply 
gave up on you guys — they just gave up. They just felt that in 
no way, in their lifetime, were they ever going to get anything 
from you that might help them solve any of their problems. 
 
I want to now talk about the social welfare recipients, the poor 
social welfare recipients, and I do that . . . I don’t want to sound 
excessively negative to the members of this House. What I’m 
trying to do is to bring you a frank report from my constituents, 
and I regret that it’s negative. It just happens to be that way. 
 
With the social welfare recipients, I hope I don’t exaggerate, 
Mr. Speaker, when I say that it is a crisis situation. I’m so glad 
to hear the minister responsible say, as he did in this House 
yesterday, that that situation was going to be reviewed, and I 
understood him to say words to the effect, that sympathetic 
consideration would be given to increasing benefit levels 
because they simply must be increased. 
 
(2000) 
 
People who are unemployable welfare recipients, who just have 
no way of earning any income at all, are having to live on 
allowances that would appal you, Mr. Speaker, simply appal 
you. Their general allowance to cover their food and their 
clothing and their incidentals and that sort of things is a 
pittance. And I think the minister knows this. If the minister 
was asked to go out to the stores in Regina and buy enough to 
feed himself and his two children on the allowance that he’s 
paying to these people, he would just laugh. He would know 
that he couldn’t do it, or having tried once he would learn that 
he couldn’t do it. 
 
The social welfare recipients are receiving, in addition, an 
allowance to cover their utilities. It is exactly the same 
allowance as they were receiving, I think, 10 years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. I could be wrong about my number, but it’s really 
some incredibly long period of time in the past. And it creates 
. . . The minister shakes his head. It may not be 10; it may be 
six. I don’t know. 
 
But in any event, whatever it took to cover the utility bill back 
then no longer covers the utility bill. I haven’t met a single 
welfare recipient who is able to pay for their utilities on the 
allowance that they receive for utilities. They have to pay for 
utilities out of their food allowance. They actually wait in dread 
for the day on which the utility bill — the electric and gas bill 
particularly — wait in dread for the day on which that bill 
arrives, and they open it in real fear because they don’t know 
what they’re going to see. If they see a bill that is $15 larger 
than they expected, they’re in a panic because $15 off their food 
bill is a great deal of o money. 
 
These are people, Mr. Speaker, for whom $10 or $15 is an 
incredibly large amount of money, and is the difference 
between making it through a month and not making it. And I 
pass this on. I hope it does some good. And I hope that when 
the department’s review is being conducted that it will be 
conducted with compassion and with understanding, and with a 
feeling for just how difficult it is 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

105 
 

for these people. 
 
I don’t stand here bearing a brief for people who are abusing the 
social welfare system. I don’t stand here with a brief for people 
who could be working and have elected not to work. I stand 
here with a brief for the people who are on social welfare 
because they don’t have any choice and are starving — not to 
death, but they’re just having a very, very difficult time. 
They’re not feeding their kids properly. Their kids are growing 
up . . . not just a matter of growing up without any of the 
advantages, but growing up suffering from the effects of 
poverty. And we in this province, in this land of plenty, just 
simply ought not to allow that to go on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I think I could presume . . . Maybe presume is 
not the right word. I think I could try to sum up what I’ve been 
trying to convey by saying that in my experience, in the west 
end of Saskatoon, the people don’t share the government’s idea 
of how the Government of Saskatchewan should be run. The 
people just simply don’t share your thinking. They don’t share 
it on any of the particular issues that I’ve been addressing. They 
don’t share it on the hiring of somebody like George Hill to be 
the president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I mean, 
you can make all the speeches you like about how well 
qualified George Hill is. And I’ve known him for 30 years. I 
know how well qualified he is. You can make those speeches in 
this House for as long as you like and the people are simply not 
going to buy it. It was a patronage appointment of one of your 
own to one of the top jobs in Saskatchewan, and the people will 
so regard it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now, I think that you know that what I have 
said is true. Mr. Speaker, I should be addressing this to you. I 
think the members of the government know that what I’ve said 
is true about the people not sharing their idea of how a 
government should be run. I think they know from their own 
polls that if they had gone to the people last spring or last 
summer, they would have been wiped out and this party would 
be sitting over there, and a small number of them would be 
sitting over here. But they didn’t, and with some jiggery-pokery 
and a lot of smoke in a few mirrors, they managed to turn the 
situation around sufficiently so that we have the House as it’s 
constituted right now. 
 
But what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is if they don’t clean up 
their act, and if they don’t somehow convince the people of this 
province that they are behaving fairly and that they’re 
competent to govern, and that they are reflecting some of the 
real needs and concerns in this society, then in the next election 
the result will be remarkably different. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to before sitting down to say one other 
thing on a personal note. I’ve no idea whether this is 
appropriate or not, Mr. Speaker, but I am here in large part 
because of my father, and my father will be known to many of 
the members of this House as Charlie Mitchell from Sturgis, 
and as I speak to you tonight, I am conscious 

of the impression that he has had in my life. He died last 
January and I just couldn’t sit down with put putting his name 
on the record. I think that members opposite and members on 
this side will know him for many years as a director of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and its 
president for three years, and many, many, many other positions 
he discharged in the public service of this province. And his 
example was an example to me as it was to a lot of other people 
in our community. 
 
I also am here because, Mr. Speaker, my six children are going 
to live in this world for a long time after you and I are gone, and 
their children are going to live after them. And it would be 
irresponsible of me not to do what I could in order to make 
things better for them and help ensure that they do have a good 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My daughter, Allison, who is the youngest of 
my six daughters said to me three or four years ago — or asked 
me — she said, “Daddy, was I born at the wrong time?” She 
said that after she had heard or read some disturbing piece of 
economic news or something like that, and I just answered it in 
a quick reassuring way without going into any detail, but I 
ought to have said that she was born in about the best time that 
she could have been born. She was born at the best time in our 
history where we have so many opportunities as a result of our 
mastery of technology and our increasing knowledge of how 
things work. And she ought to have the fullest life of anyone in 
the history of our civilization. 
 
And all I hope is that we in this Assembly, and in other 
Assemblies across the country, are able to do everything we can 
to ensure that my daughter, and all of our daughters and all of 
our sons, have the life that it is possible for them to have if we 
bring enough wisdom to the tasks that are before us. 
 
I will be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and opposing 
the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to rise in this House this evening 
to speak in favour of the throne speech which my colleagues 
from Eastview and Pelly so eloquently presented to this House 
the other day. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, sir, on your 
election as our Speaker of this fine House. Being a colleague of 
mine for over a year and a half prior to the last election and 
having been on ag caucus and a few other committees with you, 
sir, I know that the dedication which you showed to your 
legislative duties then will surely spill over now into your duties 
as Speaker of this House, and you will acquit yourself with 
pride and dignity in performing the duties of the Speaker. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the new 
members, the newly elected members of this House, both on the 
government side and the opposition side. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

106 
 

Some of the members of the opposition are well-known to me. 
We come from the same neck of the woods, and my special 
congratulations to them. 
 
I’d like to take this time to thank the people of Thunder Creek 
for re-electing me. I was very pleasantly pleased and surprised 
when that reaffirmation took place and had an extra thousand 
votes tacked on to it from the spring of 1985. 
 
It makes one feel good to think that the representation which 
you have done on behalf of your constituents has been 
represented, that the programs of the government which you 
represented have meant something to your constituents, and that 
was indeed a pleasure for me to have that type of majority in 
my favour in the recent election campaign. 
 
I might remind the member from P.A.-Duck Lake — I see he’s 
left — but that was the other by-election in 1985. 
 
My constituency, as almost everyone in this House knows, is a 
very large, sprawling agricultural riding. I think I have the 
distinction of being the only riding in Saskatchewan without 
some type of a newspaper. Some days that’s good; some days, 
bad. 
 
It ranges from the very fertile land of the Regina plains, some of 
the best wheat growing land in Saskatchewan, to the hills and 
ranch land of the Missouri Coteau, and to the advanced 
technology of our irrigated lands along Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
And I like to think, as other members have said, that it is a 
riding which represents very well the overall aspects of rural 
Saskatchewan and indeed agriculture, because you can find in 
my constituency just about every type of agricultural endeavour 
that anyone in this province has ever tried, or probably ever will 
try. 
 
It is for that reason that I really do take great pleasure in 
speaking in favour of this throne speech because it is a blueprint 
for growth in our province. And when I look at a constituency 
such as mine, I can see many opportunities for that growth. It 
means that we have to have optimism; it means that we have to 
look forward, that we have to come up with new ideas because 
to stand pat means stagnation. And for that reason, we need a 
blueprint; we need a four-year plan; we need to know where we 
are going. 
 
I also liked, Mr. Speaker, the commitment to the security of 
Saskatchewan families that was illustrated in that document. 
And though others may ridicule and belittle some of the 
protectionist measures in there, I like to think that our mortgage 
protection for home owners is a renewed trust with the home 
building and the home owning public of Saskatchewan. It’s a 
commitment for the next 10 years, and it gives confidence in 
that sector. 
 
I like to think that The Farm Land Security Act which will be 
reintroduced in this session of the legislature is a continuation 
of that commitment which we made two years ago to the farm 
families of this province, that they would not be foreclosed 
without proper jurisprudence 

and someone looking into their affairs and helping them out 
when they are dealing with both financial and legal institutions. 
 
I like our commitment to the continuation of building of our 
medical services in this province. As some of my colleagues 
have mentioned, we are now up to $1,200 per man, woman, and 
child in this province, and I don’t think that anyone can dispute 
that our medicare system is as good now as it ever was in the 
province’s history. 
 
I would like to go for a minute, if I may, Mr. Speaker, to some 
of the commitments which our government has made to my 
riding in particular, and expand that to some commitments that I 
felt have been kept to the province as a whole. 
 
I look at Thunder Creek and the obvious agricultural difficulties 
which have existed out there the last couple of years and I see a 
commitment by this government in 1986, through the 
production loan program of over $46 million in my riding. That 
commitment paid a lot of bills; that commitment bought a lot of 
fertilizer; that commitment paid for a lot of chemical which 
ensured that the farmers of my constituency would grow one of 
the best crops which they have ever had in their history. 
 
(2015) 
 
I look at the commitment to the red meat industry in my 
province, a commitment since the middle of 1985 which has 
meant over $6 million to the livestock cash advance system — a 
system that was long overdue because it helped take some of 
the humps and valleys out of the production of red meat. Most 
cattle men know that the big pay-day only comes once a year, 
when you sell that calf or feeder steer, and the next 11 months 
in between can be kind of lean at times. And I like to think that 
this program has gone a long way to stabilizing the red meat 
industry in my constituency and around the province. 
 
I like to think of the commitment that was made in 1985 when 
almost all of my constituency was in the throes of a very bitter 
and severe drought. There was over a $2 million commitment 
by the provincial government on top of the regular crop 
insurance payments which were made to producers in my 
constituency. And above and beyond that, Mr. Speaker, there 
was the over $5 million which came from the federal drought 
assistance program, which I like to think was put in place 
mainly because of the representations made by our Premier to 
the federal government. And I like to think that only he, 
amongst Canadian premiers, could have helped institute a 
program like that in such times of dire need that meant so much 
to the people of my constituency. 
 
I like to think of the oil royalty refund which will mean so much 
to the producers in my constituency as they go out to plant that 
1987 crop. Twenty-one cents a gallon means a lot when you 
burn up 10,000 gallons of diesel fuel in a spring seeding 
operation. 
 
And I would like to think of some of the long-term 
commitments which were made in 1982 which have meant so 
much to the people of my constituency. I think of the 214 
farmers that are part of the farm purchase  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

107 
 

program. They have an average yearly subsidy of $4,500 under 
that and I contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the land bank 
program which, in a far longer period of time, only placed 100 
farmers — thereabouts — in my constituency. And I doubt, sir, 
that very many of those are owning their own operation at this 
time. 
 
Over half of those 214 farmers that I speak of, Mr. Speaker, 
were intergenerational transfers, the very thing which we are 
attempting to do with that program. And if my constituency is 
any microcosm, if you will, of the province as a whole, then it 
is indeed a very successful program in that intergenerational 
transfer of land. 
 
I like to think of the 1,300 kilometres of natural gas line which 
have gone into Thunder Creek in the last three years — a 
convenience, if you will, which so many people in urban 
Saskatchewan took for granted for so long. A cheap source of 
energy, a cheap source of heating their homes, and it is now 
available by and large to the people in my constituency. I think 
of one very large hog operation which in its first year saved 
$60,000 in heating costs, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of savings 
mean money in the pocket of the producers in my constituency. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking about 
commitment, about living up tot he things which we said we 
would do as a PC government in this province, I suppose the 
crowning achievement came today. Because $415 million, 
which will be Saskatchewan’s share of a $1 billion deficiency 
payment, has come home today. It is something which our 
Premier spearheaded and fought for and indeed was keeping the 
trust with rural Saskatchewan when it came today. 
 
It will mean millions of dollars for producers in my 
constituency. It will mean millions of dollars to the small 
towns, to the people who have small businesses, to the people 
who supply the farm sector. It will mean thousands of dollars to 
the nearest urban centres, Regina and Moose Jaw. Recently 
there was a Statistics Canada report, Mr. Speaker, which said 
that 21 cents of every dollar which goes into a farmer’s pocket 
goes to the nearest urban centre. And I would think that all the 
people in the urban centres of our province would be awaiting 
that $415 million to our province because they are going to 
directly benefit from it. 
 
And I like to think of my own nearest urban centre, the city of 
Moose Jaw. I was born there, in the union hospital, received 
most of my education there — and I like to think it was a very 
find education. I lived there after my marriage in 1974 for eight 
and a half years, was a taxpayer in that city, and considered 
myself to be a Moose Javian like the other 35,000 that habituate 
there. Many members of my family live in that city. 
 
And it made me think and take issue a bit with my colleague 
across the way, the member from Moose Jaw North, who said 
in his maiden speech that this government had not done 
anything for the city of Moose Jaw. And I think that’s a bit of 
an unfounded criticism because many of the problems which 
my nearest urban centre, my trading area, is now going through, 
I feel have deeper roots than what have occurred in the last four 
and a half years. 

And I’d like to say to my colleague that from 1960 to 1982, a 
former member of the government when they were in across the 
way . . . He sat in the front bench, a very prominent minister for 
11 years from the city of Moose Jaw. And I did not see the 
Phillips Cable factory built at that time in the city of Moose 
Jaw; I did not see the Bader Bin establishment coming to the 
city of Moose Jaw; and I definitely did not see a provincial 
Crown corporation taken from the capital city and moved to the 
city of Moose Jaw in an attempt to spread the government of 
our province to the citizens of this province. 
 
I’m not saying that everything during that time period was bad, 
because it wasn’t. There were things done for our city. But I 
think when we talk about what needs to be done, and if we are 
placing blame, that perhaps a sharing should be done rather than 
just the last four and a half years, because I am very proud of 
Moose Jaw, and I want to see it grow and prosper because the 
direct relation between Moose Jaw and the people of my 
constituency is very intimate and will not be changed in the 
foreseeable future. And I believe that that intimate relationship, 
for the good of all of us, must grow and prosper. 
 
When you talk about building and development in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, I like to think that the initiatives made in 
the last four years were positive. I think of the Weyerhaeuser 
project for the city of Prince Albert, where we finally had an 
integrated forest products system in this province for the very 
first time, as being positive. 
 
It may take a few years before those positive results become 
apparent to everyone in this province, but I believe it will come 
because we are taking an asset which has never been used 
before and we are going to build upon it. We are going to have 
people employed using an asset which was never used before. 
And any time you do that, you only can improve the quality of 
life and the quality of jobs in this province. 
 
I like to think that Gainers, which will be the very first, if you 
will, totally value-added red meat system in this province, can 
only be a good thing for this province. And I know that the 
ownership of the Gainers plant has brought great derision and 
laughter from some people, but I once again will give Mr. 
Pocklington his due and see if he can produce. 
 
I firmly believe that the private sector is the way that this type 
of value-added industry should be added to our province 
repertoire, and I feel that any time we can ship packaged bacon 
or hams into one of the largest grocery markets in the world that 
we would be foolish to do otherwise, because once again we are 
using a resource, Mr. Speaker, which we have never used 
before, to the advantage of the people of this province. 
 
During the course of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker . . . I don’t 
know why this is. I thought I had an original thought here, but I 
also am going to refer to my grandmother. And I’ve heard it 
from both sides of the House in the last few days, and I suppose 
the reason I’m doing this is because I’m fortunate enough to 
have two of them still alive, and I like to think that they’re both 
great ladies, and ladies of some wisdom. They’re people that I 
respect because  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

108 
 

they’ve spent their entire life, if you will, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I would think in 92 and 88 years 
respectively, that you would learn some very valuable lessons 
over a period of time. 
 
I like to think of Grandmother Swenson in particular because 
she was born offshore as opposed to my other grandmother who 
was born in Canada. Grandmother Swenson walked out of the 
belly of a cattle boat in 1908 in Montreal, and I’m sure that 
many members of this House had relatives and people who 
experienced a similar type of situation. And I had to think that 
that took a heck of a lot of optimism and dedication to walk out 
of the belly of that cattle boat and get on a train and go on a 
wagon from Moose Jaw southward to a point in the prairie 
which was 20 miles south-west of a place that came to be called 
Assiniboia, and there was nothing there. Nothing at all. And to 
be there as a 10-year-old child when you had grown up in a 
major area of England must have been a fair shock to the 
system. And I can only think that that optimism and that 
dedication had to be there from a very early age in order to 
withstand the type of things that were necessary in those days. 
 
And there was definitely a dedication to building this province 
because you do not raise a family in the 1930s, Mr. Speaker, 
where you had to cover the table three times a day to keep the 
dirt out of the food, and wash the clothes that were constantly 
rubbed in that grime, and try to put three squares a day on that 
table when you could not grow anything in southern 
Saskatchewan. I think that took optimism and dedication. 
 
And you know what? My grandmother thought a lot of the CCF 
regimes of the 1940s and ‘50s. And she though a lot of them 
because they set about rebuilding Saskatchewan after the 
devastation of the ‘30s. And that was building. That was 
bringing power to rural Saskatchewan to make my 
grandmother’s life a little bit easier — things that people in 
urban areas had taken for granted. 
 
It meant a telephone, so that when sickness or joy occurred in 
the family, you could spread it around to your friends and 
relatives. Once again, something which was taken for granted 
by other people in our province. And that was why my 
grandmother was a great fan of the CCF. And that is why, 
today, my 88-year-old grandmother is a very strong supporter 
of our Premier because she still reads and listens and watches 
television, and she likes that attitude. She likes to think that we 
will not go back in time, but that we will have that optimism 
and dedication and we will build and grow in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We must take the strengths which so are inherently obvious to 
this province and we must build upon them. Because for us to 
do otherwise and for me in particular, the fourth generation on 
my farm, would be a disgrace to my heritage. And, sir, I did not 
go through two election campaigns and two nominations in the 
last 18 months to be a disgrace to my heritage. I am here to do a 
job, sir, and let’s get on with it. 
 
We must develop our oil and gas industry because it is there. It 
is a strength; it is something to build on. And until the recent 
downturn in the world energy picture, it was a very obvious 
strength in this province and to the 12,000 

newly employed people which were there after 1982. 
 
We must develop the fertilizer and farm chemical industry in 
this province because that is a $550 million mega-project that 
occurs every year here in this province, Mr. Speaker, as you 
well know. We, in rural Saskatchewan, in the production of 
food, spend that much per year. And I find it ludicrous, Mr. 
Speaker, that we in this province would truck in water from 
Ontario to spray on our fields. And I know that we have not had 
a great water reputation in the south of Saskatchewan in the 
recent past, but we’ve taken measures to make sure that it is 
drinkable in the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina now. And I 
would think that it is at least good enough to mix in with our 
farm chemical in order to get those nice little 10-litre jugs in a 
saleable position. 
 
(2030) 
 
And I would think that for us to do otherwise, to not look at 
those two particular industries when they mean so much to our 
province would be foolish and ridiculous. I like to think of the 
optimism which the hon. member from Rosetown spoke about 
when he talked about the irrigation potential in our province. In 
my constituency of Thunder Creek that potential is vast and 
untapped. And I look forward to working with my colleague on 
tapping that resource and making it something that 
Saskatchewan can use and build upon, because, once again, it is 
a resource that has never been used in our province to its full 
potential and can add so much to the everyday life of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When you think of the potato chips which each and everyone of 
us consume in the cafeteria here in this building, and you think 
that maybe they came from New Brunswick and maybe they 
came from Idaho, there is no reason at all, Mr. Speaker, that 
those particular potato chips cannot be grown under irrigation 
along Lake Diefenbaker and be here for the consumer of our 
province at a benefit to him and at a benefit to the producer of 
that potato. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to mention a few words about 
trade. And I’ve heard quite a bit of negative comment coming 
from across the way on the trade matters which have been on 
the minds of Canadians over the last year. And I know, in this 
province, as a producer of a primary product, that for us to 
think, to even attempt to think about living within our borders 
without having comprehensive trade with our major trading 
partners would not only be foolish, it would be disastrous. And 
I think only of the red meat industry in this province, 80-some 
per cent of which goes outside of our province. It is traded 
either in Eastern Canada, or to the United States of America, or 
the Pacific Rim. 
 
In my constituency, tomorrow morning there is a meeting, and I 
expect there will be several hundred people there talking about 
developing a 12,000 head feedlot. These 12,000 head will be 
turned over three times a year. They will use the natural assets 
of Lake Diefenbaker, the irrigation potential. They will use the 
feed grown there to feed the cattle to a fat-cattle status, a 
slaughter-cattle status, and that means many things. It means 
stability to the red meat industry in that part of my  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

109 
 

constituency and indeed many of the constituencies around it, 
because it’ll provide a market for those feeder cattle that are 
there every year. It will mean that Canada Packers in Moose 
Jaw and Intercon in Saskatoon may have to hire more people 
because they will have 36,000 head of cattle more to slaughter 
per year. 
 
And it will mean that a very drought-prone area of my 
constituency which has had to rely upon grain as a way of 
living may be able to diversify and perhaps protect themselves 
form some of the ups and downs of the farming market. 
 
And I think of that red meat industry, Mr. Speaker, and what 
would happen if that border were shut down to those producers 
when those cattle are finished out between 90 and 120 days. 
And if that border is shut down and that outlet is not there, Mr. 
Speaker, then this whole concept, which so many hundreds of 
farmers may be participating in, will go down the drain. And for 
us in this province as primary producers of products to think 
otherwise is disastrous. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that this throne 
speech, this blueprint for future development in Saskatchewan, 
is building on strengths. And we all know that when you use a 
blueprint, you have to use some foresight. You have to look into 
the future a little bit, and you definitely do not look into the 
past. And in this case we have a blueprint for building 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to congratulate my Premier and his government for this 
blueprint, for the speech which my colleagues so elegantly 
delivered. And I want to say as MLA for Thunder Creek that 
I’ll naturally be supporting this motion. I look forward to the 
many excellent programs which this government will bring to 
the people of Saskatchewan during its next four-year term. It’s a 
Progressive Conservative blueprint, something which I am very 
proud of. And it is something that I want to be a part of for the 
next four years. 
 
In my closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, I say this to the legislature. 
For those of you who oppose this Speech from the Throne and 
are saying no to building in Saskatchewan, and to those who are 
saying yes to this throne speech and who are saying yes to the 
future, then the future of Saskatchewan is ours. And on that 
note, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of the constituents of Thunder 
Creek, I support the motion in favour of the Speech from the 
Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I enter the debate today, I notice a happier occasion than the 
previous time when I entered debate. But I do want to take a 
moment to again congratulate you on your appointment to the 
Chair. 
 
And I also want to take this opportunity to thank . . . not to 
thank, but to congratulate each member of this legislature and 
you, Mr. Speaker, for the honour the people of Saskatchewan 
have bestowed upon us. 

As we begin our deliberations, it must be with a clear 
understanding that the people of this province have just 
temporarily delegated to us the authority to make rules 
regarding the administration of Saskatchewan — rules and 
administration, Mr. Speaker, which will best reflect the interests 
of the people who have elected us. 
 
It is my sincere hope that in some way I can use the lessons 
learned while I was growing up on a co-op farm over 100 
kilometres from the nearest city, which was Swift Current. I 
sincerely thank the people of Beechy and the district 
surrounding Beechy for offering me solid values which I was 
growing up there. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I hope that some of the things I learned over 
the past 12 years, while working for the largest agricultural 
co-operative in Saskatchewan, will help me better serve Regina 
North and the people of our great province. 
 
My appreciation also goes to the people of Regina North for the 
honour that they have bestowed in me, the honour of 
representing so many good, honest, hard-working and sincere 
people that make up the constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish not to offend any other MLA because I am 
sure that there are many Saskatchewan people that could fit 
nicely into Regina North, but the fact is that Regina North has 
the finest people in all of Saskatchewan. Regina North residents 
go daily about the job of keeping our province going by 
working in manufacturing industries, service industries, small 
businesses, in the public service and in agriculture, either 
directly as farmers or less directly as owners and employees of 
agricultural related businesses. 
 
Sadly, we have disproportionately high unemployment in 
Regina North, as trades people who have worked many years at 
Ipsco and in building trades are finding jobs all too few and 
farther and farther between. 
 
In Conservative Saskatchewan there were 2,000 fewer jobs in 
November of 1986 than there were in November of 1985. 
Saskatchewan was the only province in that one-year time 
period that had fewer jobs at the end of it than at the beginning. 
It is just simply not good enough. Sadly, many of the jobs lost 
have been lost to would-be working people of Regina North. 
 
The people of my constituency do not want anything more than 
a fair portion of jobs and opportunity for working people today. 
We don’t want anything more than a fair shake, but we will not 
accept anything less. 
 
Students and young people are facing the toughest times we’ve 
had for many years. Youth unemployment has been at crisis 
levels for much too long. Mr. Speaker, if we don’t address the 
unemployment crisis we will soon have adults in their mid-20s 
being offered their first jobs and them saying, what, me work? 
And they won’t understand that you have to appear at a certain 
time to go to work — through no fault of their own. We have to 
address the unemployment crisis. We must do a better job at 
creating permanent job at creating permanent jobs for a 
permanent future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned, I do look forward to  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

110 
 

representing Regina North residents in this legislature. As I 
have also stated, jobs and job creation is the first priority. We 
have seen the number of small-business bankruptcies escalate 
and grow to three times the number of bankruptcies that there 
were in 1981. Yet the Conservative government doesn’t see or 
hear the problems of small-business people and working people. 
They don’t hear or see because they are too busy with 
self-congratulating hoopla. 
 
Part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, results from the people in our 
society who are least able to defend themselves being attacked 
again and again by the government. How can any reasonable 
person or any reasonable government expect any one of the 
approximately 50,000 Saskatchewan workers working for 
minimum wage to survive? Assuming a 40-hour week, 52 
weeks a year, these people earn just $9,300 a year. 
 
I know that the Conservative rhetoric is, oh, but it’s only a 
starting point. But the sad part is, for most of these 50,000 
working men and women it is a long, long starting point. How 
long is it reasonable to be “a starter”? Is it one month, is it one 
year, or is it a lifetime? 
 
Members opposite by their actions and by the actions of their 
party, and the government in its first term, have shown nothing 
but callous contempt and disregard for minimum wage earners. 
The Premier, on the other hand, has recently hired a principal 
secretary at a cost to taxpayers of over $69,000 a year. Simple 
mathematics shows this is more money than 10 people working 
at minimum wage. And single parents on minimum wage don’t 
have expense accounts to further inflate their earnings. 
 
There are other examples, Mr. Speaker. I wonder how many 
minimum wages could be paid with Mr. Hill’s new salary. Do 
you think the Premier will ever disclose the amount? Is it more 
than when he was a judge? 
 
The point is, we have people being attacked and being held 
down and reduced to permanent poverty while others bask at 
the trough. 
 
We are entering the first session of a new legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, and in doing so I hope we appreciate the importance of 
this opportunity for a fresh new start. It is a time to review our 
priorities and give serious consideration to new ideas. 
 
This is particularly important for the government with respect to 
its policy regarding urban Saskatchewan. The massive 
condemnation of your old solutions by people in cities, towns, 
small towns, and villages, and the reduction of your support in 
rural Saskatchewan, should provide the government with clear 
evidence that their tired and old, worn solutions simply will no 
longer work, if they ever did work. 
 
(2045) 
 
When talking of old solutions, let’s look at the similarities 
between the Thatcher Liberal government and the present 
Conservative administrations. 

Both offered sweetheart deals to their big-business friends with 
no regard for the fact that Saskatchewan people would have to 
pay the final bill. Both set aside principles to engage in rampant 
patronage — patronage to line the pockets of wealthy friends. 
Some of this patronage eventually found its way back to the PC 
and Liberal party coffers. 
 
Thatcher’s was, and Devine’s is, characterized by public service 
staff cuts and a tax on the wages of people employed by the 
government. Both are characterized by their attacks on people 
receiving social assistance. 
 
Both have failed to properly fund our hospitals. The Liberals 
opted for deterrent fees while the present Tory government 
underfund hospital expansions and then they give lottery 
licences to make up the shortfall. Mr. Speaker, health care is no 
gambling matter. We must be serious about it. 
 
Both subscribe to a strange law of the jungle, where the 
government makes allies of the strong and attack the weak. 
 
And finally, both appear to be governments more preoccupied 
with their own political fortunes than those of the people they 
were elected to serve. The Liberals gerrymandered 
constituencies to maintain power; the conservatives appear 
ready to grant-mander constituencies to maintain power. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we’re living in a new world with new 
circumstances, new problems, new technologies, new social 
dynamics, and new challenges — a new world which can’t be 
governed by reincarnating the right-wing policies of R.B. 
Bennett or Ross Thatcher. Taking the worst of R.B. Bennett and 
the worst of Ross Thatcher and calling it Devine conservatism 
doesn’t make it any easier to take. 
 
The Premier has talked a lot about Expo ’86, and it was a good 
show. But do you remember Expo ’67 and the great sense of 
optimism that we Canadians felt at that time about our future? 
There were displays which gave us a glimpse of the high-tech 
future: a society of robots, computers, increased leisure time 
and widespread wealth and comfort. It’s a future which can still 
happen, but it is off to a rocky, rocky start. 
 
People are not being protected, and workers are coming in 
second to corporate profits. So today, Mr. Speaker, we see 
lay-offs, increased unemployment, calls for wage cuts for 
working people and larger profits for corporations which own 
the machines. The work week has not shrunk, but the 
work-force certainly has. The benefits of technology haven’t 
been shared fairly within our society. They’ve gone directly 
back to the multinationals, leaving working people more and 
more disadvantaged. 
 
There are major concerns occurring in agriculture. There are 
two sizes of Saskatchewan farms growing in number — farms 
under 325 acres, and farms over 1,500 acres. Both have 
different needs. 
 
Obviously, the smaller farms are now — smaller farmers, I 
should more correctly say — are now earning off-farm  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

111 
 

income. For the larger and still growing farms, machinery is 
getting more and more complicated with each passing year. 
Finance and administration of all sizes of farms is much more 
complex now than at any time in our history. 
 
Business people are finding the world changed also. There are 
fewer and fewer independent retailers. Bulk buying and bulk 
merchandising by franchisers and chain stores mean the true 
independent retailers are becoming an endangered species. 
 
People involved in food processing and small manufacturers 
have their own unique problems. 
 
The innovator may have a great idea or a great product, but it is 
unlikely to survive in a world where success or failure is 
determined by marketing giants like MacDonald’s 
Consolidated. 
 
Children are looking at a shrinking job market. I mentioned 
earlier StatsCanada had reported the loss of 2,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan between November 1985 and November 1986. 
These young people are facing increased pressure of all sorts — 
to succeed in school, to find a job, or even to survive at all in a 
world threatened with nuclear arms. 
 
The time has come, Mr. Speaker, for us to take control of our 
destiny; to chart our own course. We can’t solve the 
fundamental issues which we face today by having an 
unquestioning faith in what is, or what used to be. 
 
We can’t assume that the best interests of you or of I or our 
constituents is served by allowing the current imbalances in our 
economy to continue. It won’t serve the average business man, 
the farmer, or the working man very well. 
 
So let’s talk seriously about robots and computers to do the 
back-breaking and mundane labour. Let’s talk seriously about a 
shorter work week for working people. Let’s correct the rocky 
start to our future world, and distribute the benefits of 
technology widely. 
 
Let’s talk about agriculture and the need for machinery co-ops 
so farmers can save literally thousands of dollars each year and 
get their work done faster in the bargain. 
 
Let’s talk seriously about helping Saskatchewan vegetable 
producers form co-operatives to process and market their 
products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And let’s have increased Saskatchewan Research 
Council funding to help producers make the transition to 
processing. Let’s introduce legislation that gives our people a 
fair chance at market access. 
 
Why aren’t we doing research and development on import 
replacement of foodstuffs to ensure food quality, freedom from 
dangerous chemicals, and jobs here in Saskatchewan? Farmers 
and small-business people need our attention and assistance to 
make their future, and ours, more secure. 
 
Big business, the multinationals, take care of themselves.  

They go where the greatest profits are. Their commitment is to 
the profit-loss column, not to the needs of society. It is a fact of 
life which we accept. 
 
But we are in the business of caring for people, meeting the 
needs of society. We must set the conditions for these powerful 
institutions to deal with our citizens, on a one-on-one basis or 
collectively. We must also be prepared to accept a mix of 
private and public investment. 
 
Publicly run companies have a much greater sensitivity to the 
needs of our citizens and their employees. They offer us the 
opportunity to undertake new and innovative projects for the 
benefit of the people of this province. 
 
And when I speak of public enterprise, I speak of proud 
companies that have done much to unify Saskatchewan and 
help people socially and economically. Any move by the 
present government to sell off Crown corporations like SaskTel 
or Saskatchewan Government Insurance or Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company or Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan would be short-sighted and not in the best 
interests of the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Our future, Mr. Speaker, may, in fact, be 
enhanced by new forms of public enterprise rather than the 
direction the members opposite seem to want to take. 
 
Our children today are under an incredible amount of stress. 
They feel that they lack control of their future, and they do now. 
They face increasing pressure to excel in school, uncertainty 
about their chances for finding work even if they get a 
university degree or their journeyman’s paper, and uncertainty 
about the future of this planet which has far too many nuclear 
weapons. We need to do everything we can to free our children 
of this threat and to free ourselves of the threat of nuclear war. 
 
We should be telling the federal government to stop the cruise 
missile testing. We should be telling the federal government it 
is unacceptable that Canadian soil or Canadian territory should 
be in any way tainted with nuclear weapons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — We can manage our economy, Mr. Speaker, 
through that mix of private and public enterprise that I 
mentioned earlier, to ensure that the jobs are here. Now the 
members opposite may find public enterprise distasteful, but if 
you give a young person a choice between unemployment and 
working for SaskTel or SGI or PCS, they’ll take working for a 
Crown corporation every time. 
 
We can use public enterprise to manage unemployment, and we 
can follow through with talk of compassion for our young 
people in preventative medicine by giving them better 
recreational facilities and health classes at school which teach 
them how to handle stress and other things. 
 
First and foremost, however, we need governments  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

112 
 

which are committed to peace. For our part, the testing of cruise 
missiles, as I’ve mentioned, over Saskatchewan has done 
nothing to ease the minds of young people — certainly not the 
young people I have talked to — and we need to negotiate 
disarmament somehow. That’s got to be more realistic than 
preparation for war. 
 
If we take the initiative, we can ensure that there are more and 
better opportunities for working people, for Saskatchewan 
small-business people, farmers, and for students who hope to 
join the work-force in the future. It could be the kind of society 
where each and every one is able to take a greater measure of 
control over our own future — a less stressful, more satisfying, 
a more co-operative society. We can build it, but we have to 
start by building on the foundation. The foundation is there. It 
has been shaken during the course of the last four and a half 
years, but it remains intact. We can indeed use it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have problems and we have opportunities. 
The problems are solvable and the opportunities are great. It’s a 
situation which gives us reason to feel very optimistic about the 
future of this province and the people, if we choose to govern 
wisely. 
 
But where are we now, Mr. Speaker, and how does this throne 
speech prepare us for the challenging new future which awaits 
us? It offers more give-aways of non-renewable resources to 
what are largely out-of-province companies, companies which 
have a greater obligation to profit, as I mentioned earlier, than 
to the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan — companies 
which will pack their bags and leave when our finite supply of 
resources runs out. Resources and resource revenues can be 
used and should be used to help finance our social programs. 
 
The throne speech offers more tax on the needy and the 
unemployed through further reviews of our social assistance 
programs and there is little doubt in my mind that this 
government will be stepping up its attacks on the needy. There 
cannot be any justification for attacking the people that this 
government has failed to protect in the past. 
 
The throne speech offers hope of a preventative health care 
program, an objective which I support, Mr. Speaker. But 
somehow I question the government’s dedication to this cause 
when it encourages alcohol advertising, cancels the fresh food 
subsidy for northern people, and lays in the same bed as Brian 
Mulroney, a Prime Minister who is putting the wishes of 
multinational drug companies for inflated profits ahead of the 
health of Canadians. 
 
It is a throne speech from a Premier who four and a half years 
ago led the people of Regina to believe that he would solve 
their water problems and the water quality problems with a 
pipeline from lake Diefenbaker. Instead, we see continuing 
water supply problems. We’ve seen a partially effective carbon 
filtration plant. We also have seen massive unemployment and 
laid off employees at Ipsco. So much for long-term planning, so 
much for social planning. We need a secure water supply for 
Regina, and we need it soon. 

It is a government which talks of its business sense, but is 
unable to balance its books or even to accurately forecast the 
size of its deficit. 
 
This government also dispenses patronage freely and with no 
apologies and no remorse. The present government went into an 
advertising frenzy with public funds before calling the recent 
provincial election, and that same government has already 
shown its disregard for the legislative process and intends, I 
believe, to flaunt is regard for democracy by rewriting the 
electoral boundaries of this province in a manner which they 
hope will give them a chance to survive in the next election. 
 
(2100) 
 
With respect to the areas I will serve as a spokesman for my 
party, let me make the following observations: the Department 
of Co-operation and Co-operative Development had a staff of 
75 people in fiscal year 1981-82. That is now down to 59.3 in 
fiscal ’86-87. While I have no trouble with governments finding 
efficiencies and cutting the fat, I must wonder if these staff cuts 
are part of the reason for the lack of accomplishments by this 
department. The need for co-ops has never been greater than it 
is right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — SGI has been run into the ground by the 
members opposite — rate increases, service cuts and inattention 
to pressing problems like liability insurance are only the tip of 
the iceberg. Automobile owners, businesses, home owners, 
mobile home owners, school boards and municipalities have 
spoken out, but their concerns keep falling on deaf ears. What 
has happened, Mr. Speaker, to the promise in the previous 
throne speech that we would have a “made in Saskatchewan” 
liability insurance rate for our school units and our 
municipalities. Where is it? Nowhere. 
 
There is little doubt that Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company has not grown to more effectively serve the people of 
this province. The number of buses owned and the routes served 
have decreased under the Conservatives, while the average age 
of the buses has increased dramatically, and the reason for the 
age increase of the fleet is that the present administration has 
chosen to direct Saskatchewan Transportation Company to sell 
some relatively new buses and trade them in for older units. I 
just don’t see the business sense of that. If the government 
wants though, I’ve got . . Well I have a vehicle that I’d be glad 
to trade with them. Let’s put it that way. And I think I could do 
very well. 
 
In Wascana Centre, Mr. Speaker, Regina’s showpiece has not 
been given the financial or the moral support it needs. It could 
become the magnet which attracts more tourists to our city and 
our province and it could provide even better recreational 
opportunities for the people of this community. We will be 
watching to see what happens over the next term of government 
in that area. 
 
We have a wealth of new opportunities before us, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a province and a people full of promise  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

113 
 

and hope; together we can make a better Saskatchewan. Let’s 
just remember that we are here to serve the people of this great 
province. 
 
Just before I close, Mr. Speaker, I too would appreciate the 
liberty of acknowledging some family that has been very 
supportive of me. My wife Lorna is up in the visitors’ gallery at 
this moment, and she has been my best critic, my best 
supporter, and a real help to me as I’ve gone through my 
political career. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I would also be remiss if I did not mention my 
grandmother, who was the first woman elected to represent my 
party back in 1944, along with Tommy Douglas. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. And I am sure that if my 
grandmother were alive today she would join me in heartily 
welcoming the three proud New Democrats we have — the 
three proud women we have representing the New Democratic 
Party today. And I take my hat off to our three good MLAs that 
we have now, today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the amendment to the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise from my seat for 
this evening, for the very first time in this Assembly to 
represent the constituency of Moosomin in support of the recent 
throne speech presented by His Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
And I, too, say thank you to the Moosomin electorate for a new 
and enlarged mandate for a Progressive Conservative MLA to 
represent them here in this legislature in this term. 
 
As well, I congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as 
Speaker of this House, and I am confident that you will 
administer the office of Speaker fairly and effectively. 
 
I also take the time to congratulate all members on their success 
in the recent election campaign. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the strong and 
able representation provided to the Moosomin constituency 
since 1975 by the former member, Larry Birkbeck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I believe today is a rather 
significant day in the history of our province. Before I was 
elected to this Assembly, I was quoted in a newspaper article 
with the following comments: 
 

The leadership of the Premier, the member for Estevan, has 
been one of the main strengths of the 

Progressive Conservative government since its election in 
1982. He has led the government with vigour, determination, 
a positive attitude, despite the economic hardships of the last 
few years. And he has gone to the wall for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 

 
There is no doubt in my mind that the Premier best exemplifies 
the qualities required to take this province into the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not pretend to be a prophet, but I fully believe 
that statement has been borne out here today, with the 
announcement of over $400 million for the pockets of 
Saskatchewan farm families, an announcement that many of my 
constituents will welcome and even now are saying, thank you 
for thinking of us. 
 
The delivery of the $1 billion deficiency payment for Canadian 
farmers facing the unfair subsidy programs of the United States 
and the European Economic community is in a very big way 
due to the efforts of our Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this great province made a clear 
decision on October 29th of this year to say no to the past. It 
was a clear and conscious decision and with it went any support 
for confrontation and negativism. 
 
The farm families of this province do not want rhetoric. They 
want delivery, and today they got it. I cannot emphasize this 
enough, Mr. Speaker, the importance of today’s announcement. 
The people we represent are rational and realistic people. As 
producers in an industry that is the lifeline of this province, they 
are not, nor have they ever been, looking for handouts. 
 
Yesterday, for example, while stopped at a service station in my 
constituency, a farmer approached me and said, “Thank you for 
your help and let the Premier know that we say thank you.” He 
also added, “We do not want handouts, but we want a 
government that cares when we are in need.” And I was proud 
to assure him that we do care, and we will continue to listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — His message was simple, Mr. Speaker. Farmers 
simply want some protection from a situation they are neither 
responsible for nor have control over. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, today they got it. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
have received that protection alongside new opportunities since 
your Progressive Conservative government was formed in 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap. A responsible government must 
protect the livelihood and prosperity of its people. And it must 
provide a vision for the future. Your Progressive Conservative 
governments track record speaks for itself. No government in 
this province has ever done more, and as outlined in the Speech 
from the Throne, we are going to continue building on what is 
now a strong and stable foundation. 
 
To make my point, Mr. Speaker, let me highlight a few 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

114 
 

examples. The introduction of the first ever Saskatchewan 
pension plan for home-makers, small businesses, farmers and 
part-time workers,; exemption from education health tax on all 
clothing, footwear and yard goods under $300; creation of the 
senior citizens’ heritage program providing almost $40 million 
for our elderly; a 100 per cent increase to the Saskatchewan 
income plan for senior citizens; construction of 540 senior 
citizen housing units; the revitalization of nursing home bed 
construction program, which approved over 1,500 new beds 
since 1982 and eliminated a 6-year moratorium; creation of the 
Saskatchewan Home Program to provide new opportunities and 
provide increased security and a better life for home owners and 
their families. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, today while having lunch I had the 
privilege of talking with a tradesperson involved in home 
construction in this city. This is what he had to say regarding 
the home program. This home program is one of the best 
government programs any government has ever come up with. 
And of course it was very easy for me to agree with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few examples. 
 
One of the major concerns of people everywhere is 
employment. Since 1982 our Progressive conservative 
government has consistently been among the leading provinces 
with the fewest unemployed and the most new jobs created. 
 
Our success, Mr. Speaker, has come as a result of our 
commitment of government resources an dour encouragement 
of small business and a diversification of our economy. 
 
As indicated by the Speech from the Throne, these efforts will 
continue and will be combined with new thrusts in tourism and 
the development of manufacturing for agricultural chemicals 
and fertilizers, support for technological advancement, and 
further efforts to secure new industry in our province. 
 
We proved to the world through Expo ’86 that we have the 
capabilities, the resources and the people to compete at the very 
best levels. As our Premier said recently, we simply cannot 
afford to stand still. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel the magnet again pulling, and I’m again 
drawn to speak on our accomplishments in agriculture. I know 
they are many, but I’ll do my best not to run out the clock. 
 
The constituency of Moosomin is like most in this province. We 
depend almost exclusively on the fortunes of farmers. When our 
farmers suffer, the businesses in our communities suffer, and 
that is what I got from every business person in our 
constituency — was to do everything we could for agriculture, 
because it meant a lot to them. To put it simply, the money 
stops flowing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the efforts and direction of our Premier, 
agriculture has survived its worst attack in 50 years. As a result, 
the farmers and their families who are so vital to the 
communities they represent are still in  

operation today, despite the grasshoppers and the drought and 
low commodity prices and many other problems they have 
faced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while many of my colleagues have already 
mentioned a large number of the programs that have protected 
our producers, I too must highlight these initiatives because of 
their positive impact on the farmers in my riding: the 
production loan program which provided over $19,000 per 
farmer; the farm purchase program which 5,700 farmers, mostly 
young, took advantage of; the farm fuel program which was 
created through oil royalties; the farm land security program for 
which our government will propose legislation that will extend 
its provisions for another year to further protect farm families, 
and, Mr. Speaker, many many more. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that in your Progressive 
Conservative government’s last budget, agriculture increased by 
$118 million — more than double that of the previous year. 
And the largest increase in the history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not rhetoric — that is commitment, 
delivery, and genuine proof that your Progressive Conservative 
government cares about the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2115) 
 
That same caring and commitment has been displayed to every 
sector of this province. Our commitment to education and 
health care came at a time when almost every other province in 
the country was cutting back. Instead our government believed 
that we must build our future by providing security against 
illness, and new opportunities for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the people proved on October 20th, we do not 
have to apologize for these commitments. Nor do we apologize 
for the construction and renovation of schools in the Moosomin 
constituency: Churchill and McLeod schools — $824,000; 
Wapella school — $273,000; Parkland High School in Wawota 
— $875,000; McNaughton High School in Moosomin — 
$32,000; Langbank school — $166,000; and Rocanville school 
— $131,000, plus an additional two projects at the Rocanville 
school, totalling $195,000. 
 
Nor, Mr. Speaker, do we apologize for the new 30-bed special 
care home in Wawota or the 32-bed special care home in the 
communities of Whitewood. And both communities expressed 
over and over and over again how pleased they were with this 
government in finally listening to them and giving them a 
service they so badly needed. 
 
Your Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, is 
listening to the people of Saskatchewan. We hear them when 
they tell us that we must make more efficient and effective use 
of government resources. We hear them when they tell us that 
they want our government to continue building for the future 
through further economic development and diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear the people tell us that they want this 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

115 
 

government to continue providing protection against difficult 
economic times. We hear the people when they tell us we must 
continue co-operating and consulting with individuals and 
groups in order to fight drug and alcohol abuse, especially 
amongst our young people. 
 
Since 1982, your Progressive Conservative government and its 
representatives have been listening. I stand before you today as 
a proof of that statement. And I must repeat, Mr. Speaker, that it 
has been the leadership of our Premier that is behind every 
accomplishment accredited to this government. 
 
I am indeed extremely honoured, Mr. Speaker, to lend my 
support to the Speech form the Throne, and I am eagerly 
awaiting all opportunities to serve the people of the Moosomin 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
participate in the throne speech debate this evening. I would 
like to say that I’m rising in support of our leader’s amendment 
to the throne speech. 
 
I would first like to congratulate the newly elected members of 
this legislature, and to congratulate those that have been 
returned. 
 
I know it can be a very trying time. I’m sure members who 
were in very close election campaigns, like Regina Wascana 
and the Turtleford constituencies, can appreciate the nervous 
moments during election night when they’re watching 
television or listening to the radio as the returns come in as to 
whether or not they’ve actually retained their seat in the 
legislature. I recognize that members work very hard during 
their term, that they are elected members of the legislature, and 
are anxious to become re-elected. 
 
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy 
Speaker, on your election as Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I notice that you approached your Chair with some reluctance, 
Mr. Speaker. But even this government, I want to assure you, 
does not hang the Speaker any more as they did in tradition in 
the older days. 
 
Don’t be sure of that, one of the members is saying. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the government on their 
re-election. I say that with some hesitancy, but I do believe that 
we’ll have a much better government than we had between 
1982 and this election, where you have a stronger opposition in 
the legislature. And a stronger opposition always makes for 
better government than a legislature that has a reduced number 
of opposition members. 
 
I would like to welcome the Pages to the Legislative Assembly. 
I know that it will be a good experience for you. And I’m sure 
that through your endeavours through your lifetime you’ll look 
back on your time here as being a pleasant and learning 
experience with, I’m sure, some frustrations, the same as many 
of the members of the  

Legislature go through from time to time. 
 
I would like to dedicate my speech this evening to a long-time 
friend of mine, Jim Murdock, who is in the Regina Plains 
Hospital this evening. I’m sure that my colleagues here, at least 
on this side of the House, will know Jim well and wish him a 
speedy recovery from Regina Plains Hospital where he has 
undergone surgery. And we do wish him a very speedy 
recovery. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, was hard to recognize as a 
throne speech, coming from the same government that has just 
some six or seven weeks ago gone through a provincial election 
campaign and that the province was very, very prosperous in 
the month of October and in the month of September of 1986. 
And now that the throne speech comes down the month of 
December, they say that the province of Saskatchewan 
continues to face difficult economic conditions. 
 
I find this a little hard to reconcile with the exuberance about 
the economy just a few short weeks ago, and I refer to it more 
as an illusion of prosperity that we experienced through the 
media and through speeches, through work of members on the 
government side. 
 
During the election campaign it was reported in the media and 
by members on the government side that all eyes of the 
province, in fact western Canada, were on the Battlefords. And 
certainly many of those eyes were on the Battlefords, but the 
Battlefords did not return an incumbent to the legislature, and I 
am privileged and honoured that I was able to gain the 
confidence of the electors in the Battlefords constituency and 
take my seat here in the Legislative Assembly for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
My commitment is to give long and dedicated service to the 
constituency of the Battlefords through this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I see that members of the government side are 
very happy to see me here as well, and I’m pleased to be here 
with you, many of whom I know quite well. 
 
One of the things that happened during the election campaign 
with the Battlefords constituency was that the people of the 
Battlefords constituency actually proved that it was a 
constituency that could not be bought. And I’m sure you’re 
disappointed in the results of the Battlefords constituency, as a 
very few people I would say are disappointed in the Battlefords 
as well, because of the great illusion of prosperity that was there 
in the Battlefords. 
 
There are many things that we promised, many things that were 
actually under construction, but the people that make the 
difference in election campaigns said that things weren’t so 
great in the Battlefords and they wanted to look at something a 
little bit different. They wanted to look at an opportunity for 
jobs in their home communities, in North Battleford and the 
town of Battleford. And they wanted to have an appreciation for  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

116 
 

some compassion. And one of the things I think that will 
happen over the term of this legislature is that there will be 
more compassion from this government than what we’ve seen 
during the period from 1982 until the election that we’ve just 
gone through. 
 
The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, is a totally urban constituency. 
We don’t have any rural area in The Battlefords constituency; 
it’s a self-contained riding. You don’t have the situation like 
you have in Prince Albert, or like you have in Saskatoon, or 
Regina where you have other urban constituencies within the 
same centre. And it’s a very easy riding to represent in that the 
people have many common interests — it’s very compact. And 
I have some appreciation for members who represent large rural 
ridings or northern ridings where you have great miles to cover 
and many, many people to see in many, many communities 
with a diversity of interests that’s even greater than that of the 
Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The mainstay, of course, in The Battlefords is agriculture. 
Agriculture has been number one in the province overall for as 
long as we’ve been a province, and likely will continue to be for 
many, many years into the future. 
 
We had some hopes for the oil industry in the Battlefords area. 
In the Battlefords area many activities concerning the oil patch 
came in to the Battlefords under the administration of the 
Leader of the Opposition, who was formerly the premier of 
Saskatchewan. I think of companies like G L M Tanks in North 
Battleford, who came there and started to produce tanks for the 
heavy oil fields. I think of Gulf Oil, their heavy oil division that 
came to the Battlefords during the term of New Democrats in 
the administration of the province of Saskatchewan and are still 
there today. They sometimes say that if the government changes 
they’ll have to move, but I believe that to be more political 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, than I do actual fact. 
 
We also have had some disappointments in the oil industry 
around the Battlefords. Recently, just prior to the election 
campaign, we had an enhanced oil recovery project that the 
community of Meota, and although that is outside of the 
constituency of the Battlefords, it certainly had a very large 
impact on North Battleford and the town of Battleford. Many of 
the employees lived in the community of the Battlefords but 
worked on the heavy oil recovery project. 
 
Canterra was the operator of that project, and I think they got a 
bit shaky when the world oil price dropped. And I can 
appreciate that some of those things are beyond the control of a 
provincial government or even a federal or national 
government, in that world oil prices are a difficult thing for 
provincial and federal governments to have any control over or 
to actually do anything about. 
 
But one of the reasons I think that Canterra actually moved out 
of the heavy oil recovery project at Meota was the fact that this 
government opposite didn’t show the confidence through 
Saskoil, which is a provincial Crown corporation, to maintain 
the majority of their work, the majority of their exploration and 
development within the province of Saskatchewan. When 
Saskoil was given, I would call, an extension of their mandate 
to move  

outside of the province of Saskatchewan, that gives very little 
confidence to the private oil companies — oil companies in the 
private sector — to remain in the province of Saskatchewan and 
develop our resources here. 
 
And I would think that a provincial Crown corporation has 
more to do than to look at the bottom line profits. I can 
appreciate that companies in the private sector have to look at 
their bottom line. They have to look at if they’re profitable, 
whether or not they’re going to be able to exist over the long 
term, whether they’re going to be able to pay dividends to their 
shareholders, and so the profit margin is a very important factor 
to them. But Saskoil — although I would hope that Saskoil 
would always be able to pay their own way, make a profit for 
the people of Saskatchewan and to give us a window on the oil 
industry — Saskoil has more than that mandate. They have a 
mandate, I think, to show confidence in the resources of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And lo and behold, when Saskoil started to move major 
portions of their operations outside of the province of 
Saskatchewan, all of a sudden Canterra, the operator of the 
heavy oil recovery project, also moved away. They closed down 
the Meota field. Families moved out of The Battlefords and 
there was a great void left there. 
 
I would like to go back to the election campaign just briefly. 
The Conservative Party and, in fact, the former member of the 
legislature seem to be very bitter from the election loss. I can 
understand people being deeply depressed, deeply upset about 
losing an election campaign because all of us, regardless of 
which political party we represent, we put our heart and soul 
into an election campaign, and we put our heart and soul into 
the job that we do. And so the feelings are much the same. If 
you win, you’re happy, you’re jubilant, you feel that you have 
been given a new mandate by the people in the constituency 
that you represent. 
 
(2130) 
 
And the same is when you are defeated, you feel depressed, you 
feel let down because you have put so much into the election 
campaign and you lose it because the voters of the constituency 
make up their mind as to who it is they want to represent them. 
And I do pass on my condolences to the former member of the 
legislature, but I would also provide a word of caution that 
when he refers to — or his organization, I should say more 
accurately — refers to illegalities, discrepancies during the 
election campaign and on election day, I would remind him that 
it is the party opposite in government who appoints the election 
machinery, and I would like once for some of the people who 
are making accusations of illegalities against myself and against 
the people who work for me, as to what that is. If one continues 
to cry “sour grapes”, I think it is a negative factor towards them 
if they ever again want to seek re-election. 
 
And I’m happy to get on with the job of representing the people 
of The Battlefords in this legislature, and I pledge myself to do 
my utmost best to represent them fairly and in an unpartisan 
way, as you, Mr. Speaker, in your role is  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

117 
 

taking the Chair of this very prestigious House; and the 
prestigious role that you have is that you have to deal 
non-partisan. You have to assure freedom of speech and 
freedom of the activities within the rules of the legislature, and I 
want to commit myself to performing that same role to 
constituents of The Battlefords constituency. 
 
And I want to have people feel free to call upon me, whether 
they are New Democrats, or whether they are Liberals — not 
many of them around mind you, Mr. Speaker — or whether 
they’re Conservatives, or whether they’re people who have 
given up hope on our institutions and our systems, to call on me 
to have me provide them the service as best I can as their 
member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
One of the members in speaking this evening, Mr. Speaker, 
referred to their heritage; in fact a few members have done that. 
 
I’d like to point out to the credit of Meadow Lake that we 
actually — and one of the member opposite who’s actually 
representing the Meadow Lake constituency thought that I 
should mention this this evening — that we actually this 
evening have three home-grown members of the Legislature 
that were born and grew up in the town of Meadow Lake. 
 
So the town of Meadow Lake feels very well represented, and I 
wouldn’t want the member from Meadow Lake to take all the 
credit for this. There’s two members on the opposition side of 
the House now that will keep an eye on Meadow Lake as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So, in fact, we do have the member that 
currently represents Meadow Lake, the member that currently 
represents Regina Lakeview, and myself representing the 
Battlefords constituency that are all home-grown people from 
the town of Meadow Lake. At least there are some people that 
feel they have raised us with good morals and given us good 
influence to carry forward and perform a meaningful role in the 
Legislative Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also like, Mr. Speaker, to touch briefly on my major 
critic role which is the Department of Highways. I look forward 
to working with the hon. member from Melfort — he’s here in 
the House this evening — and I would like very much to meet 
with him and members of his department, the public employees, 
to discuss the highway program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I look very much to revamping the Gardiner golf course of the 
province, more commonly in some cases referred to as the 18 
holes per mile over the provincial highway system. And I’m 
sure the member from Melfort wants to correct that as much as 
I do, and I look forward to working with him over this term of 
the 21st Legislative Assembly for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the things that happened in the throne speech, Mr. 
Speaker, were a little disappointing to me. There were a couple 
of things that I think warrant some mention that were not 
touched on in the throne speech and, granted,  

may come up in the next session — the throne speech prior to 
the next session. 
 
One, in particular, is the freedom of information Act that was 
promised during the 1982 election campaign, and I would like 
to see come about during this 21st Legislative Assembly for the 
province. 
 
I know that we’ve had laid before us, by the hon. member for 
Meadow Lake, the documents concerning the Weyerhaeuser 
agreement and we do appreciate that. Although they are very 
complex set of documents, we are going through them with 
some diligence to determine whether the people of 
Saskatchewan have got a fair deal out of this government. 
 
We tend to think that they haven’t, at this point in time, and we 
will be putting forward some alternatives that we think would 
be better than the situation that we have now. We do not think, 
on a very brief overview looking at the documents, that giving 
away some $240 million worth of assets in return for the 
promise of possibly, maybe, likely a paper-mill in the province 
is actually worth the risk. I think that we’ve actually got a poor 
deal out of the Weyerhaeuser agreement. The people in Prince 
Albert, I guess, are starting to refer to it as the P.C. pulp deal, 
and I hope that we can work in a more meaningful way in this 
new Legislative Assembly. 
 
Also I think, Mr. Speaker, under the freedom of information 
Act, something that’s very dear to me in the Battlefords 
constituency is the deal with Gainers and Peter Pocklington. Of 
course some people in the Battlefords are referring to that now 
as the P.C. pork deal, and a lot of people view the P.C. pork 
deal with a lot of scepticism. 
 
The deal that was launched seemed to be a diversity in the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan where we were 
getting into more processing, which in turn should help the 
agricultural industry. And that processing would provide jobs 
for people in the Battlefords and the Battlefords are, but several 
deadlines have passed. It didn’t open in July, and it didn’t open 
in August, and it didn’t open in September, and it didn’t open in 
October, and never opened November, and some people feel 
that scepticism more strongly now than they did a few months 
before. 
 
Several hundred people have applied for jobs working in the 
bacon processing plant, and they’re disappointed that those jobs 
are not coming about, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know the reason 
why it hasn’t opened. Freedom of information at least would 
give us some insight as to what the deal was that was launched 
between Peter Pocklington, Gainers, the province of 
Saskatchewan and the city of North Battleford. But much of 
what we have to do is a little bit of guesswork, filling in 
between the lines what we hear from the members of the 
government, and that’s not enough. Freedom of information 
would provide us with those details. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the information that the people in 
The Battlefords look for is that they wonder . . . A plant that 
operates at full capacity would require 50,000 pork bellies per 
week to go through that  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

118 
 

processing plant. Well there’s only 13,000 pork bellies 
produced in the whole province of Saskatchewan. They are 
currently taken up by Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon and 
a few other meat processors around the country and within the 
province. Where are these pork bellies coming from? They 
would have to import 50,000 pork bellies a week. Are they 
available? Do they not have the money in place to purchase the 
pork bellies? 
 
Another thing that goes around The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, is 
that Gainers doesn’t have the funds to put up front to get the 
state of the art equipment to put into the bacon processing plant. 
And if that’s true, and if they can’t get credit, I think it’s a 
disastrous situation in terms of planning that you can’t put your 
plant and your equipment in place to make the system operate. 
And that disturbs me a little bit, and it disturbs the people of 
The Battlefords. 
 
Freedom of information would also, I think, give us a bit more 
of an idea where the other plants are going. When the Gainers 
deal was first announced, they talked about the bacon plant 
which has graciously -—and I'm appreciative of it — has come 
to The Battlefords. And we have great hopes for that bacon 
plant and great hopes for diversity in the agriculture industry in 
terms of our economy in the province of Saskatchewan. But 
where, in fact, is the slaughtering plant going? Where is the 
processing plant going? And where is this . . . Pardon me, the 
member from Meadow Lake says it’s going to Meadow Lake. I 
doubt that very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know more about 
what’s going on in government, Mr. Speaker, than what they 
do. And I think that freedom of information would overcome 
some of that. 
 
The other thing that was omitted in the throne speech that I 
want to refer to is there was no mention of a department of 
seniors or an agency for seniors. Many seniors’ organizations 
within the province would like very much to have one 
department or one agency where they can go and bare their 
grievances and express their desires and wishes to government, 
without having to go to the Department of Social Services, 
Department of health, Department of Supply and Service, 
Department of Highways, the whole broad range of provincial 
government departments. 
 
I think that our pioneers, the people who have built this 
province and done a very good job of it, should have that. It’s 
something that members opposite on the government side have 
supported from time to time and I’d like to see — if not in this 
throne speech which it wasn’t, at least in some throne speech — 
that that situation will, in fact, be addressed. Of course there are 
many other things that were not addressed in the throne speech, 
but those are two that came to me immediately that I wanted to 
mention in my first address to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would like to go back to the very beginning of the throne 
speech. When I talked earlier about this illusion of prosperity 
during the campaign, and now that we’re actually into the 
nitty-gritty of things — the government has to govern, and the 
opposition has to provide some  

constructive criticism — that a lot of the blame for our difficult 
economic conditions is blamed on world commodity prices and 
protectionist measures. And granted, there is some problem 
with that, and again I state, as in the oil industry, there are some 
things about our agricultural industry — or any time we have to 
export anything that are beyond the control of our government 
here in Saskatchewan or on behalf of the Government of 
Canada. But it can’t all be blamed on that. It can’t all be blamed 
on the subsidies from the United States to their agricultural 
producers and to the European economic community who 
subsidize their farmers very heavily. We can’t always control 
that, but what we can do is we can have a little better planning 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that one of the members this evening mentioned the 
problem of the deficit, and formerly, when I was a member of 
parliament for The Battlefords-Meadow Lake constituency, I 
spoke against the deficit that was being created by the federal 
government. And I don’t speak against deficits for the sake of 
speaking against deficits themselves. It seems to me that there’s 
nothing wrong with going into a deficit position, Mr. Speaker, if 
it’s some investment in the future that you’re going to get back 
a return, or that that investment will be there for a long period 
of time and you have some plan to pay for it. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Mayfair, or Fairview I believe it 
was, who spoke this evening, pointed out that in 1982, the fiscal 
year ending March 31, 1982, the last full year that New 
Democrats were responsible for in the province of 
Saskatchewan, there was a surplus of $139 million in the 
province of Saskatchewan in terms of the general operating 
revenue of the province. Well, between then and now, under a 
Conservative administration, Mr. Speaker, we’ve accumulated a 
very large deficit, in excess of $2 billion. Now I could even 
accept a deficit of $2 billion if it had been a planned deficit, but 
it’s not a planned deficit. Granted, the ministers of Finance 
projected deficit budgets every year that they brought in a 
budget in the province of Saskatchewan under a Conservative 
administration. But when the books were tallied, the deficit was 
much, much larger than that that was projected. And what that 
tells me, Mr. Speaker, is that the government has no plan. And 
if they don’t have any plan, how do they know that what they’re 
doing is successful or not. Or if they do have a plan, they’re not 
sticking to it. 
 
And it seems to me that the government over the past four and a 
half years has ruled by public opinion poll. And I’d ask you to 
stop that. It never does a government any good to rule by public 
opinion polls. Every time there’s a problem, a shift in the public 
opinion polls will show up, and the government over the past 
four and a half years has seemed to throw out some money over 
here and throw out some money over there. 
 
And it seems to me that he government over the past four and a 
half years has ruled by public opinion poll. And I’d ask you to 
stop that. It never does a government any good to rule by public 
opinion polls. Every time there’s a problem, a shift in the public 
opinion polls will show up, and the government over the past 
four and a half years has seemed to throw out some money over 
here and throw  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

119 
 

out some money over there. 
 
So, of course, when it comes to the end of the fiscal year they 
can’t evaluate their program because they’ve never stuck to any 
plan that they’ve put in place as a government. And that’s a 
disastrous situation to get in, and I say that in a non-partisan 
way, whether it’s a New Democrat government or whether it’s a 
Conservative government. If you’ve got a plan — you’ve got to 
have a plan — but if you don’t stick to that plan, you’ll never 
know if it’s worked, and you’ll get yourself into increasingly 
difficult situations which we will never be able to pay off. 
 
(2145) 
 
Just in the last fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, or I should say in the 
current fiscal year, there were some $200 million allotted for 
interest, just to serve the debt of the province of Saskatchewan 
— the debt that was not there under New Democrats. And for 
$200 million, Mr. Speaker, the government could have built 33 
Gainers bacon processing plants in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Over half the constituencies in the province 
could have had a meat processing plant of some kind just in 
what you allowed to be paid for interest in this fiscal year. 
 
I think there’s something wrong with that economics that’s 
there, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s a dire situation that we’re 
getting ourselves into. So for heavens sakes, if you’re going to 
deficit finance, invest in something that will bring us a return. 
Don’t get into a situation of perpetually deficit financing to 
please the people of the province of Saskatchewan, because you 
can never please all the people all of the time. 
 
And the true test of the pudding is whether or not you can stick 
to a plan over a period of a complete legislature, a period that 
you are in government. You’ve made your decisions; you’ve 
stuck to them; you’re compassionate; you show that you’re 
good planners; you show that you’re good administrators; then 
the people will elect you if that’s the fact and case. But people 
will not continue to support you if you continue to get us into 
the situation that we’re in today. 
 
I referred earlier, Mr. Speaker, to agriculture. Agriculture is the 
number one industry in Saskatchewan and, again I say, likely 
always will be the number one industry. I don’t know that we 
can continue to give blanket coverage to everything. I think that 
we sometimes have to start targeting agricultural groups in 
terms of their special needs, and the needs of one agricultural 
group are not always necessarily the same needs of another 
agricultural group. Because although we traditionally think of 
wheat and livestock in Saskatchewan, our agricultural economy 
is much more diverse than that, and has many more 
ramifications throughout all of Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noticed that in the throne speech, that the 
government is taking some credit for, in co-operation with the 
federal government, irrigating an additional 250,000 acres of 
land over the next 15 years. I provide some caution. Again it 
goes back in terms of planning. There have been extensive 
studies done in western Canada recently on fresh water supplies 
in western  

Canada, and if our current rate of irrigation continue at the rate 
that it is going at today, without such large increases as this, 
we’re going to be in very serious situations in terms of fresh 
water supply in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I say, it’s well documented that at current consumption, 
15 to 20 years, unless there are major fresh water diversions 
from northern Saskatchewan, northern Alberta, that we will be 
in a serious situation. 
 
So when the government puts forth something like irrigating a 
large number of acres — and I don’t begrudge that to people 
that want to cultivate and grow in drylands within the province 
or to enhance marginally agricultural lands — that there’s 
longer term planning always attached to short-term decision 
that are made by the government. 
 
I notice also under agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that there’s now 
talk of Gainers and Intercontinental Packers investing $50 
million in the province of Saskatchewan, although most of that 
is taxpayers’ money, especially in the Gainers’ situation. 
 
We’ve paid very handsomely for that investment, and I don’t 
think we should be calling it the investment of Gainers. It 
should be the investment of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, because we’re a lot more on the hook than the 
private entrepreneur, Peter Pocklington, is on the hook. 
 
And the thing that amazes me is that we’re now talking about 
2,000 jobs created — 2,000 jobs created by this investment. 
Well, that’s a gross exaggeration of how many jobs will be 
created. Even during the election campaign they were talking 
about 600 jobs being created if Gainers went ahead with their 
three plants — the bacon processing plant, the slaughtering 
operation, and the processing plant at locations in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I look at this 2,000 jobs, I’m sure it’s a misprint, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s no way that 2,000 jobs are going to be 
created out of that industry and out of that kind of investment in 
the province of Saskatchewan, even though large numbers of 
jobs are needed. They’re needed by the people who are 
unemployed, the people who have been relegated to welfare 
roles in the province of Saskatchewan, those people that want to 
go back to work and don’t have the jobs available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice that one of the answers for helping out the 
agricultural sector in the province is the local manufacturing of 
agricultural chemicals and fertilizers. I agree with this concept, 
Mr. Speaker. I think we can produce much more in the province 
than what we are producing at the present time. But I don’t 
know that that’s the actual route to go. What you’re saving 
there is actually transportation costs and hopefully some local 
investment — getting people of the province to invest in local 
industries within the province. 
 
But one of the things that I wish that the government of the 
province would rethink their position on is that of generic 
chemicals. We know that they aren’t in support of generic  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

120 
 

drugs within the province; they support the Mulroney plan to 
back the pharmaceutical companies. I think that there can be 
some sort of a median at least met where we can supply generic 
chemicals within the province of Saskatchewan for farmers, 
instead of paying for the brand name or the trade name on 
patents that have expired — that they can be produced 
generically. They still have a useful life in terms of their cycle, 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and it would be a great saving 
to people within the province of Saskatchewan that are actively 
engaged in farming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the something else that is lacking is that we have to look 
very closely at the transition of family farms. To me, family 
farms are very important. I can’t profess to come from a strong 
farm or an agricultural background. Although I was born on a 
farm, we moved off at a very early age, but my spouse’s family 
is actively still engaged in farming. They have a truly family 
farm operation and they’re hesitant to transfer that land to the 
next generation because they don’t know whether they want to 
burden them with the problems that small family farms seem to 
be encountering in this day and age. 
 
And I for one, and I hope certainly my colleagues on this side 
of the House, do not want to see large corporate farms or a few 
large land holders where you almost go back to the serf system 
that happened many, many years ago. I would hope that 
members opposite don’t want that to happen either. If a large 
farmer wants to expand, fine, let that Saskatchewan farmer 
expand. But also, at the same time, it should still be possible in 
this day and age, Mr. Speaker, to make a living off of a 
half-section or a section of land. And there are very few people 
that are starting into farming today that can make a living off of 
that small parcel of land. It just seems that they have to get so 
much larger and larger and increase their production many, 
many times over if they want to make a go of it. And it seems to 
be draining the population of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that if not the Minister of Agriculture, who also 
happens to be the Premier, at least the Minister of Rural 
Development should be looking at the repopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan, how we keep people in rural Saskatchewan so 
that we maintain our unique way of life in this province. And I 
think we do have a unique way of life in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, on the agricultural scene, we heard about 
the deficiency payment that was announced in Ottawa today by 
the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. I believe it was $415 million that 
the farmers of Saskatchewan are going to receive. There is no 
doubt in my mind that this government promised the farmers of 
Saskatchewan — not the farmers of Canada — the farmers of 
Saskatchewan were promised a billion dollars in deficiency 
payments. 
 
And what does deficiency payment mean? To me deficiency 
payment, Mr. Speaker, means the difference between your 
production costs, what it costs to produce that product, and the 
return that you get when you sell that product. Well that 
deficiency payment, if it just applied to wheat and to barley, 
Mr. Speaker, we need a deficiency payment of about $2 billion, 
not the $415 million dollars that was promised today for 
Saskatchewan 

farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If you want to look at more commodities so 
that we put our agricultural people on an equal scale to those in 
the United States that are heavily subsidized, and those in the 
European Economic Community that are heavily subsidized, 
we’re looking more at $5 billion, Mr. Speaker, than the $2 
billion or the $1 billion that was promised, or the paltry $415 
million that was actually delivered today. 
 
And so, these are short-term measures. Farmers appreciate 
getting the help they can because they are in very difficult 
times, and I encourage this government again to look at the fact 
of planning. We have to know what’s happening a year, or five 
years, ten years down the road in Saskatchewan agriculture 
because the band-aid measures will help, but it only forestalls 
the inevitable that we are in difficult times in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a couple of things in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 
that I’m kind of excited about. I don’t want to seem too 
exuberant because it might excite the members on the 
government side of the House, but I am very excited about the 
words in the throne speech that talk about creating a tourism 
and hospitality institute. 
 
And I would think that tourism is about number three for the 
economy of an area like The Battlefords and north-western 
Saskatchewan. Many, many people come there as a tourist 
destination passing through on tourism on the Yellowhead 
route. The Yellowhead route is something also I want to deal 
with the hon. member from Melfort about. We have a federal 
government commitment there, and I’m anxious to see what the 
provincial government commitment is to twinning the 
Yellowhead — or at least certain sections of that — which I 
think will enhance the tourism in the province of Saskatchewan, 
especially in the north-west corner of the province. 
 
And the tourism that comes there, Mr. Speaker, the local 
entrepreneurs that are involve din tourism don’t want to grab 
that dollar one time and have the tourists go away. They want 
those people who come as tourists to be repeat customers, 
repeat tourists to north-western Saskatchewan, or wherever they 
come, wherever they come to Saskatchewan. If they come from 
the United States, or they come from Europe, or if they come 
from the Pacific Rim countries, we want people to come back 
and feel that they’ve been treated with good hospitality in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To date we’ve not been able to provide training to people that 
people need that are involved in the industry so that they can 
increase their expertise in the tourism industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see it’s approaching close to 10 o’clock. I do 
have a few more remarks I’d like to make on the throne speech, 
but I would beg leave to adjourn debate for this evening. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

121 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 
 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

122 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 62 of the Hansard of December 8, 1986, in the fourth 
paragraph of Mr. Petersen’s speech, the last sentence of the 
paragraph should read as follows: 
 

They deride the programs that we’ve tried to put into place 
trying to improve the processing industry. 

 
We apologize for the error. 
 
 
[NOTE: The online copy of Hansard has been corrected.] 
 


