


















































June 17, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 17, 1986 
 

2031 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mrs. Caswell: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the west gallery, 
virtually taking up the entire gallery, is 81 students, grades 7 and 
8, from Caswell School. When my colleagues hear that there were 
81 visitors from Caswell, they were wondering what is she 
stacking the gallery over now, but you'll be pleased to know 
Caswell is a school, and they're here like all schools are to learn 
about our democratic process. The last time I was at Caswell 
School, they had a very successful citizenship court in which the 
entire school welcomed 40 students. Now they are learning about 
the democratic traditions that those 40 students and themselves 
have inherited in this fine country. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 3 o'clock for pictures, and we'll be 
having a little discussion in room 218. So would you please 
welcome my friends and neighbours from Caswell School. This 
school is used to fine standards, so I expect excellent behaviour 
from my colleagues. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sandberg: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly 20 
visiting students from the Saskatoon Region Community College. 
Mr. Speaker, these students have worked very, very hard this year 
to upgrade their education, and coming here to the legislature and 
to Regina is part of that upgrading process. I hope you've enjoyed 
your visit to Regina today. I know you'll enjoy the proceedings in 
the legislature. 
 
These students are accompanied by their teachers, Gladys Brown 
and Roy Bourke. I'll be meeting with you at 2:30 for coffee after 
question period in the members' dining lounge. So I ask all 
members to give them a warm welcome to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, I would like through you to 
introduce to the Assembly, 23 grade 5 students from Stewart 
Russell School in Regina. They are here visiting the legislature 
and will be returning back to the school, I understand, right after 
question period. We hope that they have an interesting and an 
educational visit here, and that they go away having learned 
something more about our system of government, and that they 
enjoy the stay that they have here. 
 
They're accompanied by their teacher, Dorothy Trevina, who has 
been good enough to arrange this tour for this group of students. I 
understand tomorrow there's another group coming from Stewart 
Russell, so this school is certainly very active in its visiting of the 
legislature. 
 
I would ask the members to join me in extending a warm welcome 
to the students from Stewart Russell. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly this afternoon, 
approximately 50 grade 6 students from M. J. Coldwell 
Elementary School in the north end of our city. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Nelson, and Mrs. Campbell, 
along with a chaperon, Mrs. Clark. 
 
I was indeed looking forward to visiting with them following 
question period and taking pictures and drinks, but I understand — 
I had a note handed to me that indicates you have to leave right 
after question period. So I sincerely hope that they enjoyed their 
tour and their visit, and I ask all members to welcome them to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure at this time 
to introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, a group 
of young people who are seated in the Speaker's gallery. They are 
a group of 25 grade 5 students from Massey Elementary School in 
Regina. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Kleemolla; 
and the chaperons, Mrs. Lang, and Mrs. Douglas. I'm sure that you 
will find you visit to the Legislative Building and to question 
period very interesting. I'll be meeting with you for pictures and 
drinks immediately after question period, and I would ask the 
members of the Assembly to join with me in extending a cordial 
welcome to these young people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I 
want to introduce the commissioner of Sask Expo. 
 
All members, Mr. Speaker, will have a kit on their desk that, 
among other things, includes articles and letters about what other 
people are saying about Sask Expo in Vancouver. Included in that 
kit is an on-site '86 publication, Expo Reviewed: The Best of 
Expo, Mr. Speaker. In this publication the Saskatchewan Expo 
rates in the top 10 overall, and I think the restaurant is rated as a 
"must see" or a "must visit." And I might also point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that this publication was published by people completely 
unrelated to Expo in any way, shape or form. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there's a Maclean's article that 
rates Saskatchewan nine out of a 10. There was only one 10 on the 
site, Mr. Speaker, so Saskatchewan, as you can see, rates right in 
there with the best of them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I'm 
sorry that members opposite are grumbling about their super-fine 
presence in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker. But in addition, we have 
included in this package for all members some souvenirs from 
Sask Expo. 
 
I would invite all members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me first in 
welcoming Mr. Gordon Staseson, president and commissioner of 
Sask Expo. And I'll invite Gordon to  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2032 
 
 

stand up and be recognized; first to welcome him here to the 
legislature, and secondly to congratulate him and his team for 
putting together a first-class act for Saskatchewan in Vancouver 
— truly, Mr. Speaker, a presence to be proud of. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Early Retirement of SaskTel Employees 
 
Mr. Lusney: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. Minister, in 1983 many 
SaskTel employees took advantage of an early retirement program 
that the corporation offered. SaskTel management stated at that 
time that this package was a one-shot deal and would never be 
repeated. 
 
Mr. Minister, during '84 and '85 about 20 long-time SaskTel 
employees took the opportunity to take early retirement. They 
didn't qualify for your '83 program, but in '84 and '85 they decided 
to retire. As late as December 27, 1985, some of these employees 
were assured by SaskTel that they had no plans at that time to 
introduce another early retirement package. 
 
In April of this year, Mr. Minister, SaskTel announced a new 
retirement package, retroactive to January 1st of '86. Mr. Minister, 
this leave some 21 employees who took their early retirement 
during '84 and '85 — just left them right out in the cold, without 
any package at all. 
 
Since some of the former employees have had about 35 years' 
service with SaskTel, Mr. Minister, do you not agree that this is 
not the fair thing to do, and what you should do is provide the 21 
people involved with the same benefits package as you provided 
for those that you made retroactive to January 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, yes, Mr. Speaker, there was an early 
retirement program in SaskTel in 1983. The board had decided 
that their . . . that would be it. On reconsideration of the matter in 
April, the board felt that there was another opportunity to continue 
some downsizing with a minimum of disruption in SaskTel. 
 
Having said that, in the interim there were some 21 people that 
retired between the two programs. Not all of those, to correct the 
hon. member, did not qualify in 1983. Some of those in fact were 
eligible in 1983 and elected not to take the early retirement in 
1983. 
 
Secondly, the matter . . . your allegation that they are out in the 
cold in not accurate because the pensions, quite frankly, at SaskTel 
I think are more than fair, and those that retired in the interim are 
retiring at their eligible pension level. So it's not that they took any 
reduction as a result of taking their normal retirement. 
 
Thirdly, the cost of going back to the 21 and looking at them and 
giving them the same early retirement benefits is roughly $75,000 
per employee. Having said that, we are reviewing the situation to 
ensure fairness, but the facts, as you gave, are not quite accurate. 

Mr. Lusney: Well, Mr. Minister, some of these employees took 
early retirements, so they would be losing benefits compared to 
those that you put the program in for this year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, is it not true that the former president of 
SaskTel and at least one other former senior executive were 
allowed to change their retirement dates in order to qualify for 
your 1986 program? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you made special arrangements for a few 
people, why not make the arrangements for some of the other 21 
people, or all of those 21 people that were left out of that program 
and provide them with the same opportunity for early retirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, with regard to the former president, he 
made no special arrangements as a result of the early retirement 
program. In fact it was at our request, the board's request, that he 
stay until January because we were searching for a new president. 
I'm not aware — although I've now seen the allegation from those 
retirees that there was another senior executive — I'm frankly not 
aware of that, and I am pursuing that suggestion. But to attribute to 
the former president, that was at the board's request while the 
executive search went on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: A supplementary, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is it not curious, as you say, that the 
board requested that the president, the former president, stay on 
until January 3rd, whereas if he had retired on December 31st, he 
would not have qualified. But the board apparently suggested they 
stay on the extra two or three days, and this fortuitously qualified 
him for a considerably higher pension; is that not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No, it had nothing to do with this early retirement 
program; it was based on the previous early retirement program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Minister, these employees, these 21 are 
only asking for the same treatment that you gave employees in 
1983 and again in 1986. What is so difficult to arrange that these 
employees would be treated on the same basis as the ones in 1983 
and again in 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Again, the question of cost is one factor; and 
secondly, whenever you have an early retirement program there 
are going to be some cut-offs, unfortunately. There were people 
effected in 1983 who were obviously dissatisfied because they had 
retired before the corporation made the decision. Having said that, 
I have indicated to the former employees, the retirees, that we are 
reviewing the situation to ensure fairness. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, new question, and I direct it to 
the minister in charge of SaskTel, and it deals with the same issue. 
Now, Mr. Minister, you advised us in the Crown Corporations 
Committee that an executive committee of the board were 
reviewing this, and you told us that on June 3rd, and on June 5th, 
one David Birnie, the manager of personnel services for the 
corporation, has written to one of these employees saying, in 
effect, the contrary. He says: 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2033 
 
 

The Board's decision (is) to limit the program to the calendar 
year 1986 (and this) is consistent with the programs that other 
Crown corporations . . . 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

In any program of this kind, no matter what parameters are 
chosen, there will always be people who are not included by 
reason of circumstance. The policy does not provide for an 
inclusion of those who retired between the two earlier 
retirement programs . . . Now that's the policy of the 
corporation. On the 3rd you told me you were reviewing it. 
Have you decided to review this and be fair with these 
employees who are caught between these two programs and 
treat them the same way that they would have been treated 
had they been under the 1983 program or the 1986 program? 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I realize the responsibility is mine, but that 
letter went out without any knowledge of myself or my office. 
And as I say, the responsibility is mine, but we had not completed 
the review, and I had not received, nor have I received, a report in 
detail looking at each of the circumstances which I'd requested 
from the officials. So I freely apologize to the retirees for that 
letter. As I say, it went out without the knowledge of either myself 
or my staff, and the review is still going on. 
 

Uranium City Air Terminal Building Inaccessible to Public 
 
Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. It deals with a 
mix-up between his department and the federal Ministry of 
Transport. This mix-up has resulted in patients who have been 
flown into Uranium City for medical treatment being forced to 
wait for taxis outside the airport terminal for up to two hours. 
Because the terminal is now closed to the public except for 
Norcanair's scheduled flights, Mr. Minister — and as you're aware 
that airport serves the only hospital in that northern region for all 
the communities in that area — can the minister explain how this 
mix-up came about; and can he give the people of the North his 
assurance that the matter will be cleared up immediately and that 
the airport terminal building will be always opened to those needs 
as long as the hospital and the town remain active? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must apologize. 
I'm not familiar with the subject which you are bringing forward to 
the legislature today, but I will give the hon. member my 
assurance that I will take notice of his question, and I will give it 
my personal thoughts, attention in the very, very next few hours 
this afternoon. I will become fully briefed on the matter, and I can 
give you my utmost assurance that the people in the North will 
receive whatever help that our province can give them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
take notice of that question and I wonder, at the same time, if you 
would check out whether the radio signals are being operated on 
that airport. As you realize, it's the only airport that serves that 
hospital in that area. There is radio equipment there and beacons 
that aircraft  

use at night and in bad weather. I wonder, Mr. Minister if you 
could check on that and report back whether the radios are in 
operation, so that aircraft can use the beacons. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: Yes, I would be pleased to do that at my 
earliest convenience. 
 

Use of Executive Aircraft 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister 
of Supply and Services, and it has to do with a report he tabled in 
the legislature yesterday dealing with the executive aircraft for the 
year 1985-86 fiscal year. 
 
Yesterday you reported that that aircraft was used by the 
Executive Council 980 times for flights within the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, of course the executive aircraft 
is for use by cabinet ministers. But in checking it over, the report 
last evening, we found a number of very careless uses of the 
aircraft. And I want to report to you and to the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, that, for example, on June 27th of last year the executive 
aircraft made four round trips to Saskatoon with four different 
cabinet ministers on board. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Minister, who is responsible for scheduling 
the executive aircraft and how would it happen that aircraft that 
are the size capable of flying all the four ministers to Saskatoon 
and back would make four flights, rather than using one flight to 
fly the ministers there and back. How does it happen that we have 
airplanes coming and going to the same city, like a shuttle bus, at 
great expense to the taxpayers; and are you the person responsible 
for co-ordinating such a mess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Speaker, yes it rests with the 
responsibility of our department. I would have to check on the 
particular day to check the circumstances, but it's very conceivable 
that there were very reasonable reasons why that was necessary. If 
someone . . . For instance, I can remember days when we had 
special events in Regina and Saskatoon that were run in order to 
have the same information in the same place, and it might have 
been impossible for the four ministers. If he wishes, I can acquire 
details of that particular day and determine the reason for it, but 
I'm sure that the reason is quite logical, and we can provide that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, on another date, October 29th, the 
taxpayers shelled out thousands of dollars for three different 
cabinet ministers that day to fly from Regina to Saskatoon and 
back. And my question originally was to you — who co-ordinates 
the use of this executive aircraft? — to see whether or not better 
use can be made of the executive aircraft in terms of getting 
maybe two or maybe three cabinet ministers on the same flight. 
Because it seems to me and to the public that 980 flights in one 
year, cabinet ministers coming and going, and the suspicion, a lot 
of it for political purposes . . . Can you tell me who co-ordinates 
these flights, at any rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all in 
reference to the question, we have found on this side of the House 
that it's not always a good idea to take the information provided at 
face value, but I've indicated I  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2034 
 
 

will check into that particular day. The written information may be 
right, sir, but your interpretation often leaves a lot to be desired. 
 
Secondly, we are attempting and will continue to stay in touch 
with Saskatoon, the largest city in this province. We have many 
times there's business to be carried out. I don't think it's reasonable 
to expect somebody with an 8 o'clock meeting and somebody with 
a speech in the evening to necessarily go to Saskatoon and spend 
the day there. 
 
Many times flights are co-ordinated, and there are often as many 
as four ministers on one flight going somewhere. That's not 
unusual at all, and the staff deal with that and they do their best to 
make it work. We try to co-ordinate those and make it as 
reasonable and as efficient as possible. And if that particular day 
poses problems, as I indicated, we'll determine what the 
circumstances were. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. He questions the credibility of the information we're 
using here. And maybe, for his benefit, we should be tabling this 
back to him so he can read the covering page on the document 
which indicates clearly the number of flights taken by each 
minister; for example, the hon. member from Souris—
Cannington, 51 flights; the Premier, 66; and so on down the list 
. . . the hon. member from Wilkie, 52 trips, and so on. These are 
the flights that are indicated by the minister. 
 
But my question to you is: who co-ordinates the flights? What is 
the process? Are you responsible for that plan flying to Saskatoon 
and back four times in the same day and within a matter of hours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Chairman, as I indicated in both the 
previous answers, the staff of the department of exec air 
co-ordinates the flights. Obviously, as the minister, it's my 
responsibility that that is correct. And once again, I'm not 
questioning the numbers; I'm questioning the interpretation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Supplement to the minister. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister: can you indicate the position of the government in terms 
of the use of the executive aircraft which, of course, is paid for by 
the taxpayers? Are these aircraft for the use of cabinet ministers 
only on business, or are they used for personal reasons at any 
time? What is the policy of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Chairman, the policy has not been 
changed since the party opposite were in fact in government. The 
policy has not changed; it's exactly as it has always been. 
 
Mr. Koskie: I also direct a question to the Minister of Supply and 
Services. I'd like the minister to advise us whether or not the 
former minister of Highways, the member for Wilkie, who hasn't 
been in the House during this session, did he ever pay back to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers for his improper use of the government 
aircraft last November? Has he reimbursed the taxpayers for the 
full cost of the round trip between Regina and his home near 
Unity, since that trip was clearly improper and resulted in the 
member's resignation? Could you advise  

us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Chairman, I'll take notice and report 
back on that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Minister, are you aware that this was not the 
only time that the former minister abused his privilege in respect 
to the use of the government plane — not only in November but a 
subsequent time? The documents which you tabled yesterday 
show that the government aircraft was sent from Regina to Unity 
on July 16, 1985, to pick up only one passenger, the wife of the 
former minister, and fly her back to Regina. This is a second 
offence — second time. 
 
I ask you: can the minister explain how such a clear abuse of the 
government aircraft got by his officials at a time, and whether or 
not the member again has reimbursed the taxpayers for their 
improper use of the aircraft. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to the 
member that his use of the term "improper use" is ill-advised. We 
certainly do not have any problems when a minister is attending a 
function to which his wife in particular, possibly his family, have 
been invited, that they travel by the same means of transportation. 
 
I think that, as members of this government, we spend a great deal 
of time away from home. We certainly don't apologize for taking 
our spouses along to various functions, and I don't think that that is 
something that the taxpayers of the province expect us to 
apologize for. 
 
Mr. Koskie: The document that you tabled, Mr. Minister, clearly 
indicated that there was one passenger on the aircraft flying from 
Regina to Unity, Wilkie, and that the only name of the passenger 
on your document was Mrs. Garner — one passenger. I ask you: is 
that the government policy that the plane can go out and pick up 
the respective wives of the government members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Chairman, once again I will find the 
details of that particular flight. It's quite possible that the minister 
had a commitment in one place and his wife attended and then had 
to be somewhere else. But I can determine. We gave you the 
information as it stands, and I will get any other details you desire 
around that particular flight. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Minister, according to the documents you tabled 
and obviously didn't read — you tabled in the legislature — you 
used a government aircraft to fly home to . . . This is to the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, by the way. 
 
According to the documents, Madam Minister, you used the 
government aircraft to fly home to Maple Creek on Friday, 
February 7th of this year. One the same day, your colleague, the 
member of Swift Current — the same day — used the government 
aircraft to fly home to Swift Current for that weekend. On each 
flight there was one passenger aboard. 
 
I ask you: could you not in fact organize your schedule with your 
colleague to take the same flight and attempt to save the taxpayers 
some money and prevent the waste  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2035 
 
 

and the extravagance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: Mr. Speaker, in response, the information 
you have provided does not indicate the time of day. Once again, 
one minister may have had a meeting or a responsibility at 8 
o'clock in the morning; the other member may have gone home 
. . . had a full day of work here in Regina and gone home for a 
speaking engagement in the evening. So I don't think it's at all 
unreasonable to assume that that could very logically happen. And 
that is in fact the purpose of having the executive air, so people 
can carry out their duties in a reasonable manner. 
 

Absence of a Member from the Legislature 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question of 
the Deputy Premier, and it's not the question he thinks I'm going to 
ask him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question has to do with a large number of 
complaints and inquiries which we have been receiving in our 
office from constituents in the constituency of Wilkie. This is now 
day 63 of this session. We've had a budget speech; we've had a 
throne speech; and the session began on March 17. Since the 
session began, the member from Wilkie has never been in this 
Assembly, Mr. Deputy Premier. He has never showed up. 
 
Can you inform this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
taxpayers of Wilkie, where their MLA has been, and why he does 
not find it and consider it important enough to represent them in 
this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: This may surprise the hon. member, but 
that's exactly the question that I thought he was going to ask. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have from time to time — the other day, in fact, 
the Minister of Health was out in Wilkie constituency, and not one 
complaint did he get from any of the fine constituents of Wilkie 
constituency as it relates to the representative of that constituency 
here in this Legislative Assembly. I don't in any way, shape or 
form intend to account for the member for Wilkie or his actions or 
his attendance here at this legislature. 
 
All I will say is this, Mr. Speaker, that as long as this government 
is sitting here, Wilkie constituency will be well represented in this 
legislature. 
 
While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: The Deputy Premier tries but . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I have a supplementary. In light of the 
member from Wilkie's inability or unwillingness to perform his 
duties, can you inform this Assembly and the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers how much this MLA has received in salary, allowances, 
and other payments since this new session began? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: I suppose I could find out, Mr. Speaker. I 
kind of expect that as a back-bencher in this Chamber, he gets paid 
exactly what you get paid in this Chamber, and probably 
contributing far more than any  

member sitting on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but I 
suppose I could find out. If this is the most compelling issue of 
today and if the member's insisting . . . 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that the member, the same member, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: I just wanted to advise the member from Regina 
North East that there can only be one final supplementary, and he's 
already asked for that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you did. 
  

Cost of Advertising in the Saskatchewan Report 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: The member from Regina North East some 
time ago asked me a very compelling question, and I have been 
trying on several occasions since then — and this is no aspersion 
on the Chair, Mr. Speaker — but I have trying on several 
occasions to be recognized so that I could answer the question. 
And the question had to do, Mr. Speaker, with this publication, the 
Saskatchewan Report, and how much was spent in government 
advertising in the Saskatchewan Report. And then there was a 
supplementary that asked how much was spent in advertising in 
the Star-Phoenix, and how much was spent, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Saskatchewan Business magazine. Well, I have those answers, 
Mr. Speaker, and I'm very pleased today . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Send them over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Well I could send them over, but I'm very 
pleased today to tell the member exactly what those numbers are. 
In the case of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think this has to do with the 1985 year, calendar year — 
understand? — 1985 calendar year. The Star-Phoenix was 
$472,616.43. That compares, Mr. Speaker to $344,000 spent on 
the Star-Phoenix in 1971 when the cost was 67 cents a line, as 
compared to 98 cents a line today. So in fact if you count inflation, 
cost increases, the previous administration spent more on the 
Star-Phoenix than we did. 
 
In the case, Mr. Speaker, of the Saskatchewan Business magazine, 
the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: The Saskatchewan Business magazine, Mr. 
Speaker, which has a circulation of 10,000, and eight publications 
a year, we spent $56,022.35. In the case of the Saskatchewan 
Report, Mr. Speaker, which has a circulation of approximately 
40,000, and 12 publications a year, there were $99,314 spent. In 
that case it's May to May because this particular publication didn't 
exist in the whole calendar year of 1985. 
 
Now the kinds of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, please. Order. Order! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2036 
 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Appointment of Primate to Anglican Church of Canada 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I'd like 
to make a congratulatory message, a brief one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday was a very important day, both for myself as an MLA 
from Regina, and for Saskatchewan, I think, as a whole. 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Archbishop Michael Peers was elected as 
the Primate of the Anglican Church of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this is the first Saskatchewan bishop to rise to the primacy of the 
Anglican Church in Canada in the history of the church in this 
country. 
 
As a member of the church from which Mike Peers was the rector 
. . . first became rector, Mr. Speaker, in 1974, of St. Paul's 
Cathedral in Regina. He has been very active in the church and in 
the community in Regina. He was ordained bishop of the 
Qu'Appelle diocese, and in 1982, Mr. Speaker, he became the 
archbishop and metropolitan of Rupert's Land, which consists of 
10 western dioceses in western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a first for Saskatchewan, and obviously a first 
for the Diocese of Qu'Appelle in Regina, that Mike Peers has been 
elected yesterday as Primate of the Anglican Church of Canada. 
And I would simply like to pass on my congratulations to him and 
his family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, may I join with the member for 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment, in extending our 
congratulations to Archbishop Michael Peers on his election as 
primate of all Canada, the titular head of the Anglican Church in 
Canada. 
 
Archbishop Peers had been a distinguished churchman here in our 
midst and is a very, very lively individual who takes a great deal 
of interest in affairs outside the strict realm of the church which he 
serves with such distinction. 
 
And I know that all members on this side of the House would join 
with members on the other side of the House in extending our 
congratulations to the new primate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the 
Assembly to move down the order paper to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 

Bills 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
Assembly to move the following motion. I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill nos. 62, 63, 64, and 
65 be discharged and the Bills be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, if I could just ask the minister a 
question. As I understand it, there was some question about House 
amendments that may be necessary for some of the Bills. They 
will then be referred back to the committee for those amendments 
to be made? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: Yes. I perhaps should have explained that, 
Mr. Speaker. What we will do, apparently there's a need for at 
least two House amendments that I know of. Those can then be 
referred back by the chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee who will specify which particular clauses they fall in, 
and it will just expedite the business of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 56 — An Act 
respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company 
Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation and the 
Establishment of a Paper Mill in Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, I spoke at some length before I 
adjourned the debate on this Bill. I've had an opportunity to review 
the comments of the minister and to study the Bill with some 
degree of diligence. 
 
The Bill, Mr. Speaker, deals almost exclusively — indeed, 
exclusively — with the procedures which will be necessary for 
guaranteeing about $83 million to be borrowed by the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation to finance the construction of the 
paper-mill and possibly the financing of the renovation of the 
pulp-mill. I will speak as if it were money to construct the 
paper-mill, since the paper-mill will certainly cost more than the 
$83 million proposed. 
 
The paper-mill, the figure for its construction has not yet been 
revealed, but the amount which will be needed for the paper-mill 
and the renovations can be put at about $250 million. That, as the 
minister I think described, will  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2037 
 
 

be split three ways, and this is one-third of it — $83.4 million or 
thereabouts. It is to be borrowed by Weyerhaeuser and guaranteed 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no objection, and my colleagues have no 
objection, to the financing of industrial projects this way; we have 
no objection in principle. The method whereby the Government of 
Saskatchewan has either provided money by way of mortgage, or 
guaranteed money which others provided by way of mortgage for 
major industrial projects in this province, is now well established. 
 
(1445) 
 
I participated in one way or another in a number of these. The 
Saskatchewan Cement Company Limited was perhaps the first of 
the post-war group where money was borrowed and the 
government guaranteed the bonds; the Interprovincial Steel was 
the next major one. Ipsco is still with us — and it was financed by 
a government guarantee of the bonds. The next major venture was 
the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited in 1966. And the major 
financing there came from money provided by purchasers of 
bonds, again guaranteed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I may point out, Mr. Speaker, that I was in the legislature at that 
time and voted in favour of the Bill whereby the bonds of the 
Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited were guaranteed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan as, in fact, did all of my colleagues 
at that time. The Prince Albert Pulp Co. Ltd. Assistance Bill, as I 
believe it was called, about that — 1966, was passed without a 
dissenting vote by the legislature. 
 
We now have what amounts to a further step in the construction of 
that complex, and the proposal is that there be a paper-mill. I want 
to state that I have no objection in principle to the guaranteeing of 
the money for the construction of a paper-mill adjacent to the 
pulp-mill at Prince Albert. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I do have a large number of 
questions with respect to the financing of it. There are a great 
number of questions which should be asked when we are 
guaranteeing $80 million and when we are selling an asset of the 
Crown for $250 million. 
 
I want to say to the minister that while we are now dealing with 
the principle of the Bill — and I will be voting for this Bill — I 
will be wanting to ask in committee what the deal is. And I think it 
is reasonable, Mr. Speaker, that we ask what the deal is. And it's 
reasonable that we ask the minister to provide the committee of 
the whole, which will be considering the Bill, with the documents. 
I think it will be reasonable for us to say: what is your deal with 
Weyerhaeuser; what commitments do you undertake; what 
commitments does Weyerhaeuser undertake. 
 
We are, Mr. Speaker, talking about a large sum of money — $250 
million. That's $250 for every man, woman, and child. Every 
family of four, we're talking about $1,000 of their money. And 
with respect to the guarantee, we are talking about another $325 of 
their money for a family of  

four. So our notional family of four has more than $1,300 of their 
money that we're talking about. And if we represent 9 or 10,000 
people, then obviously we have some obligation to ask these 
questions. 
 
And I want to say to the minister, we will be asking in committee 
for the documents, for the agreements. If they are not signed, and I 
would be surprised if they weren't, but if they are not signed, then 
draft agreements which generally outline the nature of the 
transaction could be provided. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, some specific questions. We will want to 
direct our attention to the purchase price of $250 million and the 
repayment terms. And, Mr. Speaker, they are the same question. 
To sell a mill at $250 million at 5 per cent interest is to sell it at 
about $150 million at 10 per cent interest. 
 
One needs to compute the present value of the money, and if it's 
. . . obviously if it's being sold at a market rate, the interest is at a 
market rate, then the present value is the same as its computed 
value, because it will be assumed that you can invest the money at 
today's rate. 
 
But if in fact the interest rate is not a market rate, then this is a 
highly relevant piece of information. None of us would sell our 
farm . . . We would assume that if we could get $300,000 for our 
farm, we were getting the same price if the person said, yes, I will 
give you $300,000, but I'll give you a note at 5 per cent; we would 
know that we weren't getting $300,000 for our farm. We would 
twig to that right away. 
 
And similarly we will want to ask the minister what the 
arrangement is; similarly with respect to the repayment terms. And 
we don't know what the repayment terms are. Reference is made 
by the minister to an income debenture, which is quite consistent 
with the language used in the first press release, indicating that it 
would be paid for out of the profits of the combined venture. 
 
If it's to be paid for out of the profits of the combined venture, as I 
said earlier in my remarks, one needs to know a little bit about the 
financial structure. On the face of it, Mr. Speaker, it looks as if it's 
going to be a very highly leveraged operation. It looks like $5 out 
of every six is going to be provided by loan capital. 
 
To phrase it another way, the debt/equity ration of this pulp-mill is 
going to be absolutely unique in Canada. when I say pulp-mill, I 
mean pulp and paper-mill. It would be . . . One would search very 
hard and very long to find a pulp-mill which was financed on the 
basis of five-sixths borrowed money and one-sixth equity. This is 
not necessarily to say that's a bad arrangement. We should know 
what it does to the profit and loss picture, since the combined 
complex will have to carry a very large depreciation, as anyone 
does, or capital cost allowance, and it will also have to carry a very 
large payment of interest. Only then will there be a profit, once 
those are deducted, and only then will we know whether there's 
any pool of money to pay back the $248 million. So all of these 
questions need to be addressed. They're all highly — or not all 
highly technical but they're somewhat technical — and they're all 
very important when we're  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2038 
 
 

dealing with public assets of this magnitude, of the scale. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find myself in a position whereby I agree with 
the principle of the Bill of guaranteeing some money to purchase 
or to finance the construction of a paper-mill, but whether or not I 
will find the transaction satisfactory and will be able to support it 
at later stages, I cannot say. And nor, I suspect, can anyone else 
say, unless they know more about the facts than I do. 
 
And I look at the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and he is 
suggesting, apparently, that members of this House should agree 
to sales of public assets without knowing the terms, or should 
agree to major transactions involving large guarantees without 
knowing the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will refrain from engaging in any by-play with one 
or two members opposite; I simply want to make this point before 
I sit down. 
 
There has been no facts made public on which anyone can make 
any rational decision as to whether this is a good financial deal — 
none. And if any member opposite says that on the basis of the 
published facts he knows that this is a good financial deal or a bad 
financial deal, I invite him to stand up in this legislature and 
explain how he arrived at the conclusion that it was a good 
financial deal or a bad financial deal, without knowing the rate of 
interest that we are getting on our $248 million; without knowing 
the repayment terms; and without knowing the financial structure 
of Weyerhaeuser from which we have to look to provide profits to 
pay back the $248 million. 
 
None of those facts are on the table, and I do not believe that 
anybody can express any rational opinion without those facts. Any 
member, let's say of the bar, who suggested that he could express a 
rational opinion without knowing those facts would be very, very 
careless indeed. And I know members opposite who are members 
of the bar are not careless; they are prudent people, and they 
would not express these views unless they had those facts. I don't 
have them and, therefore, I cannot express a view. 
 
I do say, Mr. Speaker, that the proposal for having a paper-mill is 
one which is very, very welcome I am sure, as I said earlier in my 
remarks, particularly the aspect of finding a greater use for our 
aspen resource, and accordingly we find ourselves interested in the 
proposal, not objecting in principle to the guarantee, but finding 
ourselves without the facts on which to express any sound 
judgement as to whether it is financially prudent. 
 
I will be voting for the Bill, and I will be asking the minister to 
provide us with firm data in committee. I very much hope he will 
provide the data because I don't think he would want the people of 
Saskatchewan and this legislature to vote for or against a project of 
this magnitude without laying before the public what the rules are, 
what the facts are, what the commitments are on each side. I am 
sure that members opposite feel it's a good financial deal and will 
have no hesitation in defending it. And we will look at it as 
dispassionately as we can to see whether or not we agree that it's a 
good financial deal — a prudent deal on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be supporting the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: Mr. Speaker, just in responding to some of 
the points raised by the Leader of the Opposition in today's debate 
and certain of the points that he raised in opening debate in second 
reading the other day, he made some reference . . . And I won't go 
into that in great detail except to say that I am pleased, I am 
pleased to hear the Leader of the Opposition recognize that this is 
a good deal for Saskatchewan; and not in the sense that we're 
talking about the deal in itself, but in terms of the building of a 
paper-mill and the integration of pulp and paper and the saw-mill 
operations on Bodmin, and so on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member from Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, is now entering the 
debate. I'm trying to respond to the points that were made by his 
leader who clearly understands some of the situation that we're 
into here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question, as I said in my earlier remarks 
in this second reading debate, that this is an extremely important 
industry for the northern forests part of the province, and that this 
integration, as I've said, of pulp and paper is very, very important 
to it. 
 
As in regards to the financial transactions, I know, as the Leader of 
the Opposition has indicated, that he understands well the way in 
which these debentures can work. I know that he understands that 
revenue debentures are relatively complicated instruments, and 
they are more than just relatively complicated. They're normally 
used where there is uncertainty as to the value of the entity 
because of the difficulty in forecasting the future income from the 
operation. This has certainly been the case in the market pulp 
industry. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has been most fortunate in 
negotiating this debenture on the basis of the income from the 
integrated pulp and paper operation. Many of the people with 
whom we negotiated earlier . . . And it was widely known — it 
was widely known across this province and in fact throughout the 
industry everywhere that we have been negotiating with whoever 
would come forward to try to get this integrated facility into place. 
 
Many of those that we negotiated with earlier wanted to isolate the 
pulp-mill revenue in placing a value on the mill purchase. At 
current pulp price forecast this resulted in a negative to minimum 
value being placed on the mill, and those in the industry and close 
to the industry know it well. 
 
But in response to the leader's question as it relates to some of the 
details and so on, what information that can be released at this 
stage will be; I'll give him that undertaking. For example, the 
interest rate on the debenture will be at 8.5 per cent, a fair rate 
considering the term of the agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
The transaction has also been submitted to a  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2039 
 
 

comprehensive review by Revenue Canada in order to obtain a tax 
ruling. A most critical factor in this ruling has been the necessity 
for there to be reasonable assurance that the province would 
recover the face value of the debenture in an acceptable time 
frame. There are two factors which would adversely affect the 
repayment schedule; the first, a continuing disastrous pricing 
scenario for market pulp; the second, further expansion of the 
facilities by Weyerhaeuser, say, by the installation of a second 
paper machine. 
 
The serving of senior debt, such as is to be guaranteed under the 
authority of the proposed legislation, takes priority in the call on 
available funds. In either case, the province will still come out 
ahead. In the first case, operating as if we still owned the 
pulp-mill, the province would be forced to debt-finance large 
operating losses. In the second case, repayment would be 
moderately deferred, but the province would have the benefit of 
additional jobs and resource harvest. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition is correct in his statements the 
other day in stating that there's no cash down, and others have 
been criticizing — the member from Athabasca mentioned this as 
well — no cash down on the purchase of the pulp-mill. There are, 
however, immediate cash requirements for the previously 
mentioned mill improvements and the start of the paper machine 
construction. 
 
This non-cash transaction is not unique in this industry, Mr. 
Speaker, and we can give some examples, and we may get into 
some of these in committee. But Boise Cascade is in the process of 
buying a market pulp, an uncoated free sheet paper-mill from the 
Allied Paper Division of the Hanson Trust. Hanson Trust have 
waived cash requirements and have accepted payment in preferred 
stock and debt. The specifics of the deal, as to the terms and 
conditions attached to the preferred stock, are, like the deal with 
Weyerhaeuser, at this stage commercially confidential. 
 
The situation regarding the sale of PAPCO is unique in that this 
pulp-mill is one of the very few in Canada that is 100 per cent 
government-owned. Other mill sales in New Brunswick and 
British Columbia have involved cash in the transaction, but not 
surprisingly in these days, Mr. Speaker, such cash has been 
provided by government loans to the purchaser. I understand that a 
fairly recent sale in New Brunswick was a transaction of this 
nature and, further, that that final payment was not in cash but in 
product from a paper-mill to be built. The prime provincial 
interests have been to retain the operation as a going concern. 
 
Agreements are being negotiated to assure that PAPCO continues 
as a going concern. We were also concerned that planning and 
construction of the paper-mill will commence immediately, and 
this covenant is included in the agreement as well. 
 
With respect to the financing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize 
that, notwithstanding the fact that the province is guaranteeing a 
loan of $83.4 million, as has been mentioned, Weyerhaeuser's 
parent company is also guaranteeing a loan of 83.4 million, and all 
of this is  

additional to a cash investment by Weyerhaeuser Canada of 83.4 
million or thereabouts. If the mill can be built for less than $250 
million, Mr. Speaker, the guaranteed amounts will be reduced 
proportionately. 
 
Regarding the forest management, I have some other material 
here, and I don't think I'll get into it — the forest management 
lease arrangements and so on. I'm sure we can get into that in 
much better detail in a question-and-answer sort of format in 
committee. I would undertake to do that, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 
of the Opposition mentioned things about the forest management 
lease arrangements which he'll want to know details about. He 
also mentioned the relationship of the Bodmin sawmill and what it 
means to the community of Big River and that area. He also 
mentioned the employment, what the employment numbers will 
be in terms o f the number of jobs created, and so on. Many of 
those questions could be much more easily answered in the to and 
fro of committee and the way in which committee works. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few comments — and having given 
the member the undertaking, what the interest rate will be here at 
this stage and, as well, that we will release whatever documents 
we can at this stage, and certainly we will be giving him some 
undertakings in committee — I would move second reading and 
encourage all members of the House to support the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right is Mr. 
Dave Heron, deputy minister; Keith Mackrill, to my left, is 
direction of administration; Bill Shupe, assistant deputy minister; 
Morley Meiklejohn, assistant deputy minister; Mr. Wayne 
Brownlee is with us, associate deputy minister; Jack Vicq, 
associate deputy minister; Jim Marshall, assistant director, 
economic policy. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to first of all start off by saying the Leader of the Opposition 
will be taking the majority of these estimates; he just stepped out 
for a moment. 
 
But there are some things that I wanted to get from you. One is on 
your personal staff. Do you have with you a list of your executive 
assistants and special assistants, secretaries, their salaries, and any 
increases that would have occurred in the time period from 
January 1st of '85 up till the present time? Have you got that list 
with you? 
 
The other issue that I wanted to raise is, on your staff within the 
department, the executive group — that would include your 
deputy and associate deputy and the executive directors — if you 
have that list with you, the salaries, any increases that would have 
occurred, anyone  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2040 
 
 

who has been released from those positions or moved from those 
positions, and anyone who has moved in in that same time period, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I don't have the list of those who previously 
occupied the positions. I have the other information for you. I can 
endeavour to undertake, or to get who was previously in the 
respective positions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Minister, under the Minister of Finance's 
office staff salary increases you indicate that the 1985 salary step, 
and you give the percentage increase. Was that the only increase 
that each of these individuals got? Was there any other . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: That's the full up-to-date information that you 
have there. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Here again, I wanted to ask you on, for 
example, Arlene Kenville, whose salary increase was 6.1 per cent, 
an Linda Tiefenbach, whose increase was 7.3 per cent — and you 
call it a promotional increase. What were they doing before, and 
what do you mean when you talk about a promotional increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Mrs. Tiefenbach was promoted from a 
ministerial assistant 1 to 2; and Mrs. Kenville was an A to a C. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well I understand that they got the promotional 
increase in terms of salary, but how do their . . . Are they in a 
different office, are they doing different work, or who took their 
place in the department? 
 
And the point that I'm making, Mr. Minister, is that here again we 
have 50 per cent of your staff, if you exclude the one whose salary 
is under review, Len Exner, if you exclude that one whose salary 
hasn't been increased because it's under review . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: That was the guy who organized his 
nomination campaign. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: And my colleague reminds me of some 
background of that individual. But I say 50 per cent of your staff 
got an increase of more than the public service guide-lines, and of 
course you call it a promotional increase. 
 
This seems to be what's happening in all the areas of the upper 
echelons of the political staff of the ministers' offices, is that about 
50 per cent of them are getting increases above and beyond what 
normal civil service guide-lines are. And what many people who 
work for the government, and others who aren't getting any 
increase, are saying is that these promotional increases are nothing 
more than an arrangement that the minister has with his political 
staff to get them a bit of extra salary. 
 
I'm sure that within the public service you would agree that 50 per 
cent of the employees don't get increases due to promotions, and 
that the percentage of increases due to this kind of an arrangement 
within ministers' offices is far higher than what is happening 
throughout the civil service. 
 

I just wonder whether or not you can give an explanation why this 
is happening in every department, where the political staff are 
getting those kind of increases where others in society are being 
told that there's a restraint program on, and many people are being 
told that a zero per cent increase is in order. Some places in the 
private sector, cut-backs are being called for. Your friend, Peter 
Pocklington, of course, in Alberta, is talking about salary 
cut-backs in the private sector. 
 
How is it that political staff — Linda Tiefenbach, for example, 
ministerial assistant, getting a 7.3 per cent increase; and another 
assistant getting a 6.1 — how do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Mrs. Kenville — salary from $1,611 per month 
to $1,874 per month — had been doing general secretarial work 
and then began to do ministerial secretarial work, which was a 
promotional increase of 6 per cent including the steps. Mrs. 
Dugalo had an increase of 2.9 per cent; she's now making $1,514 
per month. Mr. Armstrong had a 3.7 per cent increase. Mr. Exner 
has a zero per cent increase. And Mrs. Tiefenbach went from 
doing secretarial duties to ministerial assistant duties, and as such 
that's the promotional increase. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well I suppose I go back to my original 
question. Do you see any irony, in the ministerial offices, that on 
average about 50 per cent of them are getting those kind of 
increases that are beyond the guide-lines set out for other workers 
in government? Is it just a coincidence that in every minister's 
office that there seems to be those kind of increases based on 
promotion, whereas in the general staffing of government there is 
nowhere near that? Is that merely a coincidence, or is there a 
mechanism in place for ministers to give a little extra money to 
their political staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Again the increases that you're talking about are 
— two out of five — Mrs. Kenville was doing general secretarial 
work and then assumed duties for the minister's secretarial duties, 
which historically in the province has engendered different types 
of activities. Her salary is now $1,874 per month. For example, 
Mr. Exner was zero per cent increase. Mrs. Tiefenbach, I have 
indicated to you had been doing general secretarial and is now 
doing ministerial assistant work and received the increase. Her 
salary is now $2,455 per month. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well the minister, when he says two out of 
five, of course is leaving out Len Exner who hasn't got an increase, 
but basically that's because it's still under review. What is the 
problem there? Is there some outstanding issue with that 
individual? Are you reassessing his role in your office? What is 
the review, that you refer to, comprised of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The outstanding issue is I would like to be able to 
pay Mr. Exner considerably more, but he's at the top of his range. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well that leads me to another question. There 
was a news release that I received from a Mr. Barber who talked 
about this individual and his role  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2041 
 
 

in a certain nominating convention — and I'm certainly not going 
to refer to whose nomination that he was talking about — but he 
was indicating that Mr. Exner was involved in a political way 
while on staff with the minister, but would the increase that you 
want to give this individual have anything to do with the result of 
that particular nominating convention that may have been . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: He did a good job. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: And the member from Saskatoon yells from his 
seat that he did a good job. I thought the Premier had indicated 
that he wasn't in fact, working in a political way while on salary 
from the minister. But is this the same individual that Mr. Barber 
was talking about being involved in the nominating convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Yes. Mr. Barber indicated that Mr. Exner was the 
campaign manager. That was totally inaccurate. But secondly, if 
the hon. member is indicating that election results are to determine 
a salary increase, I am prepared to look at what the opposition is 
paying some of the advisers who suggested: "Go in April, and go 
on the Crow," and whether they've had increases over the last four 
years. I don't know. I don't think that's ever been the criteria, but 
it's interesting to contemplate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I suppose the more interesting thin, and the 
more current thing, Mr. Chairman, is who's advising Premier 
Devine on when to call the election now as the polls quickly slide 
away . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: I think we should stick with the Department of 
Finance and not on the polls. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Point of order. If I could ask how the rules of 
the Assembly work when the minister refers to certain election 
campaigns and you sit there and say nothing . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: I think it should be both sides of the House that 
should stick to Finance. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I just find it interesting when you make your 
decision, and if we could have a little fairness, it may work a little 
better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I just want to say that in indicating the review 
that is under way and trying to get this individual more than the 
$44,000 a year that he's now earning, that I would hope that you 
wouldn't strain the public purse too much. And here I'm not 
suggesting that there shouldn't be an increase of the 2 or 3 per cent 
that is normal, nor do I want to suggest that you're holding off the 
increase to pay off for political favours done because I don't know 
that. But given the fact that the individual running in that 
nomination, a Conservative candidate for nomination, was 
indicating that, the suspicion is certainly going to be there in the 
public's mind that one of the reasons that it's under review and you 
haven't announced it is because there will be a substantial increase, 
and much more than what you're admitting here for some of your 
other employees, 7.3 per cent; and that the reason that it's under 
review is because you may be embarrassed  

during estimates about the massive increase this person is going to 
get. 
 
And all I'm saying here is that you be fair in giving this individual 
an increase of what he deserves, of course, but within reason that 
others in the civil service are being asked to live with; and if you'll 
give us that commitment now, that the increase will not be out of 
line with the guide-lines set down by the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I note that — I believe that Mr. Exner's been at 
that salary for some considerable time and has been at the top of 
his range. But I certainly will take your very strong arguments for 
an increase for Mr. Exner, and I'm glad you recognize his abilities 
and talents. And I appreciate the opposition's gesture that he 
should have an increase of some kind, and I will very much take 
into account. But we have no plans. He is at the top of the range 
and, as I say, as much as I would personally like to see him earn 
more, he has been at the top of the range for some time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well I just say again, in talking about the 
increase, that I think that if any individual is doing an excellent job 
in the minister's office that they deserve a 2 or 3 per cent increase. 
And this individual may deserve the top of that range, a 3 per cent 
increase, for winning a certain nomination with what he had to 
work with, squeaking him through one more time. I just say that 
he may deserve a 3 per cent increase, and I will leave that for now. 
And, as I say, the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Elphinstone, may have more questions. 
 
But if we turn now to the executive salaries of the Department of 
Finance, I want to ask, Mr. Minister, if you can give me a short 
resume of the two individuals at the top of the executive salary, 
but the two main officials — the deputy minister, Mr. Heron, and 
the assistant deputy minister, Mr. Shupe, I believe you pronounce 
that — I may have that wrong. But can you tell me the background 
and the arrangement that you have with them — whether they're 
on contract, whether they're on leave from a company, and give 
me that? and I will have a few questions to follow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Mr. Heron was senior partner of Peat Marwick in 
Saskatoon. Taxation is his field of expertise. I can get you a 
detailed resume of Mr. Heron's qualifications; I will have to 
forward that to you. And Mr. Shupe was with Pemberton Houston 
Willoughby. Both are on two-year leaves of absence from their 
respective employers. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Minister, in the answer that you gave me, 
you indicate they're both on contract for two years from their 
respective companies — I believe, Peat Marwick, and Pemberton? 
They are on leave of absence with a contract with the 
Saskatchewan government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Yes, Mr. Shupe, just to give you more 
information, is a lawyer, was head of their corporate finance 
activities in Pemberton Houston Willoughby. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: In addition to the $98,400 that your deputy 
minister is receiving by way of a contract as  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2042 
 
 

opposed to a salary, can you tell me what other perks that he may 
have? Are there any unusual perquisites that this individual may 
receive in terms of an automobile? And I say here as well, the 
automobile, I think, is relatively standard with deputy ministers, 
and I'm not making an argument that he shouldn't be having an 
executive automobile. But are there any others, including the 
automobile, that this individual would receive from the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No. And the salary you have there is gross 
salary; there are no other benefits; that's all in, except for the car. 
He has the usual deputy minister automobile privileges. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: When you say that's all in the 98,400, he would 
still have expense accounts, access to credit cards, and that type of 
thing — access to the executive aircraft, and travel allowance and 
that type of thing — in addition to the 98,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Yes, the standard that all deputies get, but 
nothing over and above that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: And what about the assistant deputy minister, 
Mr. Shupe; would he have a similar access to executive 
automobiles which would mean he'd be allowed to purchase one 
within certain limitations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The only other item is a car allowance of $100 a 
month. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I may be wrong in this but, as I understand it, 
the deputy or assistant deputy works out of Saskatoon — one of 
them works out of Saskatoon? I could be wrong in this, but it's my 
understanding that one of them has an office in Saskatoon and 
works out of there, week by week. 
 
And what I'm wondering is how that arrangement is set up. I'm 
sure that you would agree that the normal process is the minister 
and the deputy minister are in daily contact, and I know you can 
do that by telephone, but can you tell me which of the two is 
located in Saskatoon and why that unusual — if I can call it that 
— why the unusual situation there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Yes. The deputy minister, Mr. Heron, is 
headquartered in Saskatoon. The reason is it's a rather short 
secondment of two years' leave from his employer, and with his 
family still in Saskatoon and maintaining the family residence in 
Saskatoon, those arrangements were made. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I wonder, in setting up this arrangement with 
the deputy minister located in Saskatoon, can you tell me what 
extra costs there were in setting up the officer; where is the office 
located; and what personal staff that he would have available to 
him — executive assistants, secretaries, and that type of thing — 
within the office unit of the deputy minister in Saskatoon? How 
many personal staff would he have in that office, and where is it 
located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: There's no executive assistant, any staff of that 
nature. There is a temporary secretary in the  

Saskatoon office. We will have to get the rental information from 
Supply and Services. 
 
I might add that in the normal course, if we were attempting to 
bring in a deputy from a location other than Regina, there would 
be the traditional moving expenses and whatever would be 
negotiated by the deputy minister maintaining family in 
Saskatoon. Those expenses don't arise, but I'll have to obtain the 
information on rent of the Saskatoon office from Supply and 
Services. If that's what you wish, I will supply that to you. 
 
In terms of staff, there's only the temporary secretary. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Can the minister . . . I had asked for the 
location of that office. Is it in the Sturdy Stone Building in 
Saskatoon? Can you give me the location of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Saskatoon Square. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: And the assistant deputy ministers and 
associated deputy ministers who you have here, they would be 
then located in Regina, or are there others in the executive group 
who are with Mr. Heron in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: They're all in Regina. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: I wonder if the minister could outline in terms 
of the operations of the Department of Finance. It's a little difficult 
to understand the reasoning from your perspective, in terms of 
running an efficient department, how you can have it split up 
between two cities, and I know that in terms of the deputy 
minister's moving of his family and that, I'm sure that it is more 
convenient to remain in Saskatoon, and I'm not arguing that side 
of the debate. 
 
But in terms of your job as minister, do you find this arrangement 
a little tough to get the budget put together, that type of thing? I 
noticed that there's a few things left out of the budget. Some of the 
SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) estimates, which my colleague 
from Regina North East will bring up, were sort of left out of the 
budget. In fact, there were other things that were noticeably 
lacking out of the budget document, which now we're having Bills 
introduced, and I'm not blaming that on the deputy. I think there 
could be another scenario for that — that it has more to do with 
the public opinion polls that were sliding and the budget didn't 
quite do the trick, and now we have to spend a little more money. 
 
But can you explain to me, having the deputy located in 
Saskatoon, is that causing any problems in getting the budget 
document put together? Is that one of the reasons that some of the 
mistakes we're now seeing? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I think when we'll get through the debate, 
the hon. members will support the government initiatives, but 
obviously not, and I would expect in the future that we will see 
more of a senior official presence in the city of Saskatoon by all 
government departments. 
 
The fact that we do have a deputy minister of Finance located in 
Saskatoon, certainly it doesn't cause myself or  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2043 
 
 

the department any difficulties, but again, I think that from time to 
time in the future, we will see more of a senior official presence in 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Minister, I had mentioned some of the 
errors in the budget, and I'm sure my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone will want to follow that up. 
 
But I wanted to ask you, in terms of assistant deputy ministers and 
associate deputy ministers from the early 1985 — January 1st, 
1985 — were there any additions to that category of the executive 
of the Department of Finance, or were these positions there and 
they were just . . . people just changed, or new people slotted into 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well Mr. Shupe, previously introduced, 
commenced October 21st, 1985, and Mr. Jack Vicq commenced 
November 12th, 1985. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, can I 
ask you: does the government do business with Peat Marwick and 
with the other firm from which both of your senior officials are on 
leave; does the government do business with those firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I'm advised the Peat Marwick had done the audit 
on the SaskPen properties until Mr. Heron was appointed, at 
which point they gave up the audit. And I'm advised that they have 
done other work for other departments; property management, for 
example, I'm advised that they have been selected as the auditor. 
I'm not aware that they have been selected as the auditor. I'm not 
aware of any other. We would have to go back to the other 
government departments — or Crown corporations, not 
departments — and get any further information. But that's all we 
have that we're aware of. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: I think, Mr. Minister, your officials probably 
have it in their books somewhere, the nature of the Department of 
Finance business with any firms of such kind that we are talking 
about. Do you think, Mr. Minister, without casting any kind of 
reflection on the two individuals, that the arrangement that you 
have by which there is the two top people in your department are 
on leave from firms with which your government does business, 
that there can at least be perceived by some as a potential conflict 
of interest, either now or at some future time when this contract is 
ended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I suppose that's always the difficulty. If you bring 
in qualified people or expertise from the private sector, either the 
perception can be there or the allegation. You ask, what in the 
Department of Finance, if Peat Marwick Mitchell was doing any 
work with the Department of Finance. I've given you the answer; 
the answer is no, that they were doing the SaskPen audit until Mr. 
Heron was appointed, at which point they severed that 
relationship. 
 
So I frankly don't know what more one can do. If governments are 
going to try and attract people, for example, from the investment 
community, certainly governments that are major players in the 
investment community. I suppose that perception or the allegation 
could be there. Mr. Shupe took the employment with the 
government on the understanding that, one, no relationship and no 
duties to deal with the financial and  

investment services. We certainly recognize what the perception 
. . . I believe we've responded to it as much as we possibly can and 
that no benefit accrues to any of the former employers by virtue of 
their participation. 
 
But the hon. member is correct. When we do bring in people from 
the private sector, I suppose the allegation can be made. All we 
can do is endeavour to protect the public and make sure that there's 
no benefit to the previous employer. I believe we've done that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can the minister 
advise when Mr. Shupe became the assistant deputy minister, and 
have you given the committee the remuneration which Mr. Shupe 
receives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Yes, to the Leader of the Opposition. I've given 
the committee all of the salaries of the senior officials and the 
increases that was asked for earlier. And Mr. Shupe commenced 
October 21, 1985; Mr. Vicq commenced November 12, 1985; and 
Mr. Heron commenced September 18, 1985. That information is 
on the information I forwarded to the opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
aware of the fact that Saskoil offered a substantial share offering to 
the public? Are you aware of the date, and are you aware of the 
firm through which it was offered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I believe that Saskoil — we will have to get the 
exact dates if that's the hon. member's question — was December. 
But I believe the underwriters were committed well into the 
previous spring. That would be April-May of 1985, long in 
advance of Mr. Shupe joining the Department of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your answer 
implied acknowledges that Pemberton Houston Willoughby had a 
very major part in that share offering. Do you deny, Mr. Minister, 
that the Department of Finance regularly does massive amounts of 
business with Pemberton Houston Willoughby? Hundreds of 
millions of dollars a year in securities are purchased or sold by 
your department through Pemberton Houston Willoughby. Do you 
agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Certainly, and I freely acknowledge and 
apologize to the member for not stating that, I believe, they were 
the underwriter, or one of the underwriters, of the Saskoil issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Minister, do you see no problem with 
having as your assistant deputy minister someone who is on leave 
for a relatively short period of time — two years is I believe the 
figure you gave the committee — from a bond house, an 
underwriting house and bond dealer with whom you do massive 
amounts of business? May I ask you: is there any bond house in 
Regina with whom you do more business than Pemberton 
Houston Willoughby? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I'm advised that there are other investment 
houses that we do do more business, for example, D.S. Pitfield, 
Wood Gundy, for example. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2044 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: You are informing me of something I didn't 
know. I didn't know that D.S. Pitfield had an office in Regina. If 
they do, it surprises me, but they may well have. Obviously you do 
more with D. S. Pitfield, who is, I take it, still leading your 
syndicate. 
 
But I ask you again, Mr. Minister, do you see no problem with 
having your assistant deputy minister, who obviously deals with 
the investment decisions on a day-to-day basis, being a person on 
leave for a relatively short period of time from a firm with whom 
you are doing massive amounts of business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I'm surprised with the Leader of the 
Opposition's investment portfolio that he would be surprised that 
D. S. Ames didn't have an office in Regina, and I'm advised, in 
Saskatoon as well. But having said that, as I indicated to the 
committee previously, the assistant deputy minister is not allowed 
to be involved, does not participate in the investment branch of the 
department. 
 
I freely recognize the difficulties of bringing in expertise from the 
private sector because of the allegation or the perception, but from 
time to time we have to draw on that expertise. I'm comfortable 
that we have taken what steps we can to ensure that there is no 
advantage to any previous employers from the activity of those in 
the private sector. I suppose that's the vigilance that we have to 
accept, and all I can suggest to the hon. member, certainly there's 
always a potential for difficulties, always a potential for conflict, 
but if from time to time we're going to draw on that expertise, I 
suppose the criticism and the allegation is something that we have 
to accept. One can hope that the results and the activities of the 
individuals are proof enough to the public that everything was 
done properly and correctly and in their best interest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
taking the position that expertise in operating a Department of 
Finance is not available except by people on leave from the private 
sector; that it's not available from people who are part of the 
regular public service, or from people who you can induce to be 
part of the regular public service; but you must get your expertise 
form people who are on leave and part of the staff of Peat 
Marwick, Mitchell in one case, Pemberton Houston Willoughby in 
the other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I very carefully said, from time to time 
government will draw on expertise from the private sector. As a 
matter of fact, I believe there is a federal government program 
which deliberately encourages a flow-back between private sector 
and the bureaucracy. And I believe it's been extended to the trade 
union movement as well, so that the public service, one, is brought 
into the activities of either the trade union movement or private 
sector business. Perhaps they can develop some expertise that 
way, to flow through back the other way, the private sector into 
the bureaucracy, as to learn how government operates. 
 
Did I say that that is the only place, the expertise? No, I never said 
that. I said from time to time the government may wish to draw on 
the expertise from the private sector. And I also freely admitted 
the difficulties with that. I  

believe that we will be from time to time looking at expertise from 
various sources, and we should do that. 
 
The fact that from time to time we may wish to get an expert who 
does not want to make a lifetime career in the public service, that 
is prepared to serve for a short period of time, that we should 
recognize that. We should not, as a government, in my view, 
exclude that type of individual from ever participating in 
government. 
 
But I did not in any way state that we couldn't find . . . or that all 
of the expertise would be in the bureaucracy or that was the only 
source. I think we should look around. But we have to be cautious, 
and we have to accept the difficulties that come with that. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you 
have something called an audit committee? Perhaps I will defer 
that and ask for it under the Provincial Auditor's Act, but I will ask 
you about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Do you want to ask it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: All right. Do you have an audit committee, 
and who are its members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The members of the audit committee . . . It is 
under the Provincial Auditor; I'll endeavour to get what answers I 
can for you now. 
 
The members of the committee are Mr. William Elliott, who is a 
partner in MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman; Mr. John Brennan, 
who is a Dean of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon; and Mr. Jim Maclennan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will give you 
notice that I or a colleague will, under the audit Act, ask how often 
they've met during the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Is that the only question you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Yes, that's all I have with respect to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: They meet once a year. I gather that's the 
practice, one meeting a year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: I won't ask you what an audit committee 
does that meets once a year. I won't ask you whether Mr. 
Maclennan attended the last meeting either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I'm advised that he did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Okay, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, a 
few days ago in question period, I and my colleagues asked a 
number of questions with respect to the Pioneer Trust fiasco. And 
I propose now to repeat them and ask you what the answers are. 
 
At what point in 1984-85 did the Department of Finance become 
aware that Pioneer Trust was in serious financial difficulty, and 
how did it become aware of it? 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2045 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: The department became aware of the difficulty in 
November of 1984 or '85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: I'm not quite sure I understood the answer. 
Was the answer 1984 or 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: November of 1984. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: So the department was not aware of 
difficulties prior to November of 1984. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, did the department designate in 
1984 a staff person to negotiate a government guarantee of a 
preferred share issue, and at that time was the department aware of 
the extent of Pioneer Trust's financial situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The department was made aware of financial 
difficulties with Pioneer, but not the full extent of the difficulties. 
Mr. Meiklejohn was the individual in the department who was 
involved in the possibility of the guarantee on the share issue. Or 
what other . . . if there were any other options, we could try and 
take a look at. I think that's generally brought into the difficulties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to pursue that a 
bit because later that same month undertakings were issued by the 
Department of Finance — indeed, on November 21st. And you 
tell me that the Department of Finance became aware of at least 
some difficulties earlier in that month. Are you aware, Mr. 
Minister that Mr. Will Klein, the former president of the company 
writes: 
 

The first discussion which took place relative to the financial 
problems of Pioneer Trust Company was in a meeting in July 
of 1983 in which I had received a call from the premier's 
office and was asked to meet with Premier Devine. 

 
At that particular meeting he asked what the problems were 
relative to Pioneer Trust because he had a report from the 
Saskatchewan Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs through the federal Department of Insurance that 
there were financing problems as they related to the trust 
company. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: did the Department of Finance receive no 
indicate of any of these problems, again, prior to November of 
1984? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No. As I advised, the department was advised of 
the difficulties November of 1984. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I repeat 
again — I quote again from the excerpts from a confidential 
account of the collapse of Pioneer Trust, by Will Klein, and he 
goes on to say, as published in the Leader-Post on Saturday, 
February 8, 1986, and I again quote: 
 

On Tuesday, October 20 . . . I met briefly with the premier 
and advised him of some of the concerns that related to 
Pioneer Trust and future financing. 

 

My meeting on October 30 with the premier (again I'm 
skipping) was not a lengthy one and on Nov. 2 I was at the 
Legislative Building and met with Ron Dedman. 

 
I ask you two questions: were the meetings in October with the 
Premier on this issue brought to the attention of the Department of 
Finance; and the second question is: does Mr. Ron Dedman work 
with the Department of Finance or the then minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No, Mr. Dedman doesn't work with the 
Department of Finance, and I don't believe he ever worked with 
the Department of Finance. Secondly, I have advised that the 
information to the department of the financial difficulties with 
Pioneer was in November of 1984, and that is the information. As 
I indicated, one staff person then was given duties to look at it, and 
that's where the Department of Finance first got notice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I did not say 
1984 in my previous comments, I certainly intended so to do. I 
was referring to October 20, 1984, and then Klein again, " . . .my 
meeting on October 30, 1984 with the Premier." These are all 
listed under monthly heading, and I am reading the October 1984 
heading and then the November 1984 heading. 
 
I go on to quote: 
 

At a meeting on November 6th at Berntson's apartment (I 
take it the reference is to the hon. member for 
Souris-Cannington) Klein identified the concerns of the 
Pioneer Group and its need for capital and suggested an 
amount of $20 million. We discussed at that particular 
meeting how much the capital injection would be, and Mr. 
Berntson had mentioned, let us make certain that we don't 
use a band-aid if a stitch is necessary. 

 
I asked Mr. Andrew (and I take it the reference is to the hon. 
member for Kindersley, the former minister of Finance) if 
there were precedents of this type of guarantee. 

 
Now this is November 6th. I take it that the Department of 
Finance, or at least its minister, became aware of the situation on 
November 6th. The reference goes on: "It was decided that the 
government contacts would be Dedman and Morley Meiklejohn 
of the Department of Finance," and I take it is the reference to the 
long-term and valuable employee of the department, Mr. Morley 
Meiklejohn. 
 
What I really want to find out is what happened between, let us 
say, November 6th — at which time the minister was clearly 
aware of problems and a discussion was beginning to take place as 
to whether or not there would be a guarantee — and November 
21st, when a letter signed by the Minister of Finance was handed 
to Mr. Klein which stated that the Government of Saskatchewan 
will guarantee the $27.5 million preferred share offering of 
Canadian Pioneer Management Limited. My short question is this: 
what examination was carried on by the Department of Finance 
between the period of November 6th and November 21st, or in the 
period between  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2046 
 
 

November 6th and November 21st when this letter of commitment 
was given? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, in general terms, between the date that the 
Department of Finance became involved or was notified of the 
difficulties, the process began of rather lengthy discussions, 
obviously, with the federal regulator as to the situation. We 
received advise from the federal regulator as to what would be 
acceptable. The desirable position of course from, we believe, the 
province's point of view was to keep a Saskatchewan financial 
institution operating and viable. They began to get the 
information. The information sources at that time, I believe, were 
primarily the federal regulator and advice from Pioneer. 
 
The matter accelerated, resulting in the letter, I'm advised, when 
the Bank of Montreal, which then had granted pioneer 
cheque-cashing privileges, threatened to withdraw the 
cheque-cashing privileges which would have in effect put the 
company into receivership. We had to make a decision as to what 
would be acceptable to the federal regulator to allow it to continue, 
and that was one of the options, I gather — probably the only 
option — that was acceptable at that time to continue the 
corporation, to continue the company, in light of the bank's 
decision to cancel the cheque-cashing privileges. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Well, Mr. Chairman, you tell me what steps 
were taken to commit the government to stand behind Pioneer 
Trust. And as you rightly point out, prior to the time when the 
letter of commitment of November 21st was given, there was a 
contact with the Bank of Montreal. And I assume, as a result of 
that contact, in the words of Mr. Klein, the bank "backed off," I 
believe is his phrase, but I won't attribute that to him at the 
moment. following the discussions with the government people, 
namely — and a reference earlier identifies that government 
person as Mr. Costello, the deputy minister — the Bank of 
Montreal backed off somewhat. 
 
These tell us what happened so far as the government's dealings 
with the external world. What I am asking — and clearly the 
government was beginning to commit itself. Deputy ministers 
don't call the bank and say, ease up, without giving some implied 
commitment. And then of course on November 21st there was 
nothing implied about the commitment. The letter given by the 
minister was clear and unequivocal. 
 
What I am trying to find out is: what examination into the affairs 
of Pioneer Trust took place prior to the implied commitment to the 
Bank of Montreal and the very definite commitment contained in 
the letter of November 21? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I tried to indicate: from the period of time that 
the department became involved, given the complexity of the 
situation, there were discussions with the federal regulator. 
Certainly the objective of the government was to try and keep, if at 
all reasonably possible, the Saskatchewan-based financial 
institution going. 
 
The review was beginning. We were getting some advice from the 
federal regulator as to what would be acceptable  

from their point of view. They were giving us their information on 
their assessment of the situation with regard to Pioneer Trust. The 
intervening event which accelerated action was the threat from the 
particular bank to take away the cheque cashing privileges, which, 
as the hon. member knows, would have at that point effectively 
shut down the financial institution. 
 
So in terms of what the department . . . the department was acting 
on advice from the federal regulator, certainly advice from the 
corporation, and whatever other sources it could get to begin. But 
to do a full evaluation of the company in a little better than two 
weeks was very, very difficult, if not impossible, for the 
government. The government had to make some decisions based 
on what would have been acceptable to the federal regulator to 
keep the company going in light of the bank's intervention to 
protect, I assume, its position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take it it 
is not denied that the deputy minister contacted the Bank of 
Montreal and gave them some indication that the government was 
standing behind Pioneer Trust. I ask the minister: on whose 
instructions did the deputy undertake that level of commitment to 
the bank? did he do it on his own initiative? Did he do it on 
instructions from his minister or some other minister of the 
Crown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I assume the minister. But the point about the 
evaluation — the hon. member should be aware that the federal 
regulator was doing its evaluation, which evaluation went on well 
into December, January, given the complexity obviously of a 
financial institution. The federal regulator's investigation was 
going on with degrees of intensity through all of that period of 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister, but what you are 
then telling us is that people were looking into the affairs of 
Pioneer Trust, that they had not in any sense concluded their 
examination into the affairs of Pioneer Trust. And while they were 
making these examinations into the affairs of Pioneer Trust, the 
deputy minister, probably on the instructions of the minister, 
indicated to the Bank of Montreal that the government would be 
standing behind Pioneer Trust. And the minister wrote an 
unequivocal letter designed to be shown to third parties — it's 
what a comfort letter is — unequivocal letter saying that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would guarantee $27.5 million of 
preferred shares, all before the government had completed or even 
got very far along with its examination of the affairs of Pioneer 
Trust. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the question I ask is: how can a department of 
Finance, and particularly a minister of Finance, commit the public 
purse to $27.5 million in a situation which is obviously a highly 
risky one without some reasonably adequate examination prior to 
making that sort of a commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Let's keep in mind, one, that it was a guarantee, 
not necessarily a commitment of the total amount of the funds; 
secondly, that . . . Let's assume that no guarantee was given. If one 
assumes no guarantee was given, at the point in November when 
the Bank of Montreal was going to take away the cheque-cashing 
privileges, the corporation Pioneer Trust was effectively  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2047 
 
 

in receivership and effectively shut down. 
 
We freely admit that we were trying to maintain the existence of 
the Saskatchewan-based financial institution. If nothing had been 
done, the Pioneer Trust would have been shut down in November, 
and we certainly did believe that we had to make some effort to try 
and, if possible, save the company. 
 
Secondly, keep in mind that the federal regulators' investigation 
went on as well; it wasn't completed. So some of the information 
we had as to what would be acceptable certainly came from the 
federal regulator. We don't deny for a minute the difficulties. And 
I believe the previous minister had indicated that if he had all the 
information, he certainly would not have issued the document. 
 
But having said that, there was a very short period of time . . . the 
objective, one, hoping that the company could survive. The basic 
advice we had at the time — but the information sources were 
obviously limited and somewhat prejudiced in that they were 
Pioneer — that the difficulties were of a relatively short-term 
nature. But once that intervening event came in, if the government 
had have done nothing, the company would have been shut down 
in November. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: So that, on the grounds that the trust 
company would have gone to the wall, and in the absence of 
information, on November 21st a letter of guarantee was issued. 
 
Mr. Minister, I now want to ask whether or not you were aware of 
the financial situation, your department was aware of the financial 
situation on December 28th, which is more than one month later, 
at the time that three press releases were approved by the 
Department of Finance — the one relating to the preferred share 
offering and two others relating to the year-end performance of the 
company? 
 
Now here, Mr. Minister, we have, a month later — more than a 
month later — about five weeks later, the department approving a 
press release to be issued by Pioneer Trust dealing with a preferred 
share issue which was going to be guaranteed by the Government 
of Saskatchewan. And I want to ask you, what information about 
the financial affairs of Pioneer Trust did you have at that time — 
five weeks after you had issued the guarantee letter of November 
21st? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The analyses and investigations were going on as 
well by the federal regulator during the course of those five weeks 
and in succeeding times. That investigation was in no way 
complete by the federal regulator. There was till, on the advice that 
was forthcoming and the information, there was still some belief 
that the company could be maintained. But as more and more 
information came, after January, ultimately the decision was made 
to not proceed and withdraw the guarantee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, now we 
have a situation whereby in mid-November you were making 
commitments and by November 21st you  

were making very, very hard commitments in writing, without 
information, and by the end of December you're still making 
public statements that you're going to guarantee, and still, you tell 
us, without information, or without sufficient information. 
 
Can you tell me when and by whom Mr. Al Wagar was appointed 
and to do what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The information, you say that" without 
information." The information — we did have information coming 
primarily from the two sources: one, the federal regulator, and I 
think we should recall that Pioneer was a federally regulated 
financial institution. The advice I have, that the officials were 
aware of the press releases but in no way approved them. 
 
But we should keep in mind, with a federally regulated 
corporation, that the federal regulator as well had not completed its 
investigation; and again keeping in mind that the threat to take 
away the cheque cashing privileges would have collapsed the 
company at that time. The efforts were made — no one denies it 
— in hopes of keeping the company going. Mr. Wagar was . . . If I 
can just take a minute and get the exact dates for the hon. member. 
We don't have the exact date, but it was January of 1985. Mr. 
Wagar, of course, had some involvement as president of a 
financial institution. We were coming to the conclusion that the 
information we were getting from Pioneer was less than complete. 
There was increasing concerns from the federal regulator; 
certainly the officials were increasingly concerned, and we wanted 
someone outside that could take a look at this and give us their 
opinion. Mr. Wagar was asked — we don't have the exact date — 
but it was January of 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: By whom and to do what, was Mr. Wagar 
appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: By the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs to investigate the Pioneer Trust Company. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister. You tell us that the 
federal regulators didn't have all the information and they, too, 
were carrying on their investigations. There is a very, very 
considerable difference between the situation of the federal 
regulators and the provincial government. The provincial 
government, while gathering up information, was busy strewing 
financial commitments about to banks and to other people, 
whereas the federal regulator was seeking information, 
presumably before the federal government undertook any financial 
commitment, if any, if they ever intended to. 
 
The question which I ask — and you may well say that I ought to 
direct it elsewhere, and if you say that, fine: why did it take until 
January to appoint someone like Mr. Wagar, who had previous 
trust company experience, to examine into this matter, when in 
July of 1983 — 1983 now, and this is January of '85 Wagar was 
appointed by the Department of Consumer and corporate Affairs 
— in July of '83 the Premier is discussing with Mr. Klein the  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2048 
 
 

problems which relate to Pioneer Trust because he had a report 
from the Saskatchewan Department of Consumer and corporate 
Affairs, through the federal Department of Insurance, that there 
were financing problems? 
 
We have the situation whereby Consumer and corporate Affairs 
were aware of these problems in July of '83; the Department of 
Finance became aware of them in November of '83, and within 
five or six short weeks had given commitments to banks, 
commitments which were designed to be relied upon by the 
federal government. And then in January of 1985, finally 
somebody is appointed to examine into the affairs of Pioneer Trust 
after commitments had been freely given. 
 
Why did the Department of Finance not pursue with more 
diligence examination into the affairs of Pioneer Trust during this 
period of November and December when they were distributing 
financial commitments, but apparently not pursuing any rigorous 
analysis of the affairs of Pioneer Trust, since obviously the 
information which they obtained from Mr. Wagar on two or three 
weeks examination proved that Pioneer Trust was not a worthy 
recipient of provincial government guarantees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I think you will understand, one, that it 
wasn't a matter of strewing financial commitments. There was the 
financial commitment made. We've gone over that as to the reason 
for accelerating any decision. The members should keep in mind 
that through the course of this, and this is a federally regulated 
financial institution, the licence was being continued. The licence 
was not renewed after December 31, 1984. And obviously the 
concerns as the investigation by the federal regulators was going 
on, and as we got more and more involved into it, the concerns 
increased. 
 
We certainly had the position that there had been the guarantee set 
out. We wanted to, once that licence was not renewed, to make 
sure that we did have as many facts as we could get. But the 
federal regulator had continued the licence through all of this 
period of time, and certainly we can get into the debate as to where 
the province stands under the federal regulating system in a 
situation such as this. But we, to an extent, were relying on that as 
well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Minister, the federal government 
continued the licence because you gave the letter- your 
predecessor gave the letter of November 21, and that is why the 
federal government continued the licence. And you can hardly 
then say that you were depending upon the federal government 
and the fact that they were continuing the licence as some 
evidence that the company was in reasonable shape. 
 

On November 21 the Pioneer delegation travelled to Ottawa, 
and a letter was delivered to me (that's to Will Klein), by 
hand by Mr. Dedman at the Regina airport at noon of 
November 21. 

 
Signed by the Minister of Finance. 
 

Please be advised that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
guarantee the $27.5 million preferred share offering of 
Canadian Pioneer Management Ltd. Details of the guarantee 
are now  

being reviewed by officials. You may expect the guarantee 
to be ready in time to allow your new equity to be placed 
prior to December 31, 1984. That December 31, 1984 date is 
one set by the federal government saying you have to 
increase your equity by that date or you don't get your 
licence. 

 
This letter obviously gave us the comfort that we needed 
because we were then certain that everything was in hand 
and we could proceed. On November 22 (that's the next day), 
Pioneer officials met the Department of Insurance at Ottawa 
on the matter of property write-down. And the letter was 
given so that the federal government regulator would not 
withdraw the licence. 

 
There is no justification for the provincial government saying that 
the non-withdrawal of the licence represented any endorsement by 
the federal regulator of the ability of Pioneer Trust to meet its 
obligations. The regulator was acting on the basis of your 
commitment to put up $27.5 million by way of guarantee — and a 
share guarantee at that. 
 
And the significance of the preferred share, as opposed to any type 
of debt security guarantee, is that it would increase the trust 
company's equity. And we all know that, and I just make that point 
— a highly unusual thing, by the way, a guarantee of preferred 
shares. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again: how can you justify the 
department's issuing of implicit undertakings to the Bank of 
Montreal and very, very explicit undertakings in the minister's 
letter of November 21st, when you did not have any information 
or sufficient information about the financial standing of Pioneer 
Trust, in the light of the fact that when Mr. Wagar was appointed 
some time in January, an examination of about three weeks on his 
part revealed that, at least in his opinion, the trust company was 
unsalvageable? 
 
Could you not have addressed the problem earlier when you knew 
about it in November and saved a great deal of taxpayers' money? 
Could you not have done in November what was done in January? 
Could you not have made a decision earlier which would have 
saved tens of millions of dollars? How do you justify not acting 
until firm, solid commitments had been given to the federal 
authorities? Press releases had been issued which, at least Mr. 
Klein says, were approved by the Department of Finance. How 
can you justify that type of lengthy delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well the original point you made about whether 
the . . . WE should keep in mind that the licence was in fact 
continued until November of 1984. I've answered the question 
before. I say this to the hon. member that if the Government of 
Saskatchewan between . . . The Department of Finance in 
particular, between November of it becoming involved and the 
date of the guarantee, if the Department of Finance had have said, 
no, we are not giving any financial commitment or taking any 
action until we have gone through the books — and remember the 
federal regulator was going on — the company would have 
collapsed when the Bank of  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2049 
 
 

Montreal took away its cheque-cashing rights. If the government 
had have done nothing, the company would have in November, 
the end of November, would have collapsed. 
 
One can argue — and obviously very much part of the debate — 
whether the government should have moved to protect a 
Saskatchewan headquarter company; you're arguing, no. The 
government made a decision based on, certainly less than 
complete information, but it was forced to make that decision by 
the move, the intervening move, by the bank, which was going to 
take away its cheque-cashing privileges. 
 
As the investigation continued — and let me state that the 
investigation as well by the federal authority — there was more 
and more information coming into play, which certainly when Mr. 
Wagar became involved he had access to more information than 
the regulators of the provincial government during the intervening 
period of time. 
 
You asked the question: should — and I think this is the 
fundamental question — should the Government of Saskatchewan 
have acted in November of 1984, with less than . . . not having all 
of the information to issue the guarantee, the question is: should 
the province of Saskatchewan have acted in those circumstances 
to move to protect a Saskatchewan-headquartered financial 
institution? I suggest to you that the province had to make some 
effort to protect a Saskatchewan-headquartered financial 
institution in hopes that it could become viable and that it could be 
maintained. 
 
We have some disagreement with this. Obviously, if the ideal 
situation is if you can make your decision with all of the available 
facts — if that option had have been open to the government — I 
think we all would have been much more comfortable. But 
unfortunately with the intervention of the bank taking away the 
cheque-cashing rights, that option was no longer there. 
 
So the final question, the point you make . . . Let's assume that the 
province had done nothing and that Pioneer Trust had collapsed in 
November of 1984, what would have been the obligation of the 
province to pay the unsecured depositors — if the province had 
taken no action? 
 
I suggest that any government would probably make some 
response, given that it was a Saskatchewan-headquartered 
corporation, to give some assistance — one can debate how much 
— to uninsured depositors, particularly when we look at who 
those uninsured depositors were. And we are not dealing with 
large, independently wealthy organizations in many cases. We 
were dealing with, in many cases, ordinary Saskatchewan citizens 
and Saskatchewan institutions. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member, in fairness, that if the province had 
done nothing in November and the corporation had collapsed in 
November, that there still would have been some obligation — 
moral as opposed to legal, I suppose — to give some assistance to 
the uninsured depositors. 
 
So we can debate how much we should have given;  

whether we should have given any. I suppose that the government 
made the decision that we should make a payment to the 
uninsured depositors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
can make those arguments, but he hard facts are that your 
department — your companion Department of Consumer and 
corporate Affairs — was aware of trouble in July of 1983. In 
October of 1984 the Premier was made aware of difficulties. He 
was aware in 1983 but aware again of difficulties in 1984. This 
corporation was one which was very closely associated . . . the 
leading actors were very closely associated with the political party 
which you represent. 
 
(1630) 
 
And notwithstanding some early warning signals, notwithstanding 
the fact that there would naturally be some questions asked when 
persons as close to the political party which you represent solicit 
government assistance, you nevertheless — your predecessor, but 
your government nevertheless — gave a guarantee of $27 million 
of taxpayers' money in respect of a company whose affairs you did 
not know about except to know that they were in deep trouble. 
Except to know that the bank was threatening not to cash their 
cheques; except to know that you had warnings at least a year in 
advance that there was trouble. 
 
You knew all that and you still issued a guarantee of $27.5 
million, a guarantee which eventually — again if one can accept 
the word of Mr. Klein — for political rather than economic 
reasons, you felt it necessary to withdraw. 
 
That last comment is based upon a statement attributed to Mr. 
Andrew. This is Andrew to Klein: 
 

It was six of one and half a dozen of another economically, but 
politically it just couldn't fly, and the Premier had made the final 
decision not to honour the guarantee. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you not believe that your government 
has some obligation to act with more circumspection, with more 
care in those circumstances where you had knowledge of 
difficulty, where there was some suggestion that there might be 
political camaraderie involved? None the less, you went out and 
gave a guarantee of $27.5 million which has cost taxpayers in this 
province a large amount of money, with no facts — with no facts. 
All you knew was that there was trouble and you didn't have 
enough facts to know how deep the trouble was. 
 
Now surely, Mr. Minister, that's irresponsible conduct on the part 
of the a minister of Finance and a department of Finance, and I 
would want to know whether or not this sort of thing is going to be 
continued by the Department of Finance, or have we seen the last 
of these episodes of strewing about commitments and guarantees 
on the basis of no information, but apparently camaraderie and old 
friendships? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, the allegations the hon. member makes 
don't quite jibe with the facts. I suggest to the hon.  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2050 
 
 

member, one, he conveniently fails to recognize that Pioneer Trust 
was a federally regulated company; that even though there may 
have been, and there was street talk that Pioneer was having 
difficulties, that was a matter for federal regulation. And through 
the course of this until that November, that federal licence was 
continued. 
 
Given the fact that the department became involved with 
indications from the federal regulator of Pioneer that it was then in 
serious trouble, certainly we made the effort, as the provincial 
government, to maintain the viability of a provincially 
headquartered financial institution. We can accept the criticism for 
endeavouring to do that. That certainly the efforts of the 
government to investigate could not be completed in light of the 
intervening act of the cancelling of the cheque cashing 
capabilities, which caused the government to act to try and 
maintain the corporation. 
 
I do suggest, in fairness to the hon. member, that if the province 
had done nothing, and it was not a provincially regulated trust 
company, if the province had done nothing, that there still would 
have been an obligation on a government to assist Saskatchewan 
citizens who were uninsured in light of the collapse of Pioneer. I 
believe that obligation would have been there. 
 
And I don't for a minute believe that the obligation would have 
been lessened if it had happened in November as opposed to 
January, February — that there still would have been a significant 
financial obligation. Admittedly, not legal, but they were 
Saskatchewan citizens who were being affects, in many cases 
seriously hurt by the collapse. So I believe that that action would 
have had to been taken in any event. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Minister, you're still in effect asserting 
that you didn't have time to investigate fully, that these events 
came on suddenly and you didn't have time to investigate fully. 
 
But I want to remind you, Mr. Minister, that your companion 
department had indications of trouble in July of 1983, that there 
were a number of meetings between the officials of Pioneer Trust 
and ministers of the Crown during early 1984. Here in July of 
1984 the Hon. Mr. Berntson meeting with Will Klein, this in 
July, during which the problems of the Pioneer group of 
companies were discussed. 
 
And if there were areas of mutual assistance which could be 
provided through the government, the government would be 
receptive to talking with Pioneer. I don't know what the mutual 
assistance was. I know what assistance the government was 
expected to provide to Pioneer. I'm not at all sure what assistance 
Will Klein and others were expected to provide to the Government 
of Saskatchewan by way of mutual assistance, but I can speculate. 
 
And then in September of 1984 we continued to dialogue on a 
regular basis, and on and on it goes — and on and on it goes. And 
there were meetings between Mr. Klein and minister after 
minister, some with two ministers there, some with three ministers 
there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: In the dark of night. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: . . . and, yes, apparently not in the business 
offices of either the Government of Saskatchewan or the Pioneer 
group of companies. 
 
And then we have this plea by the Department of Finance that they 
didn't know that there was trouble, and that really they didn't have 
time to look into this matter before they distributed, as I say, 
commitments to the Bank of Montreal and further commitments to 
the federal government of a $27.5 million guarantee. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you can say that if the guarantee hadn't been 
given, such and such would have happened. What I don't think 
you can say is that any prudent measures were taken to ascertain 
the true facts with respect to Pioneer Trust, of which you or your 
colleagues had some sufficient notice prior to the time when this 
guarantee was issued. And I don't think there's any doubt about 
that. You just gave it without due consideration — carelessly and, 
I say, frivolously — and I think the public are paying, and paying 
heavily, for that type of conduct on the part of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well again I have to remind the hon. member 
that the federal regulator did maintain the licence through the 
course of that. There were, I gather, some differences between 
Pioneer and the federal regulator as to valuation of assets and that 
sort of thing. and I would think that in the review of any federally 
regulated financial institution — I think the Estey inquiry is 
showing this — that there may be debates between the managers 
and the federal regulator as to the valuation of assets. 
 
But we did not have any indication from the federal regulator that 
this corporation was in serious financial trouble, that it was going 
down the tubes, until the seriousness obviously was brought to the 
attention approximately November of 1985. 
 
There's a big difference between a financial institution having 
difficulties if the parties are and the federal regulator looks upon it 
as they may be short term; they may be temporary; they may be 
able to be rectified by the management of the corporation. 
 
So to argue that because they may be some difficulties, that 
Draconian action necessarily need be taken immediately, could 
have the opposite effect. It could very much have created a run on 
the corporation, I suggest to the hon. member, and I believe that's 
why there's the difficult position the federal regulator has — the 
reticence to go out and cause a run and a shut-down or a closure of 
a financial institution. 
 
So I think it fair to say that with a federally regulated financial 
institution, during the course of that that the licence was in fact 
maintained by the federal regulator. Certainly if there had not been 
the intervening act of the bank indicating it would take away the 
cheque cashing, there would have been ample time for a full 
investigation. One, I freely admit, cannot investigate a financial 
institution, I suggest, of any reasonable size in a very short period 
of time of a couple of weeks. 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2051 
 
 

But we freely admit that we made the decision as a government to 
try and do what we could to maintain the existence of a 
Saskatchewan headquartered financial institution. I don't think it 
was a good day for the province when a Saskatchewan 
headquartered financial institution shut its doors, and I believe we 
had some obligation. And I believe that if we had taken no action 
and let the company go down earlier, we still would have had an 
obligation as a reasonable government to assist the uninsured 
depositors, given the particular nature of a locally headquartered 
financial institution. So we can debate whether we should have 
done that. I believe that that obligation would have been there for 
any government. 
 
Do we wish that we would have had more time? Certainly, it 
would have been preferable to have more time to do the full 
investigation, but given the intervention which would have shut 
down the corporation, certainly some action had to be maintained 
to try and keep the company going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'd like to 
turn to your estimates and to turn to pages 10 and 11, the 
Consolidated Fund estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a copy of the estimates for last year and I note 
that there are some substantial differences in the structure of the 
estimates. And I ask you, in general terms: if your budget had 
been structured on the same basis as the budget of your 
predecessor, do you have an estimate of how much the 
expenditure estimates would be increased and how much the 
revenue estimates would be decreased? 
 
You have used a large number of devices in this budget which 
weren't used in other budgets, and I'm just looking for a horseback 
guess. If you'd taken all of these figures and calculated the, put 
them in the book the same way as your predecessor had, how 
much would the estimates of expenditure be increased and the 
estimates of revenue be decreased? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: There's no change in the way of accounting. I'm 
advised that, for example, the ag equity corporation was the same 
as done with the previous administration with regard to PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company), so there's no change. The only 
salient change would be the question of the property management 
corporation. And the property management corporation would 
have meant a differential of roughly $141 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Thank you, Mr. Minister. Let's look at a few 
of them one by one. Under the heading of . . . I'll come back to 
provincial taxes. Receipts from government enterprises and other 
funds, Saskatchewan Liquor Board, $240 million. Could you tell 
me what will be the source of these revenues? From where will the 
Liquor Board get $240 million to pay you? And prior to answering 
that question, would you indicate to me how much you received 
from the liquor board in the year ended March 31, 1986? You had 
estimated 149 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: The transfer in 1985-86, the revised  

estimate was 84 million and the accumulated funds in the liquor 
board — again the past practice is to transfer to that from the 
Consolidated Fund from time to time and we elected to do that — 
that transfer estimated for '86-87 is the accumulated funds plus the 
expected revenues this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Minister, you know and I know that 
there has never been a transfer of more than $110 million from the 
Liquor Board to the Consolidated Fund in any year in the history 
of this province . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . It's not right? 
 
Now I'm talking about a transfer — '82-83 — they may be the 
estimates as opposed to the facts. But the largest I have any note of 
is $110,426,000 in '82-83. So what, in fact, you did is decide that 
since you're going to have a whopping deficit this year, and since 
your estimate of the deficit didn't mean anything anyway, your 
estimate last year, as I recall it, '85-86 deficit was estimated at 
$291 million, and since you are going to be hundreds of millions 
out, and you now tell us it's 595 million or thereabouts, you 
decided you would roll over a little money into this year and not 
bother taking out the money you had budgeted to take out at 149 
million and you decided to leave 65 million in there and roll it 
over this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: with respect to the deficit for the year 
1985-86 which was estimated at 595 million in the budget speech, 
does that estimate still stand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: To respond to the latter: in 1981-82, the transfer 
to the Consolidated Fund and the Liquor Board, some 60 per cent 
of the retained earnings were transferred; in 1985-86, some 74 per 
cent. so there have been considerably lower transfers from time to 
time. 
 
I'm sorry, I didn't hear the second question. I apologize to the 
member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: The question was: with respect to your 
overall deficit, you estimates . . . the '85-86 budget estimated the 
deficit at 291 million. In your budget speech, as I recall it, you 
indicated that that figure would be revised upward to 595 million. 
What I'm asking is: does that $595 million estimate still stand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I'm advised that it may be in the range of $10 
million below that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: And the 595 was arrived at by only drawing 
down 84 million from the Liquor Board and leaving the other 65 
in so that it could make your this year's budget look a little less 
horrendous. Is that a fair statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No, I thought this year's budget looked pretty 
good, and I gather the public felt the same way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: That's right. Yes, I know. I think the public 
will have observed your figures of '85-86 of 291 million, and in 
fact likely to be $591 million, thereabouts — $300 million off. 
And I think that 1986-87, that if . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, 
if the money going to the farmers was even in here, Mr. Member. 
But  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2052 
 
 

all that is supposedly loan money, at least the production loans, 
and will not be found as an expenditure. That we can come to in a 
minute. 
 
So that I know, Mr. Minister, you are saying that you are going to 
drawn down all of the money, the accumulated or retained 
earnings, which will be about . . . let's see, the retained earnings 
might be of the order of 150 million, all in — a little less than that, 
perhaps. Are you going to draw down all of the retained earnings 
and virtually all of the earnings so that the retained earnings of the 
Liquor Board at the end of this year will be at a very low figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No, we expect the . . . traditionally the Liquor 
Board requires in the range of 25 to $30 million to operate. We 
expect retained earnings to be approximately $34 million, so we're 
not drawing it all down. And secondly, we are leaving a cushion 
above and beyond what the Liquor Board has traditionally used. 
 
With regard to your other point about the response with regard to 
the farmers, I suggest to the hon. member that the interest charges, 
the loss provisions, and all of those things are very much included, 
in addition to other activities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, could you 
take me through the transactions which will produce agricultural 
land revenue of $124,419,000? I want to refer you to page 6; and 
then I want to refer you to page 114; and then I want to refer you 
to page 127. Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that what you propose to 
do is to go to Pemberton Houston Willoughby, or some bond 
company, and sell $100 million worth of Saskatchewan bonds, 
and that you then intend to buy shares of this Saskatchewan 
Agricultural and Commercial Equity Corporation. And then you 
intend to use the money, the proceeds from the shares, to buy 
some of the land owned by the Heritage Fund, and assert that the 
$100 million is income and mark it up as revenue for the year that 
we are now in? 
 
Is it not true, therefore, that not a dollar, aside from the normal 
land sales which I will assume to be of the order of 24 million, the 
additional 100 million will come not a dollar from anybody 
outside the Government of Saskatchewan? It is moving money 
around within the Government of Saskatchewan, money which 
you probably have borrowed from the bankers and the bond 
dealers, and you will essentially be attempting to convert a loan 
which is going to have to be paid over a long period of time; into 
revenue which you will discern is revenue for this year, and your 
alleged asset is the shares in this agricultural corporation. Is it not 
true that that's what you're up to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: No. The agricultural equity and commercial 
equity corporation is envisaged as I indicated. That is one asset. 
We are evaluating other assets — perhaps the Ipsco shares, for 
example, that the government owns. We would envisage either the 
bond is an option, but the issuing of equities to Saskatchewan 
people to be able to invest in that type of financial institution, 
investment institution. 
 
Those decisions has not been made. There is a very  

intense evaluation going. We envisage that the province can utilize 
the equivalent of what was the Alberta energy corporation, but we 
are using different assets, obviously. We look upon that vehicle as 
one vehicle to encourage economic development, one vehicle 
which perhaps will "joint venture" with other Saskatchewan 
corporations to invest in agricultural enterprises or commercial 
enterprises. 
 
So it's not, as you say, just a transfer of funds. We are looking at 
utilizing those assets — we freely recognize that — and begin to 
put them to other uses in hopes of generating more economic 
activity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Well, I'll come back to a very simple 
question. You say, Mr. Minister, that you're going to get 124 
million from agricultural land revenue, and if I look over on 
another page it will say land sales. If I look on page 114, it say 
land sales, $122 million. 
 
Shortly put, you say you're going to sell land for 122 million. Can 
you tell me who's going to buy it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Certainly. The agricultural equity corporation 
will purchase that land, and as I've indicated that ultimately, as we 
see it, perhaps the people of Saskatchewan will subsequently then 
buy the shares in the agriculture and commercial equity 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: Order. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


