


















































June 6, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 6, 1986 
 
 

1741 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Tuesday 
next that I will move a motion under rule 16: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has stayed in office longer than any peacetime 
government in Saskatchewan since the last Conservative 
government; and regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan 
is clinging to power beyond the traditional four-year mandate; 
and further, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly therefore urges the 
Premier of Saskatchewan to call a general election forthwith. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lusney: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you, to the Assembly, 31 grades 6, 7, and 8 students 
from Endeavour, Saskatchewan. The introduction in on behalf of 
the member for Canora who isn't here today. 
 
We have with the students their teachers, Mr. Don Chorneyko, 
Dennis Thiessen, and Marc Jaques. Their chaperons are Carol 
Gawrelitza, Dianne Stoudt, and Brian Steppan; the bus driver, 
Dale Goodsman. 
 
I'd just like to welcome the students here this afternoon — or this 
morning, pardon me — it's a Friday. We welcome you here this 
morning, and I hope your visit to the legislature is going to be an 
interesting one and an informative one. I hope your visit to Regina 
will be an enjoyable one. And I'll wish you a very safe journey 
home. And I'd like all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students here. I'll meet with you later on. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 
me to introduce through you, and to you, to this Assembly, 30 
students from the Porcupine Plain school. They're accompanied 
here today by Brian MacMillan, Bill Yashnik, Al Dewan, Zonie 
Willerton, and Debbie Fettis. I hope that they find their stay or 
their visit to the legislature both informative, and certainly I think 
they'll find it innovative in many ways. I'll be meeting with them 
later for questions and drinks and pictures at 10:30. I hope they 
have a safe journey home, and I'll be seeing many of them back in 
Porcupine over the new few weeks and certainly at their fair day 
which comes up in the end of June and early part of July. 
 
So I wish them a safe journey home and ask all members of the 
legislature to join with me in welcoming the students from 
Porcupine Plain to our Legislative Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly, 35 grade 
4 students from Outlook Elementary School from Outlook, 
Saskatchewan, from the constituency of Arm River. They are 
accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by their teachers Mrs. Lee and Mrs. 
McPhail, and their bus driver, Mrs. Park. They are also 
accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by chaperons Mrs. Kasper, Mrs. 
Fallick, Mrs. Haugen, and a Mr. Derdall. I'll be meeting with this 
group, Mr. Speaker, at 11 o'clock for refreshments and questions. 
And I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming this group here and wishing them a good day and safe 
journey home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment Statistics 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and this morning Statistics Canada reported that over the 
last 12 months the number of people working in Saskatchewan has 
actually gone down; and further, that over the past 12 months the 
size of the Saskatchewan work-force has actually declined. 
 
Can the Premier tell us how he proposes to act so that these 
numbers will be turned around this summer, so that there will be 
more jobs of Saskatchewan people rather than less jobs, as there 
has been in the last months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be fair 
to correct the Leader of the Opposition. The unemployment rate in 
Saskatchewan dropped to 7.6 this last month, which is the 
second-lowest in Canada, just behind Ontario. The actual number 
of unemployed dropped by 21,000 since April. The number is also 
2,000 less than last year's number. 
 
The labour force and employed . . . The labour force . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition might 
. . . The labour force increased by 11,000 people. Mr. Speaker, I 
wondered if perhaps the members opposite could listen to the 
response. The labour force increased by 11,000 people over April. 
The actual number of employed increased by 12,000 people. 
 
The percentage increase over May, in the labour force, was the 
highest of any province west of Atlantic Canada. The actual youth 
unemployment rate dropped by a full percentage point from April 
to 12.6 per cent. This figure is nearly two points lower than in 
May of 1985. 
 
The women's employment rate dropped to 7.6 in May. This is a 
drop of 1.3 percentage points below what it was in 1985. And in 
total, Mr. Speaker, I believe the number . . . In April of 1982 we 
had 420,000 people employed. And now we have 464,000 people 
employed, or an increase of 44,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan in the last four years. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1742 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The highly 
selective figures which the Premier has chosen does not cover the 
question I asked: why are the number of people in Saskatchewan 
in May of 1986 smaller than the number in May of 1985? Why, in 
the last year, have the number of people working in this province 
— why has that number gone down? And why is the number of 
people offering themselves to work . . . Why has the size of the 
labour force gone down between May of 1985 and May of 1986? 
Would you answer those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'll make two observations; 
one is: over the last four years we have 44,000 more people 
working than April of 1982; the second observation — and we 
said it last year, and I'm sure you agreed in the legislature last 
fall - we have had two consecutive, and, in some places, three 
years consecutive years of drought and grasshopper infestation 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the impact on agricultural labour force has been significant. 
And if you go back and look at the impact in the last couple of 
years with respect to agricultural employment, you will find that it 
did fall. We had improvements in many other sectors as a result of 
what we are doing in terms of projects, whether it's an upgrader 
project, or whether it's an expansion of a rural gas distribution 
system, or others. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the whole country 
would readily admit and understand that there's been problems in 
agriculture as a result of drought, as a result of grasshoppers, and 
as a result of the combination of things that we have seen that have 
raised the cost and hurt the farm income situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don't find it particularly difficult to explain, 
when I look at the last four years, we have 44,000 more people 
working than when we started — 44,000. The member opposite 
says, well what happened last year, because you've got 1,000 less 
now than you did last year. Well I'm saying there's a 12,000 more 
people working than there was a month ago, and despite the 
agriculture, and despite the drought, we've had a situation where 
Saskatchewan maintains the best employment record in western 
Canada, the second best in the entire nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the 
Premier ascribe to the drought — the fact that in the first four 
months of this year, 1986, January to April, the number of people 
who have entered this province is about 4,300, and the number 
who have left is 9,983, for a net loss of 5,600 people in this 
province in four months. Do you blame that on the drought as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the population in the province 
of Saskatchewan — I mean the hon. member says, well, you've 
used selected statistics. Well, look at the last four years. I mean, 
year after year after year, despite drought, and despite various 
other economic conditions, the population for the first time in its 
history in Saskatchewan is well over a million people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the economic conditions that have hit this 
province, we have seen the growth in the labour  

force. We have seen significant increases in the number of people 
employed, up by 44,000. 
 
We said last year our target was 60,000 more people working in 
Saskatchewan by this July compared to April of 1982 and, Mr. 
Speaker, that is still our goal and it is our intention to see the 
unemployment rate continue to fall, more people being employed. 
And yes, we've had some difficult times. And yes, it's been 
difficult, but over the four-year history — if he wants to look at 
the four years and not be selective with his statistics — he'll see 
this province grew in population, and the number of people 
working grew, and we have had either the lowest unemployment 
in the country or the second lowest all the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In 
view of the fact that people can't eat four-year records but want to 
know what's going to happen in the next few months so they get a 
job, will you outline to the House what steps you propose to take 
to see that young people particularly, but others in Saskatchewan, 
have an opportunity for employment this summer so that we will 
not see the number of jobs go down in June as compared with last 
June, the way we saw the number of jobs go down in May of this 
year compared with last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we have an 
Opportunities '86 program which is going to be employing 
thousands of young people. We will be introducing some new 
measures in this session of the legislature that will be very, very 
appropriate for young people. We are seeing more and more 
women opening businesses in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
see the labour force . . . the unemployment among women is 
dropping all the time, and the unemployment among youth. We 
are obviously creating projects. We have had a very dynamic 
industry in the oil patch and the natural gas industry. We see more 
tourism. 
 
If I could just take a moment, Mr. Speaker. The tourism industry 
in Saskatchewan is growing very rapidly as a result as the kinds of 
things we're doing at Expo that the NDP is against. We're finding 
more and more people are not only coming into Canada but 
coming into Saskatchewan, because now Saskatchewan people are 
proud of inviting others to come in here. We see on the Manitoba 
border — and I was just in Swan River, Mr. Speaker — people in 
Manitoba are coming to Yorkton, coming to Kamsack, coming to 
Canora to shop, because there's no tax on clothes and there's not 
tax on gasoline. 
 
They're complaining in the legislature in Manitoba because too 
many people are coming into Saskatchewan. The NDP in 
Manitoba have taxed clothes and taxed gas. So if you want to find 
jobs in the service industry, in the tourist industry, in the province 
of Saskatchewan — people are coming in here to shop and to buy 
and to build because we are creating excitement; we are building 
new jobs. And Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite wants to 
compare where we spend our money versus where he spends his 
money, saying nationalizing the potash — not creating one new 
job — we are building new paper mills, we are building new  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1743 
 

upgraders, we are building new fertilizer plants, we are creating 
projects in the tune of billions and billions of dollars to provide 
jobs for Saskatchewan people so that this province will have the 
lowest unemployment despite the economic conditions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Collapse of Pioneer Trust 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. My question is to the Minister of 
Finance. Yesterday in Public Accounts my colleague and I, the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, attempted to resolve the 
impasse in the committee by providing a written list of questions 
to which we would restrict ourselves. We were attempted to meet 
the stated concerns of your members that we would stray from the 
year under review and that we would rag the question endlessly. 
 
We were met with the usual solid wall of resistance, Mr. Minister. 
Among the excuses which your members threw up was that we 
ought to ask these questions in question period. Our response to 
that was that if we tried, you would either take notice of them and 
never get back to us, or you would evade the issue. 
 
To put the matter to the test, Mr. Minister, I wish to put to you one 
of the questions which we attempted to put to the committee of 
public accounts. At what point in 1984 did the department become 
aware that Pioneer Trust was in serious financial difficulty, and 
how did it become aware of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I'm not familiar with the details of the 
NDP-started squabble in Public Accounts Committee, but I will be 
glad to take notice of the questions. 
 
The only advice I had on public accounts was that the hon. 
member, who was just on his feet, tabled some pre-conditions to 
him serving as chairman. I would think, Mr. Speaker, that is the 
height of arrogance in the British parliamentary system, where a 
member has said, unless you do things my way, I will not do my 
public duty, and I will not follow the oppositions' duty to chair the 
public accounts. That is the only advice that I have had, that we 
saw an exercise in political arrogance of the highest order 
yesterday. I believe the hon. member should apologize to the 
people of this province for his actions yesterday, assume the duty 
that he was elected by his constituents to perform, and get down to 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am prepared, if I get the list of questions from the 
hon. member, to take notice. I'm not familiar with the details, but 
we did, yesterday, see the height of the NDP arrogance in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, do I take it from that blatant 
attempt to evade answering the question that there's little point in 
putting these questions to you in question period because you're 
not going to answer them either? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I indicated that if you give me the  

questions, I will endeavour to get answers for you. I mean, as I 
indicated, the advice that I had from the meeting and the 
comments were that you tried to blackmail the committee, that 
you wanted pre-conditions to carrying out your public duties that 
you were elected to perform, and that when those pre-conditions, 
which, as I say, are probably the first in the long history of the 
British parliamentary system, when we had that political 
arrogance, the hon. member didn't get his way and stormed out of 
the committee. Now that's the advice that I have. 
 
We see an exercise, as I say, and it's not really democracy, I do 
suggest, Mr. Speaker. I think it's really kind of fascist tactics that 
members would say that you do it my way or I'm not going to do 
what I was elected to do, and I think it was a shameful act, and I'm 
sure that the other hon. members of the political party opposite 
share the concerns that I have. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you tell me when we will 
get the questions? I asked that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The answers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The answers. I asked that, Mr. Minister, 
because we are waiting from 1983 to 1984 for the answers to some 
questions. It simply isn't good enough with this government to rely 
upon your good faith to answer questions, because if they aren't 
convenient, you don't answer them in anything like a reasonable 
time frame. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: when will we get the answer to the 
question I just asked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated to the hon. member, now that 
I have the information, I will get it as soon as possible. But let me 
tell you what information you have on Pioneer. You have the 
letter, which I gather was a matter of some debate. You have the 
list of all of the people being paid out. You've made false 
allegations; they've been proven wrong. And the very fact that you 
know the following information — yes, Pioneer Trust did go into 
receivership; yes, there was a letter; yes, the province has 
obligations; there is the list of depositors; that is public 
information — for some reason you want to take pleasure in the 
fact that a Saskatchewan-headquartered financial institution went 
into receivership. I'd say that's a matter of some regret and, I 
believe, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, I will get the information. But again, I don't think 
we should . . . and I'm disappointed that the hon. member has not 
apologized today for his actions yesterday. He was elected to carry 
out certain duties. He has refused to do it. He laid some rather 
arrogant pre-conditions to him carrying out his public duties . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me ask you then 
another question, and I'll see if you can save . . . Perhaps you 
might put in written form your indignation with the fact that we 
wanted to put some questions to the Public Accounts Committee 
which they didn't want to  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1744 
 
 

answer. perhaps you could put that in written form and save the 
time of the question period. 
 
I've another question for you, Mr. Minister. When the department 
designated in early November of 1984 a staff person to negotiate a 
government guarantee of a preferred share issue, was the 
department aware at that time of the full extent of Pioneer Trust's 
financial situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, if you give me the list of the 
questions, I'll endeavour to get answers as soon as possible, sure. 
But if today the hon. member is laying out some more arrogant 
pre-conditions as to what role he's going to play, then obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the debate from the Public Accounts 
Committee being brought to the floor of the Assembly, and that's 
obviously quite proper, except what we're seeing today is the hon. 
member again laying out to this Assembly and to everyone that 
unless things are done his way and his pre-conditions . . . And I 
hope that the Leader of the Opposition would get control of his 
members over there because they're shouting and hollering. They 
don't like to hear the answer. But yesterday was a black day in the 
history of the British parliamentary system when a member . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister, if asking 
questions is arrogant, then I and my colleagues are going to 
continue to be arrogant until you people have the nerve to call an 
election and then you can have a chance to be arrogant; and you're 
going to get it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another question for you then. What 
investigation or analysis of Pioneer Trust's financial situation was 
done by the Department of Finance prior to the November 21, 
1984 letter from the member from Kindersley to Will Klein 
committing the government to a 27.5 million preferred share 
guarantee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated if you will give me the 
questions, I will endeavour to get answers. And I should remind 
the hon. members just so that they know, we also have the 
Department of Finance estimates where they have ample 
opportunity to question me and to question the government on the 
actions in Pioneer. I find it a little bit surprising that the hon. 
members seem to have forgotten that avenue of questioning. 
 
Of course, the issue is not whether the questions — the opposition 
has every right to ask the questions, Mr. Speaker. But again, I find 
it shocking that unless they get their way they are not going to 
carry out their parliamentary duties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Finance — I hope he won't regard it as an 
arrogant question — and it reads as follows: did the government 
approve three Pioneer Trust press releases made on December 28, 
1984, and what investigation or analysis of Pioneer's situation had 
the department completed by that date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I undertook that I would  

endeavour to try and get the answers for the hon. member. And I 
hope that the Leader of the Opposition will take this opportunity to 
announce that he is using a vehicle today which is quite proper to 
ask the questions, and that he will direct the member from Regina 
Centre to continue to serve as chairman of the Public Accounts 
Committee . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I put 
another question to the minister, along the same lines. With 
respect to Mr. Al Wagar's assignment to examine the affairs of 
Pioneer Trust, when and by whom was he appointed? What 
assignment was he given? How much was he paid and by whom? 
When, what, and to whom did he report? When did the department 
first learn the substance of his findings? Would you care to answer 
that, or take notice of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I've already indicated that I would take notice 
and endeavour to get answers for the hon. member. And I'm 
pleased to note today the admission by the Leader of the 
Opposition that he feels this is a proper vehicle to ask those 
questions and that there is now no excuse for the member from 
Regina East to boycott . . . or Regina Centre, to boycott public 
accounts, and that you will direct him back to carry out . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, so far as I'm 
concerned, Mr. Speaker. And this has to do with the Pioneer Trust, 
and a question which I ask in the absence of getting an answer in 
perhaps a more appropriate forum, the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
And I ask this, Mr. Minister: what investigation or analysis of 
Pioneer Trust's situation was done by the Department of Finance 
prior to the February 4, 1985 meeting at which Pioneer was told 
that the government had decided to withdraw the guarantee of the 
preferred share issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will take notice and remind the hon. member 
that he has considerable public information with regard to Pioneer. 
I note that when we tabled the list of those who were assisted, that 
the members opposite were not quite prepared to accept it. So 
whatever information we give, I have strong reservations as to the 
acceptability to the opposition. Because ultimately we know full 
well that they are not prepared to accept the factual information as 
the truth and will continue to make their false allegations that they 
have made in the past. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, none of these questions require 
any in-depth financial analysis. We're asking in every single case 
for dates, so they should be easy to come by, by a cursory 
examination of Department of Finance records. My question is: 
will you undertake to give us the answer to these questions on 
Monday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I've indicated that I will take notice of the 
questions. And I would advise the hon. members, as well, that we 
do have Department of Finance estimates coming up too in the 
next week or two, which will be ample time for you to debate as 
well. So you will have  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1745 
 

what information that I can give, and I would suggest that there is 
no excuse — and again I hope the hon. member will apologize and 
get on with his duties. 
 

Dispute with Saskatchewan Doctors 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with an important issue of health 
care in the province. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter from the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, and I want to quote part of it 
to the minister and then ask a question. In the letter, Mr. Hubbard, 
the president of the SMA, says to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, and I want to quote from the letter: 

 
I consider it most unfortunate that the matter has taken the 
course that it has. The Saskatchewan medical Association 
feels that it has been double-crossed on three counts: (1) the 
elimination of extra billing after having been assured initially 
that (the) government was not concerned about The Canada 
Health Act . . . 

 
They're saying there that you made a commitment on extra-billing 
and double-crossed them on that issue. Secondly: 
 

. . . failure of (the) government to abide by all the terms of the 
Saskatoon Agreement II . . . 
 

They're saying that you double-crossed them on that issue as well. 
And the third issue, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the withdrawal of the Minister of Health of some 
suggestions that could have resulted in a settlement early in 
May. 

 
They refer to that as the third double-cross by the Minister of 
Health. 
 
The final line that I want to quote before I put the question, Mr. 
Speaker is: 
 

The impression that we in the Association get is that there is a 
political will to precipitate a confrontation with us rather than 
to reach an agreement. 

 
This is a letter from the doctors of the province to the members of 
the Assembly, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you lay out what 
you have done in the past week to bring this to a reasonable 
solution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, it's interesting to see the 
opposition rising on this question. Very interesting to see, Mr. 
Speaker, that for 11 years the government opposite talked about 
outlawing extra-billing but never had the political guts to get 
around to do it. It's very interesting to see that the opposition, the 
NDP opposition, are now out advocating on the side of the doctors 
for higher wages for doctors in Saskatchewan. It's interesting to 
see the type of action that they take. As far as any type of 
following the spirit of Saskatoon Agreement II, the government 
negotiating team have followed the spirit  

of that Act right to the T. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary. I want to, by way of 
information here . . . the minister refers to the opposition's 
supporting increase in financial returns to the doctors. None of the 
double-crosses that the doctors are alleging of the minister said 
anything about money. And I want to read them back to him again 
because he missed the whole point of the question. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister; do you agree with the doctors 
that you've double-crossed them in the area of extra-billing, in the 
area of Saskatoon Agreement II, and in the area of taking off the 
table, or taking away a settlement that was available in early May? 
Do you agree with the doctors that you double-crossed them in 
those three areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I certainly do not agree with that at all, 
and I think the depth of the member's question is showing when he 
says you have double-crossed them in extra-billing. There is no 
extra-billing in Saskatchewan. There has been no extra-billing for 
some time, and there has been no double-cross from this 
government. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Legal Profession Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I have another official 
that wasn't with us in committee the other day, who I would like to 
introduce to the members of the committee. Seated behind me, 
Gary Cooper from the special projects branch. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I had referred to the six-year 
quarterly statistics on the oil industry and the performance in the 
province, which you were good  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1746 
 
 

enough to give me prior to the estimates starting. I wonder if you 
would for me, rather than going through the production for all the 
other minerals — which I could do right now, but it would take a 
great deal of time, a couple of hours — will you give me a 
commitment that you'll do a similar sheet up for me for all the 
minerals produced and historic from 1980 the way you've done 
with oil production. It's just that I need it for the record because 
there's a number of people who contact us from time to time and I 
would like to have that information available. I could go at it and 
ask on each one and for each year, but if you'll give me a 
commitment to send that to me within the next week or so, I will 
leave it at that and we can get on with a couple of other things I 
have to ask. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In the interests of time, it seems like a 
very reasonable request and I have no difficulty in giving you that 
undertaking. And we'll do it as expeditiously as possible. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — One other issue that I wanted to raise was 
the oil upgrader at Lloydminster, the $90 million study, the 
announcement of moneys that was announced earlier in the year 
and we asked questions in the Assembly. I wonder if you would 
give me a breakdown on who put the money in, the $90 million; 
and if you would break down what was for future engineering and 
what was for engineering that was already done at the 
Lloydminster upgrader. 
 
As I understand it, there was 40 or 50 per cent of the work 
completed by Husky that the $90 million went towards, and then 
some that was to be done at a later date. If you would just give me 
a little run-down on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, 
Saskatchewan — and these are all in millions of dollars — 
Saskatchewan puts up 13.5 million; Alberta 13.5; the federal 
government 36; and Husky 27. At the time of this arrangement 
Husky had expended something in the order of $60 million in 
pre-construction engineering work. I think the point that the 
opposition has been wanting to make is that why are we paying 
already for work that is done. 
 
Point number one, there needed to be $90 million, a minimum of 
$90 million of work to be done in the pre-construction phase. 
Almost, one could say, Mr. Chairman, exclusively on good faith 
Husky had expended $60 million. That expenditure had come 
about during this review process by the federal government. It had 
take some good, long time and we ourselves were getting 
somewhat apprehensive about the time it was taking. No clear 
signal had come from them as a result of that review; and if I were 
Husky, I suppose I would have started to ask, how long can I 
expend money at the rate of 3 or $4 million a month on this 
project when I don't really know where one of the major partners 
is coming from. 
 
At the point in time that we sat down at the table, they had put 
considerable money into this project in good faith on that phase, 
and it seemed to me to make only good sense that we 
acknowledge that expenditure (a); and (b) see what it took to get to 
the completion of pre-construction engineering and design work, 
that kind of thing. Over and above that, Husky has expended 
several tens of millions  

of dollars in field work. 
 
So in terms of what Saskatchewan has already enjoyed in 
economic benefits and spin-offs from this project, it is well over 
100 million already. And that accounts for numerous capital 
investments, jobs out there, all the kinds of things that we as a 
government support as part of the dimension of this project — that 
economic spin-off. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The idea that Husky would want money for 
studies and analyses that were done doesn't surprise me. 
Obviously any company that could get it would like to get money 
out of the government. 
 
What's interesting to me is that you explain the situation as the 
federal government was holding up the signing of the agreement, 
which they still haven't signed — they still haven't signed the 
agreement; that the Saskatchewan government would become 
responsible — if to believe your argument that the hold-up was 
caused by the federal government — and as a result of that, certain 
studies were done and the federal government was responsible. 
Why would the Saskatchewan government pick up $13 million of 
the cost if the federal government was responsible for holding up 
the project? 
 
If one was to agree with you that the money was needed in order 
to keep the project going . . And I don't accept that out of hand, 
because I think that if you have a policy for studies, then you 
should apply it to all oil companies, and every oil company should 
be part of a program, whether research, if they do some, whether 
it's Aberford in Shaunavon and they want to do future water flood 
projects, or polymers, and that sort of thing, that you would pick 
up through a program the research and development part of it. 
 
But what is difficult for industry to know in this province is how 
you get money out of the government, because it seems so 
piecemeal. Here you have a project that an agreement was 
proposed whereby the federal and provincial and Husky Oil would 
be involved, where the federal and provincial government would 
sign loan guarantees. I believe the provincial portion was 390 
million. Now all of a sudden we have to put in $13 million of 
hard, cold cash. Now that may not seem to be a lot of money when 
you're sitting around a cabinet table with $3 billion of taxpayers' 
money. But what that $3 million represents to each family in 
Saskatchewan, if there's five people, is 80 bucks increased taxes 
— $80. 
 
Now that's a lot of money for one engineering study for one oil 
company, that every family across Saskatchewan had to dig in 
their pocket and take out $80 on the spur of the moment to pay for 
this study which we had thought was in the agreement that our 
commitment to that project was to sign loan guarantees — that 
that was our commitment. Then suddenly, without any 
consultation with the legislature, without any consultation with the 
public, every family in the province has to divvy up another 80 
bucks for studies that were already done — at least in part. 
 
And part of the problem with this government, Mr. Chairman, is 
the fact of the inconsistency and the haphazard way that we go 
about spending the taxpayers'  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1747 
 

money at great speed, to the point where we're now $2 billion in 
the hole. I'm not going to dwell a long time on it, but it's indicative 
of the problem that we're having. It's not unlike other projects that 
have been announced on the spur of the moment that in order to 
keep the upgrader going, in order to keep it going until an election, 
you spent $3.5 million of the taxpayers' money when you've 
already admitted that it was a responsibility of the federal 
government that the work wasn't proceeding. 
 
I would just want to ask you: do you think it's fair to the taxpayers 
of the province that each family would pay an extra $80 because 
the federal government is refusing to sign the agreement? I also 
want to know whether or not at this point in time the federal 
government has now signed the final agreement with Husky Oil 
and the provinces. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the first point that I should make 
in reply to your question, or series of questions, is that it is entirely 
erroneous to refer to this as a study. That to me, and to everybody 
else, suggests some kind of mere shuffling of paper by a 
consultant, and this is much more than that. This is part of getting 
the project done. You can't build it unless you do the 
pre-construction design and engineering work. 
 
Secondly, the hon. member sits in here and ignores a fact of 
history as to why we ended up in the situation we did end up with 
this, and that was we were faced with not only lower world oil 
prices, but a very turbulent market-place. And I suspect, Mr. 
Chairman, had we gone ahead willy-nilly, he would have likewise 
stood up in this House and accused us of being irresponsible for 
charging ahead in the face of these new world oil prices that are 
much lower and much more turbulent. Now you can't have it both 
ways. 
 
The final point I would make, Mr. Chairman, is that he says that 
this cost represents an irresponsible expenditure on behalf of the 
families of Saskatchewan. I suggest that to have gone ahead 
willy-nilly with no view to what that turbulent low oil price out 
there meant, would have been irresponsible to the families of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On one hand, he stands up there today and says we shouldn't have 
spent that 13.5 million; we should have catered the project; we 
should have saved that money for the families of Saskatchewan. 
At any other given day in there you can hear him saying, spend 
more, spend more, spend more: a billion dollar deficiency 
payment — where is it? More money for jobs — where is it? 
 
So depending on what hour they're speaking, they're concerned 
about the deficit or they're not concerned about the deficit; they 
want more spending, or they want less spending. 
 
The reality is, on this project, Mr. Chairman, to not have done 
what we have done would have been irresponsible to the families 
of this province because 10 years from now when our 
conventional oil reserves for the most part as we know them today 
are precariously close to being gone, where then are the families of 
Saskatchewan going to get their energy resources, Mr. Chairman, 
if we don't  

develop our heavy oil? Saskatchewan's and Canada's future lies in 
the area of heavy oil. 
 
In so far as the memorandum of understanding and the status of 
that, certainly I have signed it on behalf to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. It is being circulated now to other jurisdictions; and 
at this very moment the federal government, if they have not, will 
shortly be signing that document. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'll leave that point because I 
understand that we're at an impasse here as to how we operate in 
government and public administration. But I think that if you're 
going to have a program for oil companies to do engineering 
studies, as you referred to them, and I agree that they were 
engineering studies; but if you're going to have it for one oil 
company, then you would be consistent and that other smaller 
companies would get the same hand-out, because that's what it is 
— $13 million from the provincial government, hand-out to one 
oil company. 
 
That's way more than all of your programs that you announced a 
few weeks ago for all oil companies, the small-sector oil 
companies in the province. And what they're saying to me when 
I'm in Shaunavon or Swift Current is how as that we have $13 
million for one engineering study for Husky Oil and the minister 
gets up and announces a program that won't even be half of that, 
and we have to apply for it, meet all these criteria . . . And it seems 
to us, is what they're telling me, that all Husky had to do was fly 
into Regina, take the suitcase in and get 13 million bucks of 
taxpayers' money — 80 bucks for every family in the province. 
 
I don't want to spend a long time on that but they don't understand 
it. And I'm not arguing the point of whether it was necessary or 
not; what I'm saying is, be consistent. If you're going to allow that 
kind of engineering studies to be done for one oil company 
because it creates employment, then that argument can be made 
for all engineering studies, whether it's a gas plant processing or 
whether it's making asphalt or whatever it might be. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: do you think that it would be 
possible for you to table the documents of agreement on the 
Regina upgrader as well as the memorandum of intent, as I 
understand it, which is presently being used as the formula for the 
Husky Oil upgrader in Lloydminster? Could you table those 
documents here in the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have a copy of the 
Ottawa agreement, if you like, on the Husky project, but I can 
undertake to provide you with that. I think it's a public document 
at this point in time anyway, since it's been through cabinet — 
number one. Number two, the NewGrade, you have everything 
that we have, or have on that to date. As I said in the House 
yesterday, there's no new documentation has been signed relative 
to financing agreements. So everything that's been tabled to date 
. . . and anything more will be forthcoming as it's completed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the minister about a new 
development down in, I believe it's Wood Mountain  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1748 
 
 

— Kaolin, a development that is taking place there. Can you give 
us a little review of what is taking place there and what the future 
looks like? what kind of a lease does the company that is 
developing that have on the property down there with the 
department? Can you tell us the length of the lease that they would 
have, and when they intend to start up, what kind of production, 
and what the spin-offs, for the area will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think to help you have a broader 
understanding of this issue, I have one-page briefing note on this, 
and I'll send it across to you because it may be of some local 
interest to you. I guess the only caveat I would attach to this, some 
of this might be confidential corporate information to date, and if 
you'd bear that in mind, I think you'll be able to sort out, looking at 
it, what I'm talking about. 
 
What they have to date is prospecting permits that they're in the 
process of converting to leases. So I'll give this to the member for 
Shaunavon to provide him with some history and background. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I do want it for information, and I'll treat it 
with the appropriate . . . if it's sensitive . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . .Pardon? I was just wondering; when we get these papers I 
always check to see if there's anything on the back of them 
because that has proven fairly successful in the past. But this 
minister, or his deputy, someone has already ripped it off. 
 
But there's one other question here, and it deals with an announced 
oil discovery near Estevan. Home Oil announced earlier in the 
year — there was a news report that there was an oil find of some 
magnificent amount. Is there any public information on that, and 
was it drilled within a developmental area where information has 
to come out within a certain length of time? I believe that if it's in 
a developmental area, they can hold the information for a month. 
Can you explain what is happening there; if they've started 
production, or if there's any drilling activity in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, home 
table land 8-22-29 west of the 2nd, has not yet been completed and 
placed on production. Because it is an exploratory well, 
information obtained while drilling, that is log tops and drill stem 
tests, is confidential for one year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That's what I wanted to know — if it's 
exploratory, then the information will be confidential. That would 
apply to the formation that they're of interest and any of the depths 
and that sort of thing as well? All information is confidential? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as I think 
you can appreciate, there is some sensitivity to this, so I'll pick my 
words carefully in so far as maintaining some obvious obligations 
to the industry. 
 
The well commenced drilling on January 27th, and has since been 
cased to a total depth of 8,563 feet. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — When you were talking about the upgrader 
in Regina, I just wanted to go back to that for a  

moment. I want to know whether or not there are any agreements 
with the development of the upgrader, both in Regina and the 
Husky Oil upgrader in Lloyd when it goes ahead, for 
Saskatchewan employment component that residents or people 
from the province will have first crack at the jobs. Have you 
looked into that, and is there something in place so that we don't 
see an inflow of people from . . . or Husky bringing people from 
Edmonton or Calgary and that the majority of the jobs are going to 
Calgary residents as opposed to Saskatchewan? 
 
(1100) 
 
I ask that in terms of information, if you can outline what plans 
you have in place to make sure that people in the province are the 
first to benefit from the taxpayers who are guaranteeing the loans 
and that sort of thing from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, relative to 
NewGrade, and it's not something I want to get into in great detail 
for this reason, that it's presently under negotiation with the union 
relative to site agreement, but I can say there is provision there for 
native employment. Secondly, as it relates to Husky, once again 
the employment and procurement requirements are being 
negotiated. 
 
As a general statement I can make this comment, that obviously 
we are always interested in having jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, my colleague from Regina 
North East, who is the MLA probably most affected by the Regina 
NewGrade, has a few further questions, and if you'll just carry on 
here. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
know that there are negotiations going on, and I respect the need 
to have them go on as effectively as possible. But can you tell me, 
in a general way, at which stage those negotiations are, and do you 
expect that there will be a resolve to it in the near future? The 
reason I ask the question is that I have been approached by quite a 
number of concerned people about the status of them, and I just 
wondered if you could give us some kind of a report on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to your question of the status of 
these negotiations, as I think you can appreciate, neither I nor my 
departmental officials are involved in the negotiations. It is 
between NewGrade and the union, but what I will undertake to do 
for you is to contact NewGrade and ask them if they will not make 
available to us a status report on these negotiations and provide 
that information to the MLA for Regina North East. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, I'd appreciate that. I wouldn't 
mind getting from the appropriate minister, then, that information 
as well. The Government of Saskatchewan is putting up, either in 
guarantees or directly in financing, almost all of the funding. So it 
would seem to me that, therefore, the government, on behalf of the 
taxpayers, would have a very specific interest in the developments 
on this particular issue. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1749 
 

Mr. Minister, when I questioned the former minister when the 
legislation was in the House last December, he said that steps 
would be taken to assure the maximum employment opportunities 
for Saskatchewan tradespeople. Can you tell me whether that's 
also part of these negotiations, and if so, in what form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The comment I would first make to the 
hon. member is that I think everybody's common sense dictates 
that we're interested in Saskatchewan people having the 
Saskatchewan jobs. So it's a high priority. 
 
So the answer simply is yes. And — although I am now speaking 
somewhat for my colleague, the Minister for Economic 
Development — the Saskatchewan government, if you like, board 
members there have been instructed to keep that objective 
uppermost in their minds. And over and above that, I think we can 
safely say that Federated Co-op would be coming from the same 
place. So I think everybody's heart is in the right place (a); and (b) 
everybody's head, if you like, has been sensitized to that issue. 
And I have a fair degree of faith and confidence in those people 
who are at the table for us. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — As I did with the former minister, I'll accept 
that, Mr. Minister, Can you tell me what stage — and I've been to 
the site several times, to the extent that I can get there, and looked 
at it; and I do not pretend to be an expert on all the engineering 
that's required and all the kind of construction necessities that are 
there — can you tell me at what stage the construction is for the 
upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The stage of construction, for the hon. 
members information — and I can understand why he would want 
to know, because it's something that is occurring literally in your 
backyard — two components to it: what's happening at the site 
and what's happening off site. 
 
At the site a significant amount of levelling has gone on; drainage 
— including installation of water hydrants, that kind of thing for 
fires — foundations, footings; all the kinds of work that have to go 
on before you can accommodate the superstructure. 
 
At the same time, off site, obviously there was a need for the 
bigger power plant and moving out of the old one that has been 
proceeding; modification of some of the existing refinery 
elements; and the major pressure vessels have all been ordered. So 
I think you can see there's been a fair degree of work go on both at 
site and off site, and a good degree of co-ordination so that things 
track along in parallel here. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, has any concrete been 
poured? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That would go into footings and 
foundations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, is this project then on 
schedule as you had announced it, I forget, some time last fall? Is 
it right on schedule, or has there been delays? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It's right on schedule, I'm  

advised. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many people are involved in the 
construction work at the present time? Maybe that's difficult for 
you to answer. If you don't have it, I'll accept it later. But if your 
officials have it, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My officials don't have that information. 
But I think what we should do in retrospect here is not only in 
addition to asking NewGrade to provide you with the status of the 
negotiations between themselves and the union, but I think as well 
to give you an up-to-date status report on what's going on at the 
site, and how many employed, that kind of thing, so you've got an 
entire background document. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask you some 
questions about a particular oil company in Saskatchewan that you 
will be familiar with because we have interest in it as taxpayers 
and a government — it's Saskoil. A number of people have gotten 
a hold of us in the last few days wondering about the lay-offs 
within that Crown corporation. 
 
The chairman may want to making a ruling on this. I'm not sure 
whether the minister will want to answer questions or not. They're 
not confrontational. They're more or less information-finding 
because people are getting a hold of us. 
 
But can you tell me, first of all, how many people were laid off? 
And then I want to know as well what the severance package will 
be for the people who will be affected? That's one of the questions 
that people are asking us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly have no 
difficulty in dealing with the question as best I have the 
information, although I don't have Saskoil officials here, as you 
can appreciate, because in a strict sense it's not a Crown any more, 
either. But obviously we've been in discussion with them. 
 
(1115) 
 
As a bit of background to this, Saskoil, like you said, is one of the 
oil companies out there in Saskatchewan, one of the oil producers. 
And they, like many others, have gone from being a 
$30-per-barrel oil company to an oil company that now is living in 
a world of $15 per barrel, and hence they've had to down-size. If 
we want to have this company around down the road and have 
anybody employed, they have to make these kinds of tough, very, 
very tough decisions sometimes, in the short term; but at the same 
time, if they do not do them, then the company becomes weaker 
because the strength would be eroded. 
 
What they are doing as a result of the collapse in world oil prices 
is down-sizing. I think the choice of your word "lay-off" at this 
point in time is something less than accurate, because what they 
are undertaking . . . Because they recognize — and they've 
anguished over this, I can tell you — that there's jobs and families' 
livelihoods at stake here. I would suggest they've taken a very 
humane approach. They've undertaken a couple of voluntary 
programs to start with. And it may well be that they don't  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1750 
 
 

meet their target, but I think it's a very humane approach to a very 
tough problem. 
 
What they are doing is offering early retirement — and I don't 
have what the retirement package looks like, okay? But they're 
offering an early retirement scheme to those that that might be 
attractive to; and secondly, they're offering counselling in 
conjunction with what they call, I think, a careers change 
assistance program. 
 
An example that they gave to me that I'll pass on to you would be 
that there are some, apparently — and I don't know how many — 
that might want to undertake further educational studies, go back 
to university. And so there's some incentive plan there for them to 
help go from where they are back into university or perhaps some 
other area. 
 
Now I'm not trying to kid anybody, nor are they. they are looking 
to reduce their staff level by 215 to 30 per cent. And obviously it 
will depend on how well the voluntary programs go as to where 
they get to in terms of meeting their down-size requirements. 
 
But I think they're undertaking this in a very common sense and 
compassionate and caring way. And I wish them well, and at the 
same time absolutely empathize and sympathize with those 
families who find themselves in this position, like so many other 
families out there in the oilpatch today facing uncertainty because 
of what's happened to world oil prices. I also have to say that 
Saskoil is acting very responsibly here. They recognize that 
they've got a dual responsibility: one, to their employees, but also 
to their shareholders. 
 
And I think the final comment I would make here, and one that I 
was pleased to hear the CEO make, Bill Douglas, was that, had it 
not been for our initiatives that we announced two or three weeks 
ago here, as it relates to the service and supply side, they would 
have been harder hit in terms of the measures they might have had 
to undertake. 
 
So I suppose it's small consolation to say that it could have been 
worse, had we not made some of the changes we made relative to 
oil policy, for all oil producers out there. But at the same time I 
think it has cushioned the effect on this company somewhat. 
 
And I think that's as best as I can give you in terms of details 
because I don't have those officials here, and it's largely the 
administrative, the administrivia in so far as the packages; it's 
something that they are undertaking themselves. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the issue of numbers of people being 
laid off — 25 to 30 per cent — would that represent about 90 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our best indication is something in the 
order of 70. They said 25 to 30 per cent. My understanding is that 
they've got 220 in head office, 60 in field staff. And I think what I 
hear them saying is that the field operations tend to be less in 
jeopardy because of some of the changes we made, or else it's a 
policy. But at the same time the programs are voluntary across the 
spectrum. 
 

And I don't even want to pre-guess or lead people in any given 
direction with my comments as to what their career decision might 
be. But I can give you that their view was to reduce its staff load 
by 25 to 30 per cent. It employs 220 in head office and 60 in field 
offices. And I guess I'll let you do the mathematics for yourself. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I won't spend any more time on this. I just 
say it's unfortunate, as the minister has agreed, that families have 
to be, as he is indicating, not laid off but actually they are 
terminated when this program is over, either by early retirement 
. . . As I understand it, only about . . . there are very few people in 
that organization that will be eligible for the 55-year-of-age 
retirement package, and most of them will be using the retraining 
that is being offered. And that is some consolation. But I think that 
you and I both agree that, had anyone had a choice, they would 
have much rather been staying working. 
 
And I think it's, I guess, an indication of the time that we're living 
in, that having 70 or 80 people thrown out of work is, in an already 
tough job market . . . It was one thing to lose your job when times 
were good because you could quickly move over and put out a 
few resumes and get a job. 
 
In leaving it, I wonder if you would get me the following 
information and agree to send it to me, and that is the number of 
employees; the areas, head office and field; and locations — I 
don't want names, but I would like positions; and the date of the 
termination. 
 
And also you were mentioning the packages that will be given, 
both for retirement and for retraining or replacement. If you would 
agree to send that in some detail to me in the near future, then we 
can leave that area, if you give me that commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as I 
understand it, they are in the process of having their employees 
look at what's being offered right through this month. And I — as 
does, I suspect, Saskoil, at this very moment — have no idea 
who's going to pick up on what program and to what degree. And 
it may well be that we don't have this available, I suspect, even 
through to the end of the month, easily. 
 
But I will undertake to give you what I can relative to what you 
asked, as soon as I can, with the co-operation of Saskoil — and 
certainly things like numbers, and areas, head office versus field, 
and the packages. So I undertake to give you what I can, as best I 
can, when I can, with Saskoil's co-operation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, with that, we'll maybe move 
through the Estimates, and I'll take the minister at his word on that 
issue on Saskoil. I would appreciate getting the other information, 
including the flights that you — I thought maybe you would have 
them here today for me — but I don't have any questions. But if 
you'd send them across, I'd appreciate getting them. We can whip 
through these, line by line. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1751 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — He was going to send us something. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, if I could just have a 
minute here with my officials, I think I can . . . I've got some of the 
information that just came here on what he wants. And as soon as 
I get it sorted out in my head, I'll give it to him. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Items 4 and 5 agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 23 

 
Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we had an agreement that 
the minister would send me some things, and I now have the 
flights out of province of the minister and the deputy. One thing 
that is missing here — and I believe I asked, but maybe I didn't, 
but that's the cost of each of those individual trips and the number 
of people. 
 
You indicated that you wouldn't give me the names, and we had 
our argument about that. But I think you indicated clearly that you 
would give me the number of people who went with you on each 
of these trips and the actual total cost of the trip. And there I wasn't 
asking for a breakdown of hotel rooms and that sort of thing, but a 
global amount, and also the number of people. And, as you 
indicated, you wouldn't give me the names, but if you would give 
me the number of people who went. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, we did. And I recognize it's not 
there, and we will do that for you. The other thing I was going to 
mention that's not there yet is my CVA (central vehicle agency) 
flights. And the reason is, is they are still being catalogued by 
Supply and Services and will be provided as soon as complete. It's 
been a fairly large exercise, I think you can appreciate. But the 
other things you asked for was dollars, numbers of people. Right. 
Yes. No problem. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — One other small point before we leave this 
department, and that is if you'd give me the global number on your 
advertising in the department, and also if you would break it out 
into which ad firms got it, and also the consulting firms that did 
work for the department. And I'll use the same time period, 
January 1, '85 up to April 1st of '86 — that's for advertising and 
consultants. And then we'll be on our way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your last request, I'll endeavour to give 
it to you as expeditiously as I can. 
 

Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Resources Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 1 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 47 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 
(1130) 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 
Investments 

Energy Security Division 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 63 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 
Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 63 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 63 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the 
members opposite for a relatively expeditious review of these 
estimates. More than that though, I would like to especially thank 
my officials, not only for the assistance in the House today, but 
over the past few months since they've been breaking in a new 
minister and, at the same time, dealing with a dramatically 
changed world oil price situation that has led to some great deal of 
work in that area. And secondly, for their ongoing efforts on a 
number of special projects. I was very thankful for their help and 
assistance through this entire time, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to say, as well, that we look 
forward to getting the information the minister has promised to get 
me, and I'm sure that his staff will do that for us, and thank them 
for their assistance to the minister in getting it across to us. 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 

  



 
June 6, 1986 

1752 
 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I'd like to point out to the House that the 
back-up minister, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, will 
be taking the estimates until the minister arrives. And with that, I 
think we can move over to the member for Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate very 
briefly what I said last night, and that is that housing starts are at 
an historical low in this province. We built 10 to 12,000 houses 
from 1979 to 1980. During the '80s housing starts have dropped to 
a low, now, of 5,354 houses. Moreover, Saskatchewan Housing 
corporation's projections are equally dismal. For the balance of the 
'80s we're told that we expect 5,600 houses. For the 1990s, 
however one estimate something that far ahead, we're told that the 
SHC estimates 6,000. 
 
We regard that level of housing starts as inadequate. In the long 
run it may be adequate for a period of this Tory recession we have. 
But as soon as an election is called and this government is . . . 
these members are sent back to practice law or whatever else they 
may find to earn an honest living, and when more normal 
economic times return, we think the normal demand will return. 
We think that we will need 8, 10, 12,000 new houses a year. If we 
don't have them, we're going to have a backlog; and if we don't 
have them, we're going to see an inordinate surge in housing 
prices. 
 
That happened during the '70s. For many years during the '70s, 
except in the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, those 
provinces did not build enough houses. The demand took off and 
housing prices in Toronto and Vancouver and Winnipeg 
sky-rocketed — doubled, quadrupled. Some people became very 
wealthy flipping houses. One of them is now trying to increase his 
wealth by taking it out on workers in Red Deer and Edmonton — 
Mr. Pocklington. But a great many people got hurt when housing 
prices increased. It was not a desirable social phenomenon. 
 
We are building up the same kind of explosion if we're prepared to 
accept the level of housing starts that we're having now, because 
the demographics haven't changed. I don't think people's desire to 
own their own space has changed. I don't think apartments or 
condominiums are any more desirable for the vast bulk of 
Saskatchewan families and people. And I think, therefore, Mr. 
Minister, that you are building up a long-range problem; you're 
ignoring a long-range problem is perhaps a better way to put it. 
 
The New Democratic Party and this caucus has a positive answer 
for that. We have a program which provides a $7,000 grant over 
three-year period . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You told us that yesterday. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Well, I'm going to give you the opportunity 
to hear it again since it didn't seem to have sunk in very well 
yesterday afternoon. 
 
We are providing a $7,000 grant over three years. That will be 
matched by a 7 per cent interest . . . 7 per cent 

 mortgages at 7 per cent for seven years for up to $70,000. We 
think that will produce a dramatic increase in the number of 
houses. We think that, because of the logic of the program. 
 
It's also been our experience that we have received a large number 
of telephone calls and inquiries for the days and weeks following 
the announcement of that program. The telephones in our caucus 
offices just rang steadily. They just did not quit. 
 
People weren't calling up complaining . . . Well, if the member 
from Regina Victoria spent any time in the Legislative Assembly 
— I believe that's who it is. I may be mistaken; it's so long since 
I've seen the member from Regina Victoria in the Assembly. But I 
believe . . . But if it's . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. This is entirely 
irrelevant to the subject at hand, and let's get on with the estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Well, Mr. Chairman, I suspect that his 
comments were also irrelevant, and his comments were making it 
impossible for me to continue. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — He is not entering into this debate, and I 
would ask you to get on the subject. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pretty touchy there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Yes, I see members opposite are pretty 
touchy about our housing program and would prefer that it not be 
discussed. I can well imagine that. The reason for that is the 
contrast with their housing program. 
 
I think I am the first person since the budget speech to mention the 
Tory housing program. I don't think it has been mentioned by a 
single, solitary soul — Conservative, NDP, or otherwise. You 
haven't mentioned it because you're ashamed of it. It is completely 
inadequate. It is too stingy. There isn't enough money being 
provided. Nobody else has mentioned it because nobody else 
cares, quite frankly. You're ashamed of it, the public don't care, 
and I really believe I'm the first person to mention the program 
since the budget. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you don't think this province would be a 
good deal better off with a more vigorous housing program along 
the lines we have suggested than the utterly inadequate housing 
program which you've announced. Its inadequacy, I think, is show 
by your . . . the advertising moneys it has received. This 
government has gone so far as to advertise programs which aren't 
yet in existence. 
 
You've been advertising a home-makers' pension, which isn't in 
existence; nobody can find out what it is. For some months you've 
been advertising another program, the classification of video 
cassettes, which isn't in existence, and nobody can figure out what 
it is. 
 
(1145) 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, if the government is advertising  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1753 
 

programs which aren't in existence and which the public can't, by 
making any inquiries in the world, find out what they're about, 
why is it that they haven't advertised their housing program? They 
haven't advertised it because it is inadequate. It's ineffective. It is 
their fondest hope that no one will ever remember that they ever 
mentioned the subject. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister,: do you not think the province would be 
better off with an adequate housing program along the lines of 
what the New Democratic Party has suggested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, here's a prime example 
of the inconsistencies in the position of the NDP party and the 
NDP members opposite. One day they stand up and they chastise 
the government for advertising. They say, you're spending too 
much on advertising. Now they stand up and say, but you're not 
advertising this program, and you should be advertising it, and you 
should be spending taxpayers' dollars. I mean, that's the 
implication. You know, either you have it one way or the other 
way; you've got to be consistent. The problem with the members 
opposite is that you are not consistent. Your leader has not been 
consistent when he has talked about your own housing program, 
and you know that full well yourself. 
 
Now we might just momentarily talk about this matter of 
advertising. To day we already have received approximately 500 
applications for this particular program. We know full well that 
the builders advertise this program, and I have seen ads in the 
newspapers myself. So do you want the taxpayer as well to pick 
up costs for advertising this program when it's not necessary for 
the taxpayer to pick up those costs? Surely that's not your position. 
 
The program is very successful. Housing starts are up dramatically 
in the province. And I might remind the member, for example: in 
Regina, single family starts, up 25 per cent; in Saskatoon, up 106 
per cent; overall urban Saskatchewan, single family starts, up 54 
per cent — 416 in 1985, 639 in 1986 — a dramatic increase. And 
on top of that, now you say, but you should be advertising; you 
should be spending taxpayers' dollars to advertise. 
 
Don't you have any concern for the taxpayers' dollar? Don't you 
have any concern for the public purse? I don't think you do, and I 
want to tell you why I don't think you do. You have announced 
this program where you're going to provide people with $7,000 if 
they buy a new home. Now anybody with half a brain when it 
comes to economics will tell you that the most amount of return 
that you will get to the provincial treasury, in terms of a single 
housing start, will be in the order of around $3,000 back to the 
treasury in terms of taxes. 
 
So we are providing a $3,000 grant on the other hand to stimulate 
housing starts; on the other hand, we get that $3,000 back through 
various forms of taxes as a result of increased economic activity. 
But you're going to provide $7,000, and you're going to get $3,000 
back, and you're going to be costing the taxpayer an additional 
$4,000 for every one of those starts. 
 

Now I asked you if you had any concern for the taxpayers' purse. 
Clearly you don't have any concern for the taxpayers' purse if 
that's the kind of program that you advocate. 
 
I would reiterate for the members who are here today: single 
family housing starts are up 54 per cent, urban, in the province of 
Saskatchewan; 500 applications received for the home buyers 
program; and I understand that about 75 per cent of those are 
people that presently live in rental accommodation and are moving 
out and wanting to get their own new home. That's exactly what 
this government stands for — fiscal responsibility in terms of not 
substantially heating up the market and drawing forward a whole 
bunch of demand in one year and costing the taxpayer money 
when we don't need to spend the taxpayers' dollar. Surely that's the 
sensible and prudent and responsible approach to take. It stands in 
stark contrast to what the members opposite in the NDP party 
would suggest. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, one of the things I want to 
complain about is the publication that the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation puts out. It makes highly selective use of statistics. I 
know there is some poetic licence sometimes used by some 
members opposite in this House. What is unusual, however, is to 
have a publication which I think makes highly selective use of 
statistics and is quite misleading. And I assume, given the quality 
of your officials, that's intentionally done so at the direction of the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I say, I want to complain about that. It's one thing 
. . . you may say what you like, I suppose, in Conservative Party 
literature; it's quite another thing to use the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation news bulletin as you have. I think it's at times 
intentionally dishonest. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me give you the actual housing statistics for the 
province as distinct from selective statistics. What I see your 
publication doing, what I see you doing, is you take the two or 
three best cities in the province, you call that, and you take those 
increases over last year's increases, and that becomes a percentage 
for the province. That, as I say, is an improper use of public funds. 
You're using statistics in that publication selectively. 
 
Let me give you the actual housing starts for the province 1983, 
when you had a program which had some effect — the last 
significant program this corporation ever had — 1983, 7,269; 
1984, 5.221; in 1985, 5,354. That's an increase of 130. That's a 
percentage increase of about two and a half per cent. 
 
Now that is not a 45 per cent increase in housing starts, Mr. 
Minister, nor does your projection indicate an increase in housing 
starts of the balance of the decade. The projection is a projection 
of 56 housing starts for the rest of the year. That is not a 45 per 
cent increase. As I say it's one thing for the minister to take a bit of 
poetic licence with the facts; it's quite another thing for your 
publication to be doing it. That, I do take the strongest possible 
objection to. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1754 
 
 

I would note, Mr. Minister, that this province had the lowest 
percentage increase in Canada in new housing starts. Mr. Minister, 
the level of activity in this province reflects itself in 
unemployment. I don't want to get into this for a long time. I know 
that members opposite would do it, but I'm quite sure that if I did 
it, I'd be called out of order, so I won't deal with it extensively. But 
I will say that the level of unemployment in this province would 
embarrass any government which wasn't as insensitive as yours. 
The unemployment has nearly doubled since you people have 
come into office. In any poll of public opinion . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. We're not discussing 
employment or unemployment in these estimates. So let's get on 
with the subject. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that is unfair, 
that is not . . . I think, Mr. Chairman, that will not do justice to 
housing estimates. One of the primary policies behind any 
government's housing program in these times is job creation, and 
the two are linked. They are linked, Mr. Minister, by the 
comments made by the minister who said, scarcely a few breaths 
ago, that their housing program had been successful and had 
created jobs. I suppose it's just grand for him to say that, but when 
I start to say that I think it's been ineffective in creating jobs, that's 
out of order. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, you've got to be consistent. so I say, Mr. 
Chairman, if the housing program that this government has 
brought in has worked miracles in dealing with unemployment, it's 
hard to see that in the unemployment statistics which, as I said, 
have doubled since this government came into office. The rate of 
unemployment and the actual number of unemployed is higher 
than it has been since the '30s. 
 
One of the reasons for that, the overall reason for that is, by and 
large, is the government's inability, or refusal, or both, to respond 
to the problem. One of the ways which other governments have 
responded is taking extraordinary measures to increase the 
housing stock. We need the houses, Mr. Minister. We need the 
jobs. We say to this government you should not be waiting until 
such time as the economy picks up; you ought to be doing it now. 
 
We have a program for doing that that has attracted widespread 
attention and acclaim. Their program has attracted neither. Their 
program has been ignored by them and by the public. I do not 
regard 500 applications as anything other than an indictment of the 
program. It's woefully inadequate. It ought to be several times that. 
It was several times that in 1983. And unless something is done to 
breathe some life back into this industry, it is going to go on being 
a drag to the province. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the facts. The facts are, 
according to your publication — which as I say is often 
misleading — according to your publication, and according to 
Statistics Canada, the actual housing starts in '84 were 5,200; in 
'85 were 5,300 — that's a 2.6 per cent increase. Your projection 
for the balance of the decade is 5,600, which will be about a 6 per 
cent increase. That's not a 45 per cent increase. That is down 
sharply from the  

13,000, the 12,000, the 11,000, and the 9,000 houses which were 
built in the '70s when the former government was in office. It's not 
coincidental that the '70s were a period of high employment and 
very, very low unemployment. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the facts, stop wandering 
around in fantasy land — deal with the world as it is, not as you 
wished it were. 
 
This province, Mr. Minister, is not world-class in terms of the 
number of housing starts. It's got the lowest percentage increase in 
housing starts in Canada. You have the lowest number of housing 
starts last year in over 18 years. This year it's the second lowest in 
18 years. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with those stark facts and to the 
very serious problems it is creating in the short run in terms of 
unemployment, and in terms of an anaemic industry, and with the 
effect it's having on workers — and stop, Mr. Minister, dealing 
with the world as you wish it were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would like to introduce to the Assembly 
a group of students from Eatonia high school. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Rod Stevenson; chaperons, Kent 
Schurman and Ed Nunweiler; bus driver, Rob Assmus. This group 
of students is sponsored by the Lions club in the Eatonia district, 
and they attend the Assembly every year, and I think it's a good 
program. Very few people or very few schools from out in the 
Kindersley area ever come to the legislature. Eatonia do, 
sponsored by the Lions club. 
 
What you're witnessing today is what is called committee of 
finance or the estimates, where the members opposite will be 
questioning the minister responsible for the housing corporation. 
What you will see over the next half-hour is the minister 
responding. It's a good estimate to watch. It's a good, young 
minister, and one of the strong questioners from the opposition 
side. And so you will see what, I think, is probably a good debate 
by two classic members of this Assembly. 
 
I wish all to welcome these people to Regina and to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite was 
concerned that we use facts, we speak about the  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1755 
 

world as it is. And that of course is my intention — dealing with 
reality. 
 
And reality is this: the legacy that your government left to this 
province concerning the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation was 
that you threw millions and millions of dollars into building 
houses in northern Saskatchewan that are falling down today 
because they were poorly built; you spent millions and millions of 
dollars building houses in rural Saskatchewan that today are now 
standing empty — empty — because you had no concerted, 
co-ordinated, systematic, intelligent plan for housing in the 
province of Saskatchewan — none. And everybody knows that. 
 
(1200) 
 
Now you said that his particular government has done nothing of 
consequence in housing since 1982. Surely you wouldn't suggest 
to the senior citizens of this province that our very well-accepted, 
enriched housing program for seniors is of no consequence. Is that 
what you would suggest? 
 
Surely you wouldn't suggest that our senior citizens' home repair 
program, which literally thousands and thousands of seniors have 
taken advantage of, that that program is of no consequence. Is that 
what you would suggest? I trust not. Surely you would not suggest 
that the elders' suite program for senior citizens in this province is 
somehow of no consequence. You seem to be digging a hole for 
yourself as far as seniors are concerned. 
 
I suggest you wake up to the reality of the kind of innovative and 
exciting and forward-looking housing programs that are being 
offered today in Saskatchewan that should have been offered in 
the 1970s, but you never thought of. And one of the reasons why 
they were not implemented in those days is because you did not 
consult with seniors' organizations around the province. You 
chose to sit around the cabinet table and say, well I think this will 
be good for Monday of this week, so let's throw a couple of 
million dollars here, and maybe we'll get a vote or two. It doesn't 
work that way. That's not what the people of Saskatchewan want; 
they want their government to consult with them; they want 
rational housing programs, and that's exactly what we're doing. 
 
The member opposite has suggested that somehow the statistics 
that are being provided in the monthly market report are in some 
ways suspect. Well I want to let the members opposite know that 
the statistics that are presented in the monthly market report are in 
some ways suspect. Well I want to let the members opposite know 
that the statistics that are presented in the monthly market report 
are not generated out of my office; they are generated by 
professional public servants; that these statistics are in fact CMHC 
(Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation) statistics, data 
coming out of CMHC; and that if you take a close look at this 
particular information, you will find out that it is the kind of 
information that the industry in the province is very happy to 
receive on a monthly basis, which wasn't possible formerly. And 
what you have chosen not to do today, is to take a close look at the 
actual statistics themselves. 
 
In 1986, today, urban single-family starts, housing starts, are up 54 
per cent over last year. In addition to that, we  

expect that the housing starts this year will be in excess of what 
they were in 1981, the last year in which you were in government; 
that they will be in excess of the housing starts in 1980, the second 
last year that the NDP government was in power. 
 
Now I think it's incumbent upon the member opposite to let the 
public know all of the information. All of the information is that 
today this housing corporation is providing a much larger array of 
creative and innovative housing programs to meet the needs of 
people in Saskatchewan than was ever considered or was ever 
implemented under your government. And that's fact number one. 
 
Fact number two is the housing starts today are up substantially 
what they were last year, and that we expect that they will be in 
excess of what was offered to the people of Saskatchewan during 
the last two years that your administration was in power. Now 
those are the facts; they speak for themselves. 
 
I think they are indicative of a record that certainly we on this side 
of the Assembly are very proud of, and they are indicative of the 
kinds of things that this government wants to continue to do in the 
future, and we have every intention of doing in the future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there are very, very few 
programs in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation now which 
aren't simply renamed and warmed-up versions of housing 
programs started by previous governments. There are very, very 
few. Every one of the programs you mentioned was in fact started 
by either the government of Ross Thatcher or the government of 
Allan Blakeney. That is accurate. You simply rename, change 
programs to a modest degree, and you call it something new. That, 
Mr. Minister, may be innovating advertising. It's not innovative 
programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am going to leave this subject; suffice it to say that 
I hope the public have an opportunity to listen to it. I also hope 
they have an opportunity to enter into a poll on this. I hope some 
time within the near future there's an election, and we can leave it 
to the public to decide whether or not your programs with respect 
to housing and unemployment are adequate. 
 
I suspect if your housing program were all that you say it is, I 
rather suspect, Mr. Minister, that we would not be witnessing 
history unfold before our eyes — the longest government to hold 
office — the longest government to hold office in peacetime since 
the 30s, which I don't think coincidentally was a Conservative 
government — and I don't think it was coincidental that it was not 
re-elected; in fact not a single member was re-elected. I don't think 
those things are coincidence. I don't think it's coincidence either 
that you have a bad housing program, an atrocious record on 
unemployment, and you're now into your 50th month in office. 
 
The handwriting is on the wall, and I think the noose has been 
slung over the branch of the tree for this government, it simply 
awaits a willing participant. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know . . . I want to get on to a  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1756 
 
 

rather narrow topic. It happens to do with some senior citizen 
high-rises in my riding. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if there's any plans 
to make any changes in any of the senior citizens; high-rises in my 
riding? Has there been any discussion about changing the nature 
of any of those senior citizens' high-rises, or low-rises? I think of 
the one on Ottawa Street which hardly qualifies as a low-rise, but 
it is a senior citizens' housing complex. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I do want to take a moment to 
respond to the accusations made by the member opposite 
concerning the statement that show how there have been now new 
housing programs introduced. That was your statement. We have 
the seniors' non-profit program, new under this government; we 
have the log housing program, new under this government; the 
elders' suite program, new under this government; and we have the 
enriched housing program, new under this government. 
 
Now I thought it would be appropriate to remind the member 
opposite exactly how much money was spent by your government 
in housing programs in your last four years, and we'll compare that 
to the amount of money spent by this government in our four 
years. From '78 to '81, total spent, 71.8 million; '82 to '85, total 
spent, $124 million — substantial increase. Low rental housing, 
37.2 million under your administration, 38.8 under this 
administration; non-profit housing, 34.6 million for you people, 
85.9 million for the Grant Devine Progressive Conservative 
government — substantial increase. What about subsidy 
expenditures for low-income people relating to housing — $32.1 
million for your administration, $105.1 million under this 
administration. A substantial increase in all categories of housing 
compared to the priorities of your administration. 
 
And we shouldn't be surprised because the priority of your 
administration was not really to respond to the pressing needs of 
individual people. You decided instead to build your Crown 
corporation empire, to spend taxpayers' money not to meet critical 
housing needs but to buy potash mines; to spend taxpayers' money 
not to meet the needs of seniors' housing but to buy uranium 
mines; to spend taxpayers' money not to meet the needs of seniors' 
non-profit organizations but rather to spend that money to buy 
land for your odious land bank scheme. Those were the priorities 
of the NDP. 
 
They are not the priorities of this government. Our priorities are to 
do whatever we can to substantially meet the needs of housing in 
this province. 
 
As it relates to the seniors' high-rise, low-rise in your particular 
constituency, we have no plans to significantly change what 
presently is taking place. Naturally there will be the ongoing 
maintenance process as one would normally expect. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would like you to deal 
specifically with the housing program on Ottawa Street, Forman 
place specifically. There are no plans and no discussions with 
respect to any changes in the nature of that housing project. Do I 
have that in categorical terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That particular complex is not a  

seniors' high-rise, it's not a seniors' low-rise, it's not a seniors' 
complex, as I understand it. And that's the question you asked 
about seniors. 
 
As it relates to that Ottawa Street location, there are ongoing 
discussions with the Regina Housing Authority concerning the 
usage of that particular complex. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Well, it's certainly thought of by the people 
in it and by the neighbourhood as being a senior citizens' complex. 
I bet you 90 per cent of the people in there would qualify it as the 
term senior citizens. Mr. Minister, what do you regard that as? I'm 
surprised to see that is not a senior citizens' complex. What do you 
regard it as? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe there are 24 units there; and to the 
best of our knowledge, there are about three that are occupied by 
people over age 65. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: We are dealing then, Mr. Minister, with a 
different complex. We're not talking about the same thing. I am 
talking about Forman place. You are talking about a 
condominium-type unit where everybody has a separate entrance 
out onto the street and so on. I'm talking about a different complex 
altogether, Mr. Minister. 
 
I'm asking if there's any changes for the senior citizens' complex 
which I'm nearly certain is called Forman place. There is another 
complex on Ottawa Street across from the Trinity Church which is 
not a senior citizens' high-rise at all. I'm not talking about that. I 
am talking about . . . I may have misled you. Forman place may 
not be on Ottawa Street; it may be on Halifax Street. But I'm 
talking about Forman place itself. 
 
Are there any plans for any changes in that complex? And then I'll 
get to the one . . . the condominium-type apartment which is 
across from the Trinity Lutheran church. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — What's the address? 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: I don't have a telephone book. It's one of 
those things — I could drive there but I can't give you the exact 
address. Halifax, I think. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We're having difficulty locating the particular 
housing unit that you're talking about. If you're not talking about 
the one on Ottawa, then we're having difficulty understanding 
exactly which one you're referring to. And we're going to have to 
get more information before we can respond. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: I'm going to go on to a different question 
then. If I can ever attract the attention of a page, I'm going to ask 
them to go to my office and get a copy of Henderson's directory 
and we'll settle it in a moment. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with the RAP (regional assistance 
program) program, R-A-P. It's my understanding that we are one 
of three provinces which have not signed the RAP program. I 
wonder why that is,  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1757 
 

Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, we're in the final stages of 
negotiating with the federal government, and we anticipate shortly 
signing all agreements on the operating side as well as the global 
agreement. And of course we have had more RAP expenditure 
funds here out of Saskatchewan, I understand, than the federal 
government has actually put in. So our commitment to 
rehabilitation is significant and will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what has been holding up the 
negotiations? I wonder why we must be one of three provinces 
which haven't signed. What's been holding it up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We want to get the best possible fit between 
their rehabilitation programs and our rehabilitation programs. We 
will be the first province, I understand, to sign not only the global 
but all of the operating agreements, and we will hope to be doing 
so in the very near future. And we simply want to ensure that we 
are getting the best possible deal for Saskatchewan people as we 
can. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it doesn't quite answer my question. 
What has been the hold-up? I recognize you're trying to get the 
best deal possible and hope you would. Why have you had 
difficulty getting a good deal and other provinces haven? Let me 
put it that way. What is unique about Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, we anticipate of course having a better 
deal than some other provinces. It would certainly be imprudent 
for us to sign precipitately and then find out that somehow, 
somewhere along the road, that we made some kind of a mistake 
that one wished you hadn't have made. And that's all part of 
negotiating. You want the best possible deal. Sometimes that takes 
a little longer than it may have on other occasions. As I indicated, 
our commitment to rehabilitation funding has been substantial in 
the past, will continue to be so in the future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, since I'm not going to get 
you to be candid with the Assembly, let me give you a series of 
"yes or no" questions. We have received complaints from city 
administrators who complain that because this province hasn't 
signed the agreement, they have staff sitting twiddling their 
thumbs. That's an exact quote. 
 
Mr. Minister, I gather that the formula for assistance is apparently 
being altered. The old formula had a cut-off of 13,000 annual 
income. The maximum grant of $5,000 was available to persons 
earning less than that. A person earning more than that received a 
dwindling sum, a sum that decreased as your income went up. The 
new formula apparently seems to provide a $13,000 cut-off, but 
it's a steel door. At $12,999 you get the whole thing. At $13,001 
you get nothing. Is that what is at issue? And if it is, who has been 
seeking that result? Has it been you or the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I understand that the federal 
government will continue some scale of income cut-off above the 
12 or $13,000 level, but I think the important  

point to make here is that the federal government, as I understand 
it, has decided across the country to target those particular 
rehabilitation dollars to the very low-income scale, more so than 
had been done previously. And that has been their particular 
priority decision. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well am I right or wrong that the 13,000 
cut-off and the nature of the cut-off is one of the issues? Am I 
right or wrong about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well this, as I indicated, is a policy decision 
which the federal government has imposed upon the nation, and 
they have decided that this is the way it's going to be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is there any issue at stake . . . The Minister is 
being remarkably close-mouthed about this. Is there any issue at 
stake with respect to who administers the program? Is the 
administration and the level of government which is to administer 
it, changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand the city will administer once the 
agreements have been executed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. Mr. Minister, with respect to the 
apartments at 1860 Ottawa . . . Now I have Henderson's — 1860 
Ottawa. There are 34 apartments, I guess — 14 on the first floor, 
14 on the second floor, and nine on the first floor. Is there any 
intention to effect any change with respect to that apartment 
complex? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We've sent one of the officials to get 
information concerning that particular site, so if you have another 
question, perhaps we could move on to that, and then we'll come 
back to this one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. There is the series — and I can't very 
quickly find the address here. There is the series of apartments 
which are condominium-type in nature, which each unit has a 
separate unit onto the street, which are across from the Trinity 
Lutheran Church — I can't quite get the specific address here. Is 
there any intention to change the nature of that? I understand that's 
what you were talking about recently when you said there were 
only three senior citizens, and there are ongoing discussions. So I'd 
like you to address yourself to that complex, Mr. Minister. I 
understand that's what you were referring to a moment ago when 
you got into the tirade you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I must indicate, Mr. Chairman, that it 
certainly would have been more helpful for us if the member 
opposite had been somewhat more prepared for these particular 
estimates concerning housing, in terms of locations and addresses 
and the more detailed information. 
 
The particular location that he is referring to, in the past was of 
course non-profit type housing, and it had not been targeted, as I 
understand, to seniors, or to moderate income, or to natives. And 
there simply is concern that because of the fairly large subsidy 
level of the taxpayer, that we do have more appropriate targeting 
of those particular kinds of units around the province. And I 
understand that SHC and the Regina Housing Authority  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1758 
 
 

are in discussion concerning that particular matter as it relates to 
that location. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Perhaps you could be a little more candid 
and tell me what you have in mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Concerning the Forman place location, we 
have been trying this morning to get in touch with the staff of the 
housing authority in Regina. They evidently are not available at 
this particular moment. We will find out and let the member know 
as soon as possible concerning that particular location. 
 
As it relates to the Ottawa Street, I understand the discussions 
relate to the utilization of that particular housing facility for native 
people here in Regina. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: Okay. Certainly that's needed. What needs to 
be done, though, Mr. Minister, is to avoid the confusion and 
misunderstandings which occurred on Dewdney Street. I have 
received a lot of complaints from people in that area who don't 
have any idea what you're doing. That comes all the way from 
officials in the civic administration, to clergymen who live in the 
area, to the neighbours. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could not be a little more 
forthcoming, not only with members of the Assembly, but with the 
public. And I wonder if it would be utterly fatal to the success of 
your programs if you discuss some of them with the 
neighbourhood before you implemented them. That I think was 
the most serious criticism of some of your predecessor's blunders. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if . . . I say it in the beginning: 
I say it in the end: I endorse native housing; there's a need for 
native housing. But I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you wouldn't hold 
something in the nature of public hearings in the area. That would 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, good heavens, yes. 
 
I recall, Mr. Minister, the former administration, when they were 
planning the infill housing, I remember attending more than one 
public meeting in the cathedral area where the infill housing took 
place. There was a series of charts, attended by officials . . . The 
meetings were attended by officials of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. They brought a series of charts and diagrams and 
explained to the neighbourhood what was going to happen. The 
neighbourhood after . . . I think there were some changes 
implemented as a result of the comments of the neighbourhood. 
The program went ahead, and I think it's one of the most 
successful housing programs that this housing corporation has 
implemented. it obviously wasn't done by your . . . 
 
I remember as well, Mr. Minister, when the Embury place 
complex was considered. I remember attending a meeting. The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation at that time — the member 
from Regina Victoria might be interested in knowing that at that 
time Saskatchewan Housing Corporation had someone . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was there. 
 

Mr. Shillington: —: Right. And your member who was chairing 
it and who did such an able job of explaining the program. It's 
your opponent, Harry Van Mulligen, who did it. In those days that 
corporation had some people who could talk to the public; 
nowadays we don't. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you 
would not consider public hearings in the neighbourhood before 
anything is done. That was really our real criticism of what took 
place on Dewdney Avenue. The neighbours were surprised, they 
were confused, and it caused a very serious problem. In the end 
result, you got nothing but goose-eggs. The natives got no housing 
and you got a headache out of it. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you wouldn't be prepared to proceed on 
that property — the complex apparently has no name — if you 
would not proceed with respect to that complex with a bit more 
due regard for informing the public and getting their comments 
back. As I say, it was done with respect to Embury place; the 
current member was there. The next member after the election was 
chairing it. The next member after the election chaired it. I'd ask 
you, Mr. Minister, if you don't think that ought to be done with 
respect to this complex. I think if you did, you'd avoid most of the 
problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I think one of the big differences is that 
back then you people built — the government built, Sask Housing 
built — on its own. This government has decided to work with 
organizations like St. Basil's — and they built; like the Circle 
Drive Alliance Church in Saskatoon — and they built, rather than 
government doing it all. Now that's a substantial difference in 
philosophy and approach: working with organizations rather than 
saying, this is the way it's going to be. 
 
As it relates to the Ottawa Street location, we've been in discussion 
with the Regina Housing Authority, and they of course represent 
citizens here in Regina. If that isn't sufficient consultation process, 
I don't have any particular problem with some kind of a process of 
consultation with people in the area. 
 
Those can be sensitive issues at times, because I think you and I 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the member opposite would 
just hold his comments for a minute so he could hear what I was 
going to say. Okay? Thank you. You indicated your support for 
native housing. And in this particular instance we're talking about 
housing for native students, both married and non-married. All 
right? 
 
Consultation processes can be held in different ways, I suppose. 
And there is always a concern that sometimes what you and I 
might want to see happen won't happen by virtue of a consultation 
process taking place. Sometimes that happens, because the 
community doesn't understand or it simply rejects outright. And 
then you have to say, well I'm sorry, the laudable goal that you and 
I agreed on in fact can't be reached. 
 
Now I have no problem with consultation. I am one of those who 
agrees very strongly with that. That's why we're involved with the 
organizations at Fifth and Pasqua. That's why we're involved with 
organizations at  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1759 
 

5th and Pasqua right now. 
 
So I would indicate again to the public that our particular approach 
has been to work with organizations, with St. Basil's, with the 
Alliance in Saskatoon, so that those particular organizations are 
the ones that are deciding: we want a housing project, we'd like 
some assistance from the government. Grace Lutheran is another 
example. And we are working with them rather than deciding this 
is the way it's got to be; this is how it's going to be done. The big 
brother approach of the NDP, that is not our approach. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me clear up any misunderstandings. This 
province has been working in partnership with churches to build 
residences for decades. That was not a program which we 
undertook, but it was one we participated in . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, for Heaven's sake, they have been going up 
for decades; that's not something you started. That is not 
something you people started. That's absolute and utter nonsense. 
That's not something the Blakeney government started. it was 
ongoing in the '60s. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to complain about the process here. And it 
reminds me of what you did to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana with that complex. She found out . . . I think she found out 
the same time the public did. She was furious, and she had every 
right to be, and so do I. 
 
Mr. Minister, what would have been the harm in you picking up 
the phone — I assume that SaskTel supplies you with a phone — 
or dropping me a letter and telling me what you were doing? Until 
I started to badger you today, I couldn't get any information about 
this thing. And I am a member of the Legislative Assembly; I have 
some avenues that aren't open to the general public. The general 
public can't get any information about it either. 
 
You say, Mr. Minister, there are certain sensitivities with respect 
to housing for native peoples. Of course there are. I wish there 
weren't. I wish Canada didn't have racial problems, but it does, and 
we ought to recognize those racial problems. Absolutely nothing is 
accomplished, Mr. Minister, by proceeding in the dark of night, 
not telling anyone what you're doing, and springing it on them. All 
you do is inflame everybody's worst fears. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, that had these estimates, had I not been present 
for these estimates, had I missed this morning's for some reason or 
other, never would have found out what's going on. I never would 
have found out what's going on, Mr. Minister, and you would have 
proceeded merrily down the road, and all of a sudden there would 
have been an announcement, and real trouble would have broke 
out. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, you should hold a public meeting over in that 
neighbourhood. It ought to be well advertised. You ought to tell 
them what you're doing and try and make some attempt to allay 
their worst fears. What you are doing now in proceeding in the 
dark of the night with the project, you are going to fan people's 
worst fears. That is not the way to solve the problem. 
 
I don't intend to carry on, Mr. Minister, with the issue any  

further, except to urge you in the strongest possible term to contact 
the pastorate at the Trinity Lutheran Church, book an evening in 
the Christian education centre in the church which is right across 
the street from the complex and hold a public meeting; get some 
of your officials there, and tell them what on earth you're doing, 
and stop proceeding in such a secret fashion. That is what is 
getting these projects into trouble, and we need them. We need 
housing for natives and need it badly. But you people handle it 
some incompetently that you've got nothing but goose eggs all 
over your head. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm basically going to leave it at that. I only raised 
. . . Unless there's some plans to change Forman House, I don't 
think the minister needs to get back to me . . . didn't think there 
was. I simply had heard rumours of something happening in the 
east side of my riding. I had made inquiries and got nothing, 
absolutely nothing. And I raised Forman House first to eliminate 
it, because I assumed the answer would be, nothing's planned with 
respect to Forman House. So unless you're planning something 
with it, you don't need to get back to me. I don't think there is. I 
just raised it to eliminate it. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me clear up one misconception. The Regina 
Housing Authority, for all it's capability and talents, does not 
represent that community, that east-end community. The Regina 
Housing Authority is made up of representatives of the federal, 
provincial, and civic government. No representatives of that 
community sit on that board. And there's nobody on that Regina 
Housing Authority who has a responsibility to go back to that 
community and talk to them. That is your responsibility, and I 
urge you to hold some public meetings with respect to that 
complex before you create all kinds of wild and unrealistic fears 
about what's happening. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I have no further questions, and these 
estimates can proceed, subvote by subvote, unless you have some 
comment. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Housing corporation 

Advances (Statutory) — Nil Vote 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I simply want to thank the officials for their 
assistance in helping us with estimates today. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —: I also wish to thank the minister's officials 
for assisting us. 
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1760 
 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Authority 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 44 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Seated beside me, Mr. 
Don Bennett, executive director, and seated beside him to his 
right, Mr. Dave Robinson, assistant executive director. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give us 
the salaries of the senior officers. You can give us this in writing 
again, the salaries of the senior officers, and any increases which 
they may have been awarded over the last 12 months. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to provide that 
information to the member opposite. I've just given it to the page. 
Mr. Shillington: — Can I ask when the increases were awarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We're not sure of the exact date. Can I send 
that over to you at a later time? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
was going to ask you some questions about the new assessment 
management agency, but I think I will save most of them until we 
consider the legislation in committee. 
 
Can I just ask you this, then: what kind of funding will be arranged 
from the part of the government for the management assessment 
agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As indicated in my second reading speech on 
the Bill, we will be continuing on the '85-86 appropriation level 
into the future from the provincial government, and anything over 
and above that which the agency deems to be necessary to carry 
on its activities will be cost-shared, 50 coming out of the 
provincial treasury, 50 coming from the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I was not here yesterday, and I did not have 
the opportunity to look at your comments in Hansard. After that 
initial period, will you be transferring all of the staff to the 
assessment management agency, all the staff who were there? And 
will there also, in your opinion, be a need for additional people in 
order to catch up the backlog which I think still exists from the 
point of view of assessments across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, there will be full and complete transfer 
of staff over to the agency, and of course it will be up to the 
agency to determine what their staffing requirements will be. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And you will still then provide 50 per cent 
of the funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — So I suspect you will have an interest in the 
number of staff who are there. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the cost was for the operation 
of the urban assessment task force? Are you able to give us that 
information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The cost of the urban report or study, pardon 
me, I believe was $37,285.62. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did this task force include members of the 
legislature? I think there were. Was there a Legislative Secretary 
involved with this task force — your Legislative Secretary or the 
former minister's Legislative Secretary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe there was at the time, Mr. Morin, 
the member for The Battlefords, who evidently was a Legislative 
Secretary at that particular point in time. I don't know who he was 
involved with. We'd have to check that out. He was the chairman, 
and then there was the mayor of Melville and a retired appraiser, a 
Mr. Koyl, who was a member as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you provide me, Mr. Minister, with 
any financial benefits or expenses that were covered for the 
member for The Battlefords in the performance of his duty as the 
chairman of this task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Any expenses he would have incurred would 
naturally come out of Executive Council related to his 
responsibilities as Legislative Secretary. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So out of this $37,285 that the task force 
cost, you say there were no expenses paid out of that to the 
member for Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That is correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Therefore, I will 
pursue that further with the Executive Council when it gets here. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been a lot of discussion about roads in the 
oil field areas of the province, and the beating that they take from 
service vehicles and drilling equipment and sort of the pretty 
heavy pieces of equipment. And it's been suggested that a special 
additional assessment to the wells, or that a new well-head tax, be 
turned over to local municipalities to pay for road and 
maintenance. Has this been in any way discussed through the 
assessment authority or would they have anything to do with it? 
Has it been brought to their attention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, it's not something that the assessment 
authority has been involved with, and of course assessment in the 
future is something that naturally will be dealt with by the new 
agency. So if there is an assessment consideration to the problem 
that you're talking about, then it's something that the new agency 
would naturally be interested in. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Has the government proper, Mr. Minister, 
concerned itself about this situation and have you had any 
deliberations about what the position ought  
  



 
June 6, 1986 

1761 
 

to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well you better direct that question to the 
Minister of Finance if it relates to tax issues. I wouldn't be the one 
to more appropriately deal with that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Assessment Authority 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 44 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Local Government Board 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 22 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, I have with me, Martin Janzen, a 
member of the board; and Marilyn Saucier, secretary. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can you provide me with the 
usual information about the salaries of your senior administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would be happy to do that. Can I put it in a 
little bit more legible form and write it out and send it over to you? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, one other question. There are 
no changes in here as I can see, except that I notice there's no 
changes in staff, but the total increase in your budget is $2,900, 
which is not a major increase. Can you tell me whether, in light of 
that, there are any reductions in the amount of work that the Local 
Government Board intends to do. If there is an increase in salaries 
this year, I don't think that that amount would even cover that — 
and I'm not assuming anything because I don't know what they 
might be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We expect a normal work-load in the 
upcoming year, and an efficient operation by the board, which is 
why we're looking at the rather small, very modest increase in 
appropriation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If there is a salary increase because of 
negotiations or what not, what's the procedure? Will you then have 
special warrants to make up for it? Is that the usual procedure that 
you employ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if we can't absorb you might have to go 
to that, but naturally you look at absorbing first. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 

 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I'd like to thank the officials of the Local 
Government Board for their assistance today and, of course, 
throughout the year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


