


















































December 16,1986 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 16, 1986 
 

275 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — If you excuse me, I have an introduction then. 
I’d like to introduce to the House this afternoon the Urban Native 
Pre-employment Program participants here in Regina. They are a 
group of nine adults and they will be visiting the legislature and 
observing question period. I will be meeting with them in room 255 
at approximately 2:30 and look forward to meeting with them. I 
would ask now all members to kindly receive them in the 
appropriate manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the opportunity 
to introduce to you, and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, a fellow parliamentarian from Nova Scotia who is 
visiting Saskatchewan in the province this weekend for the RCMP 
graduation which has occurred in our city. The member has been a 
member of the Nova Scotia legislature since 1974 – is sitting there 
now. I hazard to say that he is a Liberal member of the legislature. I 
would ask other members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming Mr. Guy Brown, who is seated in the opposition 
gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Canada’s Patent Drug Legislation 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and in his absence I will direct it to the Premier. 
It deals with the Saskatchewan government’s decision to support 
the Mulroney government’s Patent Act amendments, amendments 
which will drive up the cost of prescription drugs for lower income 
people in this province, the sick and the elderly, and which will 
increase costs for the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan. 
 
Last April, Mr. Premier, just prior to the possible provincial 
election, the former minister of Health sent a telex to Ottawa, to the 
government at Ottawa, saying that your government had “serious 
reservations” about the changes, and stating that they could add an 
extra $15 million a year to the cost of the Saskatchewan drug plan. 
 
Last May the executive director of that Saskatchewan drug plan, 
Mr. Ron Waschuk, said, and I quote: 
 

We don’t have sufficient detail to know how we would 
benefit from our additional expenditure. Until such time, 
our position is one of very deep concern. 
 

My specific question is this: what firm guarantees have you 
received from the Mulroney government to put to rest these serious 
reservations on the part of the minister, and the very deep concern 
on the part of the senior 

administrator, that convinced you to give your enthusiastic support 
to his proposal of the Mulroney government to give greater patent 
protection to the multinational drug companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the hon. 
member that his allegation that more drug research and drug 
manufacturing in Canada is going to increase costs, is not accurate. 
 
If we can manufacture more of the drugs here, and if we can have 
more of the research effort here, and if we can have the 5,000 jobs 
here, then not only can you have economic benefits associated with 
the new economic activity and employment, but, if we can do the 
research, we could be in a position where we could be exporting 
the new quality drugs, the various kinds of research data 
information base that others are exporting to us. We’re taking it 
from internationals and multinationals, if you will, from the United 
States and Great Britain and Germany, bringing it in here. 
 
If the federal government says that it can put up a block of money, 
I believe it’s – and the Minister of Health may know the numbers – 
a hundred million dollars; if it’s got a price review mechanism so 
that in the short run we’re not going to see this dramatic increase, 
and obviously in the long run you’re going to see lower costs for 
drugs for senior citizens and the general public across Canada if we 
do it here, then let’s build in those mechanisms that allow us to 
phase this in while we get the long run benefit. And if there’s some 
short run changes that we have to cope with, whether it is taking 
this pool of money at the federal level, whether it’s a price review 
commission that studies it, fair enough, let’s look at those. 
 
But let’s not every deny ourselves the opportunity to produce and 
research that huge health care mechanism in Canada. Now that’s 
my argument when it comes to farm chemicals. It’s the argument 
of the people of this province when it comes to manufacturing 
health care or research in health care. Let’s at least do it here 
instead of just depending on some international or multinational 
charges from wherever. So my concern is partly addressed because 
we have a price review commission, because we have time to 
address it. We have, I believe it’s in the neighbourhood of $100 
million that can be allocated over the Canadian piece. We’re 
looking up to 5,000 new jobs. And I believe it’s good that we do 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. You are in 
effect justifying the undoubted increase in drug costs by reference 
to the transition fund and by a promise of more research and 
development in Canada. With respect to the fund: do you agree that 
the Mulroney government’s changes in the prescription drug laws 
will add $15 million a year to the cost of the Saskatchewan 
Prescription Drug Plan year after year, year after year, while the 
federal government fund will only last four years and provide 
Saskatchewan with probably less than $2 million a year? Do you 
agree with those figures: $15 million a year for the drug fund and 
at a high, I suggest, $2 million a year from the transition fund? Do 
you deny those figures, and if so, what are your figures? 
  



December 16, 1986 

276 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t believe those figures. I mean, he 
can be throwing them out . . . the reason that we set up a price 
review mechanism – and we take a great deal of credit for that – 
was to make sure that we could monitor this over time and make 
sure in the short run we don’t have inordinate changes, so in the 
long run we can all benefit in Canada. Now he may want to see 
another mechanism if we have a transition fund of – whatever it is 
— $100 million. He may want to say that that should be extended 
over a longer period of time, and that may be worthy of some 
consideration. But don’t deny Canadians the opportunity to have 
the research and the manufacturing here in Canada. I haven’t heard 
of one positive suggestion from the members opposite of how we 
could have that research and that manufacturing here. 
 
We’ve said we want a price review mechanism to protect people in 
the short urn, a great deal of money that can be allocated over time 
across various provinces to make sure that we can make sure that 
it’s fair; that we want to spread the 5,000 jobs across the various 
jurisdictions so that they all don’t go to Ontario and Quebec. And 
all I hear from the opposition is – cry wolf – well, it’s going to cost 
you so much more money. And they never did look at any of the 
benefits. 
 
I think collectively this House should look at how we can bring the 
benefits to the province of Saskatchewan and to Canada by doing – 
at least, I think it’s time – some of that research and some of that 
manufacturing right here at home, as opposed to just giving the 
benefits to people internationally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
I said the costs for the drug plan would be an extra 15 million a 
year, and I am quoting the former minister. I am saying that the 
research fund will net Saskatchewan two million. You deny my 
figures. Please give me yours – please give me yours. And please 
give me why you believe there will be additional jobs producing 
patent drugs when there is going to be a loss of jobs producing 
generic drugs. Why do you believe that a job producing generic 
drugs is a less effective job than one producing patent drugs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there’s the nub of the question 
right there. The members opposite don’t understand what it means 
to put research money into developing new drugs. All they can do 
is copy. They want Canada to turn into a packaging country. We 
package for somebody else. We package for some other country 
that could design a new product. 
 
We’re talking about using our imagination, our research – 
Canadians with initiative – and creating new, better quality drugs 
for the people of Saskatchewan and the senior citizens for 
generations to come. All you’re talking about is packaging 
somebody else’s research. 
 
It’s time that this country was standing on its own two feet with 
respect to research and manufacturing and processing and 
diversification, and not just copying others. 

 
We said that we wanted to have a price review mechanism to allow 
us to monitor what short-run changes there would be. The $15 
million was an estimate of what it might be – was an estimate. We 
decided and encouraged the federal government to have a price 
review mechanism, and you’re running around trying to frighten 
senior citizens. 
 
Why don’t you tell them in the long run it would be better to have 
Canadians doing the research here, and we could have the quality 
drugs and the better drugs and the better service and the 
manufacturing and the jobs? And they would like to see that. 
 
I mean, many of us are fastly approaching the world of senior 
citizens, individually. We may be retiring. Well I think we might 
want to look forward with some degree of confidence that we are 
going to have some production and some manufacturing and the 
research here in Canada, as opposed to some other place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Health, and it 
also deals with your government’s support of the federal patent Act 
amendments, which will drive up the cost of prescription drugs to 
low-income families, the sick and the elderly, and ultimately will 
increase the prescription drug plan. 
 
Previously the Premier referred to us standing on our own two feet. 
I’m wondering, what kind of studies has the Department of Health 
done in the cost implications of the Mulroney government 
changes? And I’d also like to know when those studies were 
completed and who performed them. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the estimates that were given 
by the former minister of Health, and I believe as early as this 
spring during the estimates of the Department of Finance, estimates 
in the Department of Health were that there would be anywhere 
from 10 to $15 million. The Leader of the Opposition used those 
numbers, and we don’t deny those numbers. 
 
What I suggest to the hon. member opposite, the Health critic, and 
to the Leader of the Opposition and other members of the New 
Democratic Party here and in this country, as the Premier has done 
just a few moments ago, is: think of this legislation – because it’s 
complex, as much of this type of legislation is – and the complexity 
of it is that there are some risks and there are some benefits. There 
are risks and benefits to any of this type of complex sort of thing. 
 
But the benefit to this legislation is, as has been eloquently outlined 
by our Premier here this day, and on other days before this, is that 
there’s a tremendous benefit to Canada to be involved in the 
high-tech side of the research and development. That’s the benefit 
side. 
 
The risk side, and I have addressed that and I talked to this House 
about it just a few days ago, the risk side . . . and I’ve addressed 
those in a letter which I sent in late November or early December 
to the Minister of  
  



December 16, 1986 

277 
 

Consumer Affairs, nationally, Mr. Andre. I referred to the three 
particular things that the Premier also addressed a few moments 
ago. 
 
First of all, a drug prices review board and the workings of that. 
And we know that that is extremely important – how that will 
operate – especially for the entry price level of drugs. That’s not a 
smoke screen, to the member from Quill Lakes, that’s addressing a 
complex issue in a reasonable way. 
 
The second thing that we have addressed in that letter is the 
allotment to this province of the research and development. And 
there’s no question that as Minister of Health for Saskatchewan this 
government and this Premier will stand up for Saskatchewan as it 
relates to the distribution of research and development money 
across this country, and Saskatchewan will get its fair share of that. 
And that letter addressed that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the third thing, Mr. Speaker, is the 
distribution, as as well was referred to by the Premier, the 
distribution of the $100 million compensation fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could just say one more thing in reference to this, 
to show the difference between addressing a complex issue in a 
complex and reasonable way and yelling: the sky is falling, the sky 
is falling! – as they suggest that they want to do. Mr. Speaker, I 
have with me a document which shows the position of the New 
Democratic Party as it relates to this, and that is to scare the people 
most vulnerable tin this country – as it relates to it. And that is this 
document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
Minister of Health either didn’t understand the question, didn’t 
hear the question, or didn’t want to answer the question, so we’ll 
do this again. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the Government of Saskatchewan have a cost 
impact study on what these changes will cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan through the prescription drug plan, or increase cost 
to drugs? When were these studies completed, and who performed 
the work? I would ask you to answer the question, Mr. Minister. 
We’re tired of listening to long harangues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Health 
gave the numbers in good faith, the 10 to $15 million, gave those 
numbers with the best possible estimate that can be done by the 
people in the Department of Health of this province, who are 
competent people. And they have looked at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite is saying, as are her 
colleagues here and across this country are saying to the people 
that are most vulnerable in this country, the elderly and those 
people who are most vulnerable – here, fill our NDP coffers. This 
is what this document says, Mr. Speaker – fill our NDP election 
coffers by scaring elderly people of this country. And I reject that, 
Mr. Speaker. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question is also to the Minister of Health, 
Mr. Speaker. It also deals with your government’s support for 
Ottawa’s plans to amend the patent legislation. Those who support 
higher drug prices claim that this is the price that Canadians must 
pay to get the multinational drug companies to do more research 
and development work in Canada. And these companies have 
promised Canada $1.4 billion in new research over the next 10 
years and claim that that will create 3,000 new jobs. 
 
And my question to the minister is: can you table any information 
from the federal government which suggests that these investments 
are guaranteed, or is this simply a case of the Ottawa government 
and your government simply accepting the word of the drug 
companies on this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be tabling that type 
of information, but I will take notice of the question. If we have 
information that can be tabled, I would look carefully at it, and I 
could put something on the table if it’s there and it’s reasonable to 
do so. I’ll take notice on that basis. 
 
As far as . . . I will repeat one more time though, Mr. Speaker – this 
legislation proposed by the federal government and, in fact, 
working its way through parliament today is based on very definite 
risks and definite benefits. What we have said in our analysis of 
this, in a responsible analysis on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan is, it says those benefits can be substantial for 
Saskatchewan and for Canada and those risks we must address. 
And I outlined the three areas in which we have identified what we 
believe to be some risks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s extremely important that no one, no responsible 
legislator of any political stripe, should be able to get away with 
saying in a very simplistic way, the sky is falling; the sky is falling; 
there’s nothing complex about this. And that is what they are 
doing. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Nobody is saying 
that the sky is falling. That’s not the issue here. Is the minister 
aware than even if the drug companies keep this promise that I 
talked about, about creating 3,000 new jobs over the next 10 years, 
that this will be about the same number of new jobs that drug 
companies have created under the current system, and that those 
numbers come from the government’s own Eastman inquiry which 
show that the drug industry in Canada has created more than 3,000 
new jobs between 1969 and 1982? And in that context, minister, 
and in the light of that background, can you explain why Canadians 
should shell out billions of dollars over the years in higher drug 
prices to get a little more than the current rate of new job creation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 
the number of jobs. And I would suggest to him that none of the 
jobs under the present system – none – are in Saskatchewan, in this 
province. None of them. And what I would say to the member as 
well, as the Premier outlined in an earlier answer, the kinds of jobs 
  



December 16, 1986 

278 
 

which Canada and Saskatchewan must go after and must encourage 
are the jobs in the development in the research side, not just in the 
packaging and the copying which generic drug manufacturers in 
fact do. 
 
This legislation does not in any way suggest that there will not be, 
or that there should not be, generic drug manufacturers in Canada 
or anywhere else. It does not suggest that. So what I’m saying is, 
there are some benefits to having the research development type 
jobs in this country and in this province. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of 
Health in responding to these questions have indicated that the 
legislation presently before parliament is necessary to encourage 
the kind of research and development that they’re looking for. I 
wonder if the Premier or the Minister of Health could indicate 
specifically the basis upon which they make the assertion that the 
federal legislation with a patent protection period of 10 years is 
required, where the Eastman study indicated that a patent 
protection period of four years would be sufficient to obtain all of 
the research and development and the jobs that we are going to get. 
Why is 10 years required in the opinion of the federal government, 
whereas the expert commission suggested that four years would be 
more than sufficient? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the details to 
that. I would say to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . . I 
would say to him: the question becomes, should it be four years; 
should it be seven years? I don’t know, and I can’t answer for the 
federal government or the studies which they have done. I can’t 
answer that. I’m sure representatives of your party at the national 
level have asked those questions, and of the other party at the 
national level have asked those questions. I don’t know. But I do 
say, Mr. Speaker, there are some significant benefits which can 
accrue to Canada and to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further 
supplementary to the minister. Is the minister aware of a study 
undertaken by the Canadian Drug Manufacturers’ Association 
which shows that the higher drug prices will take so much money 
out of the Canadian economy that they’ll prevent the creation of 
anywhere from 9,000 to 10,000 new jobs in the next 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am aware of studies 
which have been done by the drug manufacturers; I’ve been aware 
of some studies that have been done by the manufacturers of 
generic drugs which are in opposition to each other, obviously, 
because there’s a great deal at stake for both. There’s no question 
that that’s true. 
 
Legislators, nationally or provincially, need to be aware that the 
lobby groups from wherever they come will put their positions 
forward, in as strong a terms as they can, with whatever back-up 
studies that they may be able to generate. We know that’s the case. 
But responsible legislators here and at the national level have to 
able to cut through that and come up with the best benefits under 

the circumstances. And I believe this legislation at the federal level 
attempts to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Minister of 
Health. The Minister of Health, it is obvious in his answers this 
afternoon, is not very much aware of many of the studies that the 
members in this side have directed to him. I’ll see if the member is 
aware of this. Will the Minister of Health please advise whether or 
not he is aware whether the issue of the drug patent legislation has 
been something demanded by the American negotiators in their 
discussions with the Canadian negotiators on the free trade 
discussions, discussions to which your Premier, of course, is a 
party to? And if it is not a party of that free trade negotiations, will 
he table the documents to this House to prove that they are not a 
casualty – yet another casualty – of the American concessions on 
Canadian people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, that same question was asked 
in the Parliament of Canada by Mr. Nystrom. Mr. Nystrom is 
becoming a more and more prominent person in Saskatchewan 
politics. The response to that question was a definite no, that has 
not been part of it. What interests me about the member from 
Riversdale is, while he stakes his ground as being definitely against 
the patent drug legislation, how it might develop our economy, he 
also stands against any kind of a trade relationship with the United 
States which shows you how backwards you are, and how you’re 
still in the 1960’s, just like your party. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary. The hon. member is wrong. I 
am not against a trading arrangement with the United States or with 
other countries of the world; that’s not the issue. But I ask, as a 
supplementary of the minister in charge – and I don’t know which 
one is speaking now for the Premier in this area – but I will ask it 
to the Minister of Health because they’re all confused as between 
Health, Economic Development, and Premier. But I’ll ask the 
Minister of Health this supplementary. 
 
You say that it is not a part of the free trade negotiations. How then 
is it that you can explain to this House, please, that in April of 1986 
before the free trade negotiations began, your government’s 
position was in opposition of the drug patent changes. Now, six 
months after the free trade negotiations have gone, your 
government is for the drug patent changes. How else can you 
explain that, other than the fact that the Mulroney and Devine 
governments have caved in again to the United States’ demands? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, to that member’s final 
supplementary. The position taken by my colleague, the former 
minister of health this spring regarding this legislation, or the 
potential for this legislation, was that there were some risks to it 
and was that there were some benefits. He did. He outlined that 
there were risks to it and he negotiated and discussed with – his 
officials did – with officials in Ottawa, and this minister did with 
his counterpart in Ottawa, Mr. Epp, that these changes are 
  



December 16, 1986 

279 
 

necessary, and several changes were made as a result of that 
representation by my colleague, the former minister of Health, and 
by his colleagues across this country from other provinces. Some 
of these changes took place. 
 
What I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the hon. member from 
Riversdale is that there are those risks which I outlined earlier. We 
have addressed them on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. We 
do that sincerely because we believe, as I’ve said before, that there 
are some risks, but there are also tremendous benefits, as is always 
the case with complex legislation, whether it be here or in Ottawa. 
 
Ms. Smart: — My question is also the Minister of Health and it 
deals with the government’s support for higher drug prices. The 
minister may not be aware of it, but consumers are certainly aware 
of the kind of prices they will be hit with under the Mulroney 
government’s changes. 
 
Is the minister aware that thanks to generic drugs Saskatchewan 
residents can purchase the generic equivalent of a medication 
commonly used by heart patients, propranolol, which sells to the 
pharmacies for $16.70 per 1,000 tablets while the Canadian 
brand-name price is $78.51, and the American brand-name price is 
$170.73. In light of such savings, how can you say that legislation 
which will hamper the development of generic drugs is good for 
consumers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this government is not for a 
higher drug prices as this member suggests. What this government 
is for, is for Canada to be on the leading edge of this industry, as 
well as on any other industry which it is possible for Canada to be 
on the leading edge. 
 
Why, I ask, Mr. Speaker, should Canada wait for someone else to 
do the research, someone else to do the development within the 
boundaries of some other country – some other jurisdiction when, 
in fact, the brainpower of Canada, the scientific power of Canada, 
the excellent educational levels that we have in this country can 
take us out to that leading edge that I talk about? That is the nub of 
the issue. That is why there is some benefit to this for all of 
Canada, whether they be consumers or whether they be people 
working in that very technical industry. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the  

day, I would like to rise on a point of order regarding the report of 
the special nominating committee, which is on the agenda for 
today, private member’s day, and the motion with respect to that 
report which is, as I say, stands under adjourned debates. 
 
Briefly put, my point of order is this: that committee improperly 
exceeded its mandate and authority and jurisdiction. Its report, I 
argue, is therefore ultra vires and out of order. The point at issue is 
the committee’s improper recommendation, as I respectfully 
submit to you, sir, regarding the quorum of standing committees. 
The authorities are quite clear on this issue. First, the rules of the 
Assembly, specifically rule 86(1), states that: 
 

. . . a special Committee . . . shall be appointed whose 
duty it shall be to prepare and report, (I underline those 
words) . . . lists of Members. 

 
Note that, Mr. Speaker, “lists of members.” 
 
Second, that special committee was duly established by an order of 
the Assembly on the motion of the Premier, and seconded by the 
Deputy Premier on Wednesday, December 3rd. The Assembly 
ordered that there be established “a special committee to prepare 
and report lists of members,” and I underline those words again. 
 
It further ordered that this special nominating committee . . . 
“considered the size of the standing committee and report thereon.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is my point of order that its mandate from this 
Assembly was therefore simple, direct, clear, and unequivocal – to 
report on the size of the standing committee and the members to 
compose them. That’s all. No mention, Mr. Speaker, of quorum, 
which is different than size, whatsoever. 
 
Third, I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s, article 621(1), 
page 198 which says: 
 

A committee can only consider those matters which have 
been committed to it by the House. 
 

In short, in my translation of it, Mr. Speaker, a committee cannot 
and must not exceed the mandate given to it by the Assembly. To 
do other wise is to be out of order. 
 
Fourth, the action of the special nominating committee was out of 
keeping with the tradition and practices of this Assembly. Over the 
years, from time to time the quorum on committees has varied. 
However, Mr. Speaker, it has only been varied by a competent 
authority duly following the rules of the Assembly and 
parliamentary practice. 
 
It is my argument, therefore, that the committee in its report has 
acted as the lawyers say ultra vires, or beyond the rules and the 
mandate of this superior governing body, which mandate limits it 
to the size but not to the quorums. 
 
Now, one last point. I’m aware, sir, that in order to raise a point of 
order in a timely way, this must be done so according to 
Beauchesne’s rule 237. My raising it now is, in my submission, 
indeed timely. This is the first private  
  



December 16, 1986 

280 
 

member’s day since the committee reported, and thus the first 
appropriate opportunity. The matter stands on private member’s 
day under adjourned debates, and we are still debating an 
amendment, and many speakers on both sides of the House have 
yet to speak on that amendment. Therefore the matter has not yet 
passed beyond the stage where it would be inappropriate to raise 
such a point of order. 
 
And finally, in any event, if the committee was exceeding its 
mandate and therefore out of order on December 4, as I argue with 
respect, sir, that it was and is, it is no less in order on December 16. 
In other words, no more in order, there is no effluxion of time 
which can grant a committee jurisdiction if it has no jurisdiction, as 
the lawyers say again, ab initio, from the start, which is the essence 
of my submission. 
 
So to summarize, Mr. Speaker, on this point of order and to 
conclude, I say as follows: First, the report of that special 
committee is quote out of order because it clearly and manifestly 
exceeded its mandate and authority. The rules of the Assembly, the 
order of the Assembly, and the parliamentary authorities all in my 
respectful submission to you, sir, demonstrate the committees 
report to be out of order. 
 
Second, if in your ruling you find against us, that will set, in my 
judgement, Mr. Speaker, an alarming and regrettable precedent and 
will encourage other committees in the future to exceed their 
proper mandate – the direction that we give to them – by adding 
additional clauses or elements of the report. 
 
And thirdly, if in your ruling you find for our side, Mr. Speaker, 
that will send an equally clear and, may I add, salutatory message 
to all future committees showing that they must adhere strictly to 
their mandate and not exceed it – that the committees are no more 
powerful than this House; that this House is the superior authority; 
the committees are junior and report to it. Such a ruling which, in 
my respectful submission, Mr. Speaker, would be the correct and 
proper one, will assist you and the House and all members to 
uphold the rules and the practices of the Assembly, without which 
the effectiveness of this Assembly can be very easily eroded. 
Thank you, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, to be very brief on this, and 
we dealt with this at some length at an earlier date in session, I 
refer to rule 90(1) of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly, where it says: 
 

One third of the number of Members of a select, special 
or standing committee shall be a quorum unless the 
Assembly has otherwise ordered. 
 

And the member suggests, the opposition House Leader suggests in 
his argument that somehow the committee to which he referred, of 
which I am a member, somehow the committee changed the rules 
of quorum. The committee did nothing of the sort. 
 
The committee is recommending, in the motion which is in 
question which the member questions, is recommending to the 
Assembly, to the House, that it be 

changed. In other words, we have not suggested that it be taken 
from the Assembly – that decision be taken from the Assembly. 
We are to vote on that, and the House will vote on it at the time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that rule 90(1), where it says at 
the end of the quotation, “unless the Assembly has otherwise 
ordered,” what I’m suggesting is that the motion brought forward 
by the member from Yorkton ask the House to change that rule. 
And it is before the House, as it properly should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I rise in the point of order briefly, and I 
rise to rebut the argument now made by the House Leader. 
 
No one is arguing whether or not the House can order otherwise. 
We are arguing whether o not it can do so by the procedure which 
is before us. We are arguing whether or not a committee can 
recommend it to the House and that the adoption of that committee 
report will produce that result. And our simple submission is that 
the special committee of the legislature which made that 
recommendation had no authority to make that recommendation. 
 
May I refer all hon. members to the Votes and Proceedings of 
December 3 at page 12, where it is very clear that the committee – 
and I will quote again: 
 

On motion of the Hon. Mr. Devine, seconded by the Hon. 
Mr. Berntson: 
 
Ordered, That Members McLaren, Gerich, Koskie, 
McLeod and Shillington be constituted a Special 
Committee (one, and I’m inserting the one) to prepare 
and report, with all convenient speed, lists of Members to 
compose the Standing Committees of this Assembly, 
provided under Rule 86. 
 

And then I’ll leave out about the standing committees having 
power to call for witnesses; it’s not relevant. And: 
 

That the said Special Committee consider the size of the 
Standing Committees and to report thereon with all 
convenient speed. 
 

It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the committee was authorized to 
prepare lists and to consider the size, and that is all. And it is 
equally clear that a special committee cannot widen or broaden its 
mandate. This will be clear from a reference to Beauchesne’s, and I 
refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s, the Fifth Edition, at page 
198 under paragraph 621: 
 

A committee can only consider those matters which have 
been committed to it by the House. 
 
A committee is bound by, and is not at liberty to depart 
from, the Order of Reference. 
 

And that’s what I just quoted. And it is clear – and I will cease on 
this point – it is clear that the order of reference authorized the 
committee to prepare lists for committees under rule 86 and to 
consider the size of those committees. 
  



December 16, 1986 

281 
 

It is equally clear that the committee had no authority to broaden its 
mandate but could only consider those matters which had been 
committed to it by the House. It considered something else, under 
quite a different rule, Mr. Speaker – not under rule 86. It exceeded 
its authority, and that part of the report beyond the mandate of the 
committee and is therefore not in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the arguments of those on the 
opposition side and those on the government side, and I would ask 
hon. members to give me an opportunity to consider it further and 
come in with a ruling later on. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Motions for 
Returns (Not Debatable), items number 1 through 45, be converted 
to Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Debatable. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Canada’s Patent Drug Legislation 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of this 
motion, which I hope all members will support. In doing so I want 
to outline to the members of the Assembly why it’s absolutely 
essential that we unanimously advise the Government of Canada 
that we oppose any change in the Patent Act that would drive up 
the prices of drugs for Canadian consumers, particularly those 
consumers who are sick and are senior citizens. 
 
Since 1969 prescription drugs have not been protected by extensive 
patent legislation. In 1969 federal legislation ended a monopoly in 
the drug industry, a monopoly by large multinational corporations. 
The legislation, Mr. Speaker, allowed generic competition. It 
allowed Canadian manufacturers of generic drugs to copy new 
drugs, and it substantially lowered prices to the consumer. 
 
It is estimated, Mr. Speaker, that Canadian drug prices fell, on 
average, 20 per cent below the U.S. prices compared to Canadian 
prices, which were well above U.S. prices prior to 1969. Let me be 
clear about that. The present legislation which the Mulroney 
government wants to change has saved Canadian taxpayers 20 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to review the situation that 
existed in Canada prior to 1969. This Canadian policy to change 
the patent legislation in ’69 did not come about by accident. In the 
960s the restrictive trade practices commission, the Hall royal 
commission on health services, and the Harley special commission 
of the House of Commons on drug costs and prices, all investigated 
the pharmaceutical industry in Canada. All three of these major 
national inquiries agreed that drug prices were too high and 
recommended government action to stimulate price competition in 
the industry. The Hall commission concluded that Canadian drug 
prices at that time were, and I quote, “. . . among the highest in any  

industrialized nation in the world.” All three inquiries felt that the 
foreign-based, multinational drug companies who have dominated 
the Canadian drug industry were using their seven-year patent 
periods to set unduly high prices. 
 
In 1969 the patent law was amended. The amendment ended the 
multinational drug companies monopoly on drug pricing and 
forced competition in the industry – competition that the members 
opposite like to talk about. Mr. Speaker, the multinationals have 
never accepted the 1969 legislation and have continued their 
massive lobbying campaign to have the legislation revoked or 
undermined. They have done this even though every major 
objective study of the industry has concluded that every major 
objective study of the industry has concluded that generic drug 
competition has saved Canadian taxpayers millions of dollars. 
 
Even the most recent report, that of Harry Eastman, who was 
appointed by the federal government in April of 1984 to head a 
commission of inquiry of the pharmaceutical industry, concluded 
the following: 
 
(1445) 
 
First, the multinationals had continued to be profitable and ahead 
of other industries in profits and growth; second, that the patent 
legislation has saved Canadian taxpayers $221 million alone in 
1983; and third, that employment in the Canadian drug industry 
between 1967 and 1982 rose by 29 per cent compared to a growth 
in the U.S. market of 23 per cent. 
 
Under normal circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Eastman 
report, commissioned by the federal government, would have been 
sent to committee of Parliament, but not this time. The Government 
of Canada ignored, Mr. Speaker, no less than seven studies 
supporting the present legislation. Instead, they charged in with 
legislation that would return Canada to a period prior to 1969 when 
Canadians were subjected to some of the highest drug prices in the 
world. In other words, Mr. Speaker, price gouging. 
 
The big question is: why would the Mulroney government want to 
amend the patent Act provisions on pharmaceuticals or drugs? As I 
indicated before, the multinational drug companies operating in 
Canada – the vast majority of them American owned – have 
lobbied the Canadian government to shelter them from generic 
drug competition. And it’s interesting to note that two years ago 
they enlisted the support of the Reagan administration which 
decided that the drug patent issue was one of those irritants it 
wanted resolved before agreeing to free trade with Canada. The 
issue, Mr. Speaker, was even discussed at the “Shamrock” summit 
in March of 1985 when Ronald Reagan and Brian Mulroney agreed 
to co-operate to protect property rights from trade in counterfeit 
goods and other abuses of copyright and patent laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who support this alarming policy change claim 
there will be major benefits to Canadians. In fact we heard that 
here this afternoon. That is an argument, Mr. Speaker, that’s used 
by the multinational drug companies. That argument is also used 
by the  
  



December 16, 1986 

282 
 

Mulroney government, and it now seems to be the argument that’s 
used by the members opposite, the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan. To the people of Saskatchewan, however, these 
so-called benefits seem vague, distant, and spurious. 
 
I therefore invite the members opposite, when they enter this 
debate, to explain what they believe the benefits will be for 
Saskatchewan people if the Patent Act is changed. Will they argue 
it’s going to create more jobs in pharmaceutical manufacturing in 
Saskatchewan? I somehow doubt it. Will they admit that the main 
benefits do not go to Canadians at all, but instead to large U.S. drug 
companies? 
 
Like every major public policy change, this one being pushed by 
the Mulroney government has its benefits and its costs. To me, and 
to my constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan, the benefits 
are not all that clear or certain. The costs, however, are a good deal 
more clear, a good deal more certain. There can simply be no doubt 
in the mind of anyone in this Chamber, no doubt in the mind of 
anyone in Canada, Mr. Speaker, this move by the Mulroney 
government will substantially increase the cost of medical drugs 
borne by Canadians. It’s that simple. 
 
Let’s just take a few examples. We can assess the impact of this 
move to undermine generic drugs by comparing the price of 
generic drugs now available in Canada to the patent-protected 
drugs now being sold in the United States. 
 
An example, Mr. Speaker: for treatment of diabetes, 
chlorpropamide — $19.03 in Canada; $431 in the United States – a 
difference, Mr. Speaker, of 2,167 per cent. For treatment of heart 
patients, chlorthalidone — $37.25 in Canada; $613 in the United 
States – a difference, Mr. Speaker, of 1,543 per cent. For treatment 
of anxiety of the medical condition, many people in Saskatchewan 
use diazepam — $2.31 in Canada; $346 in the United States – a 
difference, Mr. Speaker, of 14,875 per cent. For treatment of 
ulcers, cimetidine — $84.15 in Canada; $497 in the United States – 
for a difference, Mr. Speaker, of 490 per cent. 
 
Example after example, Mr. Speaker, of cases where the benefits of 
the Mulroney government changes are unclear, but the costs are 
very clear and very substantial indeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And those costs, Mr. Speaker, will be felt by 
those who are least able to afford it – the sick, the elderly, 
low-income families – for it is they who will bear the burden of 
sharply increased drug costs in the cases of provincial drug plans 
that they don’t cover. The cost of pharmaceutical drugs in Canada 
will go up because of this PC measure, and it is those who are least 
able to pay who will bear those costs. 
 
But there will be other costs too – other costs that will have to be 
borne by all Saskatchewan taxpayers because of the increased 
pressure on the Saskatchewan drug plan. Mr. Speaker, the PC 
government opposite has estimated these additional costs to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers at $15  

million per year. That’s right – an additional $15 million a year on 
the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago Brian Mulroney assured 
Canadians that he would honour what he called the sacred trust of 
Canada’s social programs. But that was a hollow promise, and the 
reality has fallen far short of that rhetoric. The Mulroney 
government moved quickly to cut back on federal transfer 
payments for medical care and post-secondary education. 
 
There are also federal cuts . . . We also saw some interesting moves 
by the Mulroney government to de-index pensions of Canada’s 
seniors. Again Canadians saw that the Mulroney sacred trust was 
nothing but a sham. And now the Mulroney government is 
determined to change Canada’s drug patent legislation, a change, 
Mr. Speaker, that will impose a severe and unfair burden on those 
least able to pay. 
 
And how has the PC government here in Saskatchewan responded 
to these negative and hurtful policies of the PC government in 
Ottawa? In every single case the PC Government of Saskatchewan 
has fully endorsed and supported the Mulroney government and its 
hurtful policies. When they chose to cut medical care and 
post-secondary education funds, the members opposite supported 
it. When they chose federally to de-index the old age pension, the 
members opposite supported it. And now, Mr. Speaker, the PC 
government in Ottawa proposes to change the drug patent 
legislation, and what do these people over there do? They support 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a great deal at stake here, and it seems that the 
PC members opposite are trying to ignore and overlook that fact. 
For it is not an exaggeration to say that this proposal of the 
Mulroney government, this proposal to change the drug patent 
legislation, represents an erosion of medical care in Canada. 
 
The PC members opposite have tried to pretend that they support 
medical care. But they have caused increases in hospital waiting 
lists. They’ve caused severe understaffing in base hospitals, and 
they’ve supported the Mulroney cuts to medical care by supporting 
the changes to this drug legislation. And now we once again see 
that they are supporting cuts to medical care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC members opposite have clearly changed the 
position on the drug patent legislation issue. Last spring they 
pretended to be against it. Now, however, they’ve abandoned their 
position on it. I wonder how the PC members will explain that 
policy to their constituents. How will they explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they support higher medical drug prices for 
Canadians. I’d like to know how the member from Swift Current 
will explain that to her constituents, or the member from Weyburn, 
the Minister of Education, or the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the PC members opposite are doing to 
have a very difficult time explaining to the people of Saskatchewan 
why they are in Brian Mulroney’s ball court and supporting the 
U.S. drug companies, and why they’re opposed to the best interests  
  



December 16, 1986 

283 
 

of Saskatchewan people. 
 
It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I am proud to put forward 
the motion before the Assembly today. I sincerely hope that all 
members on both sides of the legislature will join me in supporting 
it. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the member for Regina North West: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to oppose vigorously the proposed 
changes to federal drug patent legislation, which will 
impose unacceptably high costs on Saskatchewan seniors 
and low-income families. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter this debate at this time and second the motion 
moved by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
I believe that if the proposed changes to the federal drug patent 
legislation takes place, this will mean very simple three or four 
things to Canada. Number one, less competition between 
pharmaceutical manufacturers; number two, increased prices in 
drugs to Canadians; three, erosion of medicare in Saskatchewan 
and in Canada generally; and importantly, finally, hundreds of 
millions of dollars leaving the country, stifling economic 
development in Canada, and stifling job creation and ultimately 
increasing taxes for all Canadian taxpayers. 
 
If the proposed changes to the federal drug patent legislation takes 
place, this will also mean that profits of U.S. and European drug 
manufacturers will sky-rocket beyond their now record levels, and 
Canadians will be paying a great deal more for drugs – somewhere 
25 per cent more. 
 
No one supports changes to the federal drug patent legislation 
except two groups: one, the multinational foreign pharmaceuticals; 
and two, the Progressive Conservatives in Ottawa and in Regina. 
And I wonder why? Many people are asking that question. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is found in a newspaper 
article and substantiated by, in fact, other reports around the 
country. The pharmaceutical drug association, which represents 65 
multinational drug companies in Canada, operating in Canada, 
have hired an Ottawa lobbying firm with very strong Tory 
connections to press the government for patent amendments. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the name? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The name of the company, you ask? Government 
Consultants International, which is run by independent Frank 
Moores, who is the former Conservative premier of Newfoundland; 
Gerald Doucet, the former Conservative member of Nova Scotia, 
from Nova Scotia; and Gary Ouellet, a Quebec City lawyer who 
helped to organize the Conservatives in that province in the last 
election. The most influential lobby  

group in Ottawa right now are the three Tory members that I have 
named who have very strong ties to the Prime Minister’s office and 
are being paid handsomely, I am suggesting to you, by the drug 
companies. 
 
But who opposes it? Well everybody that’s not on that list: the 
sick, the elderly, senior citizens, low-income people, generally all 
taxpayers, the generic Canadian drug companies, people in health 
care fields, the pharmacists, and the nurses, and the doctors, and 
anybody else you care to mention. The only people that seem to 
support these amendments are the Conservative Party in Canada 
and in Saskatchewan. 
 
At present, the sole supplier of drugs, that is manufacturers that 
supply only one drug that is used by hospitals and doctors, prices 
are being jammed – jammed, Mr. Deputy Speaker – and the 
reference to that, the definition very simply is that they’re priced as 
high as the drug companies can get away with and not 
competitively priced, which should concern members opposite. 
They believe in competition as we all do. 
 
With the production of generic drugs, who by the way do pay a 
royalty to the original manufacturer, the costs have been 
significantly less and have created jobs in Canada for Canadians. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to illustrate to you some of the 
generic drug industry results. 
 
Tagamet, for example, is an ulcer drug, generically known as 
cimetidine, was introduced by a pharmaceutical company named 
Smith Kline & French in 1978. In 1978 this firm was the 14th 
largest firm in all the pharmaceutical industry. Because of that one 
drug they went from 14 to number one by 1980, just two years 
later, largely due to that one development. 
 
In 1981, the last year of the monopoly on this drug, Tagamet, it 
sold for $27.94 per hundred tablets. Five years later, right now in 
’86, generics have drive the price down to $5.15 per hundred 
tablets, a saving of $22.89 or 543 per cent, one-fifth the cost. If 
Smith Kline & French stayed as sole supplier for Tagamet, 
Saskatchewan hospitals would have paid over $67,000 in 1981 
dollars more just for that one pill. Ontario hospitals would be 
paying about half a million dollars per year more. These are just 
the hospitals, not the patients themselves. 
 
Competition, very important in this whole debate, is one of the key 
elements in the world market and, in particular, the drug industry. 
The pharmaceuticals don’t believe in competition; they believe in 
patents, they believe in monopolies, and that’s how they’re 
operating. And certainly one would question why the 
Conservatives support this when competition should be one of the 
underlying elements of their philosophy. The reason they support 
this is probably because they receive substantial – absolutely 
substantial – contributions to their political coffers. 
 
Now there’s some real major problems with this, Mr. Speaker, in 
particular when it comes to injectible drugs. One example I’d like 
to use is a diuretic. It’s ethacrynic acid. It helps basically remove 
fluid from the body. It’s a hypertension drug. Merck-Frosst Canada  
  



December 16, 1986 

284 
 

produces it. In January ’85 one injection cost $8.95 to the hospital. 
Two years later, as of January 1, ’87 it will go from 8.95 to $11, a 
23 per cent increase that’s been staged in between as well, when 
inflation was only 7 per cent. 
 
(1500) 
 
Aldomet which generic is methyldopa, January ’85 was $7.21; in 
’87 it will be $8.77 – a 22 per cent increase. Intravenous solutions 
which are very important in our hospitals these days, and always 
has been since their discovery – in 1980 one manufacturer sold a 
500 ml bottle for $24.50. Now there are three, because of generic 
companies, and the price has come down from $24.50 for this 
bottle to $9.40 – 260 per cent saving. And Saskatchewan hospitals, 
by the way, still buy from the original manufacturer, and they’re 
now making that saving as a result of generics entering the market. 
 
Dopamine was introduced in 1977 — $8.40 per injection in 1977. 
One year later a generic company . . . actually a new company 
started producing it and the price as of today is $1.89, down from 
$8.40. Only two companies still produce it, but certainly a saving 
of 444 per cent. 
 
Dibutomine, which is produced by Lilly Pharmaceuticals, which is 
in the same class as dopamine and has the same action as the other 
drug, does basically the same job, has only one producer, Lilly 
Pharmaceuticals. It was introduced in 1978 at $9 per injection. It is 
now being sold for $22 per injection, and some doctors are 
prescribing this even though the generic is selling for 
one-eighteenth of the cost. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that Ottawa should be giving money 
to universities for the research and development of new drugs, 
rather than making changes to the Patent Act. Fundamental drug 
research is done almost exclusively at universities. Companies then 
take the newly discovered compounds and do research – they do 
research – to determine how to produce the drug commercially. But 
in almost all cases new drugs are funded at the research level at 
universities across North America and Europe. Thus the federal 
Progressive Conservative Party and the provincial Progressive 
Conservative Party contention that proposed changes to the Act 
would foster more new drug research in Canada isn’t accurate at 
all. It’s totally false. It’s misrepresentation, in my view. 
 
At present no patent drugs are actually manufactured in Canada, 
only the generics, and the compounds are imported to Canadian 
plants where they are mixed to be made into tablet or capsule form. 
The key PC argument that this new Act will create jobs is false 
because the drug Patent Act does not require – does not require, at 
all, under any clause or circumstance – that companies establish 
chemical manufacturing plants in Canada, just does not produce 
that. 
 
The federal government seems determined to hurt provincial health 
programs, the Canadian generic drug industry and the sick, by its 
policy. This seems to be another example, in my view, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of awarding the contract to the highest bidder and this 
time 

out of the country as well. First of all, the CF-18 contract which 
was totally incomprehensible as to why they would do it except for 
pure politics, and now the multinational pharmaceuticals getting 
the big pay-off, again strictly for politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the motion, and I ask all members to 
support this motion so we can convey our concerns, which are 
concerns not of the individual members in his House alone but for 
many people in Saskatchewan, to the federal government. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to be able to rise and speak to this motion today as 
we deal with a very, very timely and important topic in Canada and 
in Saskatchewan as well. It’s good that we are able to debate these 
types of topics, to be able to get the facts out on the table, discuss 
them, and present them to the people who are going to make the 
decisions on it. 
 
I think it’s very important that when we deal with important topics 
like this that we have very accurate information so that informed, 
intelligent decisions can be made. In my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to set the record straight on some aspects of the 
proposed amendments to the drug Patent Act. 
 
Unfortunately what we see here in this legislature today is an 
opposition bringing a motion forward and dealing with some of the 
instances, and only parts of it. We see again two things for which 
they are becoming very famous, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, 
the place where they had their roots as an NDP party. 
 
They’ve once again taken the tactic – the low road – choosing to 
use scare tactics against senior citizens and low-income families, 
claiming that they are going to be the ones that are hit with all the 
consequences of this Act; that it’s all going to impact on them – the 
people who can’t defend themselves; the people who don’t have 
increases of income or fixed incomes and have to pay things out of 
their own pocket. 
 
First of all, to me that shows that they don’t seemingly understand 
the prescription drug plan -–the drug plan that’s in effect in this 
province as it is in many other places, so that it doesn’t create a 
direct hardship on those types of people, the people who can least 
afford it. 
 
The second thing they have taken, the tactic that they have chosen 
to use is a tactic of being against development. They’re once again 
showing their true colours that they don’t want any research done. 
They don’t want the development and the manufacturing done in 
Canada or in Saskatchewan that is going to come from this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, their claims that the proposed 
amendments are going to result in substantial increases in the cost 
of prescription drugs to seniors and low-income families – Mr. 
Speaker, that simply isn’t true. They obviously, as I said, haven’t 
taken the time to examine how the plans work. 
  



December 16, 1986 

285 
 

The only direct cost to the public is the nominal dispensing fee. 
That fee is presently set at $3.95, and it’s remained unchanged, I 
might add, since 1984 under the Progressive Conservative 
government, a government that does care about health in this 
province, does care about the seniors, and does care about the 
low-income people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would contrast that to their record when they were 
in power, that every year when they were in power they had an 
increase in that fee; an increase to those seniors; an increase to 
those with low incomes. The remaining part of that dispensing fee, 
plus the entire cost of the drug materials, is born directly by the 
provincial government, not by the consumer. 
 
In other words, there is no direct connection whatsoever between 
the cost of the prescription drugs and the cost to the Saskatchewan 
public in obtaining those drugs. For the NDP to suggest otherwise 
is totally inaccurate, and I believe that it is most unfortunate that 
they should raise unfounded doubts and fears in the minds of 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Unfortunate, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that it’s just once 
again, as I said, in keeping with their philosophy of using scare 
tactics, of dealing with half-truths, only parts of the issue, of trying 
to use them for their political purposes and not for the benefit of 
the people that should be served by government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to that I also find it very despicable that 
they would use an issue like this as an issue to raise funds for a 
provincial party. It’s shameful that they would take such a thing 
and only use half-truths and mention to try and raise money for 
their political purposes rather than to address the real needs of this 
country. 
 
I think it’s also very interesting to see them posing as the protector 
of seniors in our province. Mr. Speaker, when they were in 
government through the period of the 1970s, it was the NDP that 
placed a moratorium on the nursing home construction. If ever 
there was a need out there to be filled for seniors, one of them 
certainly is the need for special care homes. Yet at that time they 
said no, no more. We’re not going to build more; we’re not going 
to look after our elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, 
I’ve had opportunity on many occasions to visit with community 
people, to visit communities where nursing homes have been built, 
are being built, and I’m finding just an excellent response in every 
one of those communities. It’s a need that’s definitely there, and a 
need that this government is committed to, and we are filling that 
need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just this past weekend I visited with people from a 
rural municipality in north-western Saskatchewan who told me 
how under the former administration their member, who was a 
senior cabinet minister at that time, told them to forget about it. 
They didn’t need a nursing home; forget about it. They weren’t 
interested in building one for their community. Their response was 
that they did need it. They came back to this government, hence 
they 

have approval and are proceeding with construction. 
 
But even at this time that philosophy of the party opposite has not 
changed. Throughout the course of this last election campaign that 
former minister in his re-election, when he met with the people in 
that community, told them that he would not honour the 
commitment of this government to build a nursing home in their 
community, that they didn’t need it. I find that shameful and 
despicable. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s little wonder that those 
people in that community did not support that former minister and 
they returned a Progressive Conservative member back to the 
government of this province. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, is it permitted to raise a point 
of order? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The point of order is that the resolution 
deals with prescription drugs and patent legislation. The member is 
talking about nursing homes and election campaigns, neither of 
which are in the resolution. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. The 
member that moved the motion brought other issues into the debate 
and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. The Speaker is on 
his feet. There was far ranging . . . there was other things brought 
into the debate from the member that moved the motion. I find the 
point of order not well taken. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I raise a further point of 
order? It is incumbent upon the Speaker, or the Deputy Speaker, 
when a point of order or a breach of the rules occurs, to raise a 
point of order. If the member who raised the original question 
brought in information which was not supposed to be in the debate, 
a point of order should have been raised at that time. I’m raising a 
point of order with regard to the member who has the floor now, 
and you, I feel, Mr. Speaker, must rule on that point of order and 
not relate back to something that happened before. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to you that 
the — I’m speaking to the point of order raised by the member 
from Westmount – that the Rule 16 debate is set out in the rules as 
a wide-ranging debate, and it is that. The member who moved this 
particular motion under Rule 16 developed her arguments on a 
wide-ranging manner. The member on our side of the House who 
was speaking before being interrupted by the point of order was 
doing a similar thing, and I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the point of order should not be well taken. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. 
Anything that is brought into debate is allowed to be commented 
on, and the debate continues. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that excellent 
ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have always been a priority, as I was 
  



December 16, 1986 

286 
 

saying earlier, for this government, and they always will continue 
to be for Progressive Conservative government. Our commitment 
to seniors’ health care needs have been demonstrated over and 
over. I think we only have to look at the new chiropody program; 
the cap on ambulance charges for seniors, as I said earlier; the 
special care home construction program; increased funding for 
home care, to name just a few examples. We’re going to continue 
to develop effective and innovative programs so that seniors can 
live with independence and dignity. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I referred earlier to the NDP’s consistently negative 
attitude to any economic development and job creation that isn’t 
directly run by government. They’re opposed to the Weyerhaeuser 
project; they’re opposed to the Rafferty dam; they complain about 
the idea of a bacon processing plant in North Battleford; and now, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re apparently against the idea of more research 
and development on prescription drugs in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, high-tech development, high-tech research, 
many, many jobs by intellectual people who are going to contribute 
much to this country – all they can focus on is unfounded 
speculation about how bad things might be. They attempt to 
portray this as a sell-out to the United States in the interests of freer 
trade when, in fact, the industry will be putting $1.4 billion into our 
country creating jobs for Canadians. 
 
Let me just put this whole matter into perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
The Government of Saskatchewan has been in continuous contact 
with federal officials with regards to amendments. We certainly 
have raised concerns about it. The legislation has been tabled in the 
House of Commons containing several major revisions that have 
come about as a result of this consultation. Let me highlight some 
of the ways in which the current version differs from the one 
proposed earlier this year. First of all, the clause is now included to 
clarify that all generic drugs now being produced are exempt. Mr. 
Speaker, they would have us believe that those people who are 
working in the generic drug industry presently are going to lose 
their jobs as a result of this legislation. That simply, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is not true. They’re going to continue to . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise in support 
of this motion on an issue which is critical to the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre, one-third of whom are senior citizens and many 
of whom are persons with illnesses or disabilities that require 
medication. 
 
I also want to address my remarks to the farm families in 
Saskatchewan who use agricultural chemicals on their land to point 
out the very close link between the issue of drug prescriptions and 
the issue of access to cheaper farm chemicals. 
 
Indeed the proposal to change our Canadian patent legislation 
which the Mulroney government is whole-heartedly supporting 
will cost us all a lot of money 

as farmers, as consumers, and as taxpayers. 
 
But perhaps the members opposite are not aware of all the 
ramifications of the proposed change to the Patent Act, especially 
as it will affect the farmers whom they say they represent. So I ask 
them to have the courtesy to listen carefully while I outline the 
issue. 
 
As I said, the Patent Act which is under attack by the multinational 
drug companies, controls access to both prescription drugs and 
farm chemicals. Just a few days ago the agricultural committee of 
the federal government, which is an all-party committee composed 
of members of parliament concerned about agricultural issues, met 
with officials of Agriculture Canada to discuss what farmers must 
spend in order to produce. The meeting was intended to give an 
overview of farm costs, according to an article in the Leader-Post 
of December 3rd. 
 
Now most Saskatchewan people, including those in the core areas 
of the major cities, realize that one of the major costs facing 
farmers Is the cost of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. These 
chemicals are outrageously expensive. I personally remember the 
shock that we received when we had to pay over $200 for a very 
small container of Roundup. And most farmers are looking at 
chemical bills in the thousands or dollars. These farm chemicals 
are currently controlled . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Ms. Smart: — . . . prescription drugs. But the members opposite 
may not be aware of this. As I understand it, the section controlling 
agricultural chemicals allows the multinational chemical 
companies to have exclusive rights to their brand name chemicals 
for 17 years before cheaper generic brands can be produced. And 
the director of technology for Agriculture Canada, Dr. McKenzie, 
told the agricultural committee of the federal government that the 
department was working on policy modifications so that generic 
chemicals could become available much faster. 
 
So here we have the situation, Mr. Speaker, where one area of this 
government is looking on reducing the time frame for generic 
chemicals to become available to Canadians, as they should do, I 
suggest, while another area of the government words to extend the 
time frame for the availability of generic drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this conveys to me the impression that the 
government is not working for the best interests of all consumers in 
Canada. This conveys to me the impression that the government is 
blowing in the wind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government can’t have it both ways or all ways all 
at once. The federal government and the provincial government 
must decide which side of this issue they are on. Do they want to 
continue high prices for agricultural chemicals and reinstate high 
prices for prescription drugs, both in order to appease the 
multinational corporations, or do they want to stand up for 
Canadians, take a consistent approach to support generic 
chemicals, and thereby help us all, especially as consumers and as 
taxpayers. Dr. McKenzie, director of the technology department of 
Agriculture Canada told 
  



December 16, 1986 

287 
 

the committee, and I quote the newspaper: 
 

In the patent protection area, we note quite clearly that 
chemicals still under patent are generally at a higher 
price per unit of active ingredient than those that have 
come off patent and where you have more competition 
(you have a lower price). 
 

He went on to point out that prices are higher because this, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . is by and large the intent of (the) patent legislation, to 
reward those individuals and companies who invent 
something new so they can reap a return to that product 
while it is in the market-place. 

 
So since the motive is to make as much money as possible, one 
would expect the prices to be higher. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 
they are higher under patent as my colleagues have already 
described. The solution to this impasse that’s proposed by the 
government is that we lure the multinational producers away from 
the cheap labour and establish factories of the southern United 
States where they already operate and get them to manufacture 
both agricultural chemicals and prescription drugs right here at 
home. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that Lee Clark, a 
Conservative member of parliament for Brandon, Manitoba, told 
the agricultural committee about a fertilizer produced by the 
Simplot Chemical Co. Ltd. Of Brandon, a branch of a multinational 
corporation. This fertilizer apparently can be purchased for a lower 
price in North Dakota than in Manitoba where it is produced. So 
even if we manufacture chemicals here under multinational 
corporations, as this government is proposing to do, the price is not 
lowered until there is competition from the generic firms. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I note with interest that this example is a fertilizer plant, 
similar perhaps to the one that Federated Co-op has decided is 
unprofitable to build at this time in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Federated Co-op is one of the largest corporations we 
have in western Canada. If Federated can’t find the money to invest 
in the fertilizer plant, and if multinational companies won’t sell 
their patent chemicals cheaper to farmers – using the example from 
Brandon, Manitoba – even when they’re produced here, then I 
suggest to you that the promise to set up our own manufacturing 
plants may be another one of the Premier’s visions – images 
without much substance. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the 
Premier will try to do something to lure a multinational company to 
Saskatchewan. And I suggest it will cost us, as taxpayers, a hefty 
price, similar to the dreadful give-aways this government has 
already contracted to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
We will pay and we will pay dearly. We will have to pay the 
companies to relocate. We will have to continue paying the farmers 
heavy social assistance to cover their high costs of production, a 
major cost being their farm chemicals. We will have to pay into the 
provincial treasury the higher costs to our Saskatchewan drug plan 
so that that cost is not borne entirely by those needing prescription 
drugs. 

 
 
And I ask, what we will get in return for these pay-outs? Expensive 
brand name drugs and farm chemicals, not generics. A greater and 
greater provincial deficit. Little or no return for the people on their 
investment in Saskatchewan, as profits go back to the multinational 
shareholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prescription drugs and farm chemicals are not 
products that people can easily choose to do without. They are 
products that are seen as necessary, essential, for many people to 
survive. Therefore we as Canadians cannot afford to fool around 
with our access to these products. We cannot afford to protect those 
who want to deny access to a product that is useful to so many of 
us. 
 
The argument that a few individuals deserve to profit excessively at 
the expense of the rest of us, won’t hold up. We must be on the 
side of Canadians – farmers, senior citizens, those with health 
problems. We must take a consistent position in support of access 
to generic drugs and chemicals. We must oppose these proposed 
changes to the Patent Act, and we must all vote in favour of this 
resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter this 
debate regarding proposed changes to the Canadian patent 
legislation, and I believe there are some important points that must 
be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very wording of the motion presented by the 
opposition is one of the many reasons they are sitting on the 
opposite side of the House. Saskatchewan people have long been 
tired of the confrontational attitude of those members opposite, and 
they made that fact abundantly clear less than two months ago. The 
people of this province want to see us co-operate and consult with 
those involved in every issue in order to produce the best results for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, your Progressive Conservative government 
firmly believes that some important changes and amendments have 
been made to the proposed legislation over the past few months. 
We believe that some important changes and amendments have 
been made to the proposed legislation over the last few months, 
directly resulting from our input, a fact that members opposite fail 
to realize, or deliberately ignore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you a few examples of the results of this 
consultation and co-operation by the former minister of health, the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley. In order to protect existing 
competitions, a clause has been added to amend proposals made in 
June of this year to clarify that all generic drugs currently being 
produced will be exempt, and we will have continued access to 
them. Mr. Speaker, for new drugs, exclusive rights are effectively 
reduced from 10 years to seven years, providing that the generic 
company manufactures the ingredients in Canada – an important 
point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I point out that the June version specified 10 
years for all new drugs, and in practice this 
  



December 16, 1986 

288 
 

seven-year period represents very little change from current 
experience. However, Mr. Speaker, what it does do is encourage 
the manufacture of generic drugs in this country, resulting in new 
and exciting job opportunities and spin-off benefits for many 
others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the input of your PC government and 
others throughout the country, monitoring of research and 
development commitment swill be improved. Mr. Speaker, 
industry must now provide sales revenue information for all of 
their drugs in Canada. Again, the June version required this 
information only on patented products. 
 
Of course this will help the price review board hold industry to its 
commitment to double research and development expenditures, 
currently 5 per cent of sales, to 10 per cent of sales by 1995 and is 
expected to generate an extra $1.4 billion in research, research 
money, Mr. Speaker, that can come to Saskatchewan, that can 
come to the University of Saskatchewan or to the University of 
Regina for research purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new version also allows a government to make 
regulations defining research and development. The June version 
had no such provision. Mr. Speaker, a further change from the June 
version allows the drug prices review board hearings to now go 
public, aiding the board’s effectiveness. And Mr. Speaker, still 
another amendment to the June proposal for changes to the Patent 
Act allows a federal minister to establish a panel to advise on 
review board appointments, better assuring a fully independent 
board, a review board, Mr. Speaker, that can control drug price 
increases. Mr. Speaker, these are a few of the results of 
consultation and co-operation. 
 
(1530) 
 
When it comes to protecting low-income families, the sick and the 
elderly, based on the track records of the parties represented in this 
Assembly, your PC government has no peers. Mr. Speaker, through 
our build-a-home and first time home buyers programs, low 
income families in this province had an opportunity to improve 
their quality of life by owning their own home. Without these 
programs, Mr. Speaker, many of the thousands who took advantage 
of these opportunities would have had great difficulty in ever 
realizing their dreams of owning their own home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other initiatives have also assisted low-income 
families: elimination of sales tax on clothing under $300; 
elimination of the gas tax, saving families an average of 400 per 
year; elimination of taxes on utility bills, and many other 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, to assist low-income families. 
 
Your PC government’s commitment to the sick and those suffering 
from illness is well documented. To assure Saskatchewan people 
have first rate health care facilities, in 1985 the PC government 
announced that they will provide $300 million for facility 
renovation and construction over five years. 
 
Your government has also made a major commitment to cancer 
research and treatment facilities, equipment and 

staff. For example, Mr. Speaker, a total commitment of $17 million 
for capital construction and expanded services of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Clinic in Saskatoon; six new C.T. scanners have been 
purchased, helping to reduce waiting time for diagnostic work. By 
designating funding for a five-year period, your PC government 
has made it possible for the cancer foundation to plan its equipment 
needs and purchases in a rational, cost-effective manner. A new 
computer system will improve treatment planning, and two linear 
accelerators have been purchased for Saskatoon and for Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1,200 is being spent by your PC government for 
every man, woman and child in this province on their health care 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
protecting the people of Saskatchewan, we have ended the practice 
of extra-billing by doctors. Mr. Speaker, again, through 
negotiation, consultation, and co-operation with doctors, health 
care officials, and the public, this practice was eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the senior citizens of Saskatchewan I am proud to 
list the accomplishments of your government to assist the senior 
citizens of Saskatoon Centre, for instance, or of Regina Wascana, 
but the senior citizens throughout the province, a province that 
respects its senior citizens. 
 
We have long recognized the importance of health care for seniors. 
Our comprehensive strategy for the elderly includes the following 
innovative programs: establishment of a chiropody program, 
providing foot care services in all 10 health regions of the province 
and 23 satellite locations; integrated hospital special care homes 
are under construction at Goodsoil, Lampman, Nokomis, Rabbit 
Lake, and Rose Valley; a total of $11 million was allocated over 
the past two years in government, plus a commitment of $25 
million more over the subsequent five years, generating $125 
million worth of construction; a total of 438 nursing home beds 
were added in 1985-86 and another 330 beds are planned for 
1986-87 – just a part of the 1,600 beds to be added in the five-year 
period 1985-86 to 1989-1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over $1 million for initiatives and special care homes 
and home care for services such as respite care, day programs for 
seniors, enhanced home care for clients with intensive service 
needs has also been provided. And, Mr. Speaker, your PC 
government made a decision to build a 238-bed, special care home 
in Saskatoon which, in addition to creating more beds, will provide 
several services not previously available in the province, such as 
beds for disabled people and for behaviour management patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the accomplishments came about after our 
government had lifted the six-year moratorium that had been 
placed on nursing home construction in this province by the 
previous government. Mr. Speaker, other programs to benefit the 
elderly include the senior citizens’ home repair program, the senior 
citizens’ heritage grants, increases to senior citizens’ assistance 
payments through the Saskatchewan income plan. 
  



December 16, 1986 

289 
 

The record of your PC government in protecting low-income 
families, the sick and the elderly, is among the best in the entire 
country and your PC government makes no apologies for its 
record. The Progressive Conservative government has and will 
continue to protect Saskatchewan against economic hardships 
beyond their control. We have the record to prove it and we are 
working hard to ensure that Saskatchewan people do not suffer 
because of any changes to the Canadian patent legislation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this motion. 
There has been a very interesting progression of events in 
Saskatchewan over the Mulroney drug patent legislation. Last 
spring the minister of Health was quoted as saying that he was 
opposed to the move if a hike in the drug plan isn’t compensated 
for an increase in research dollars. In other words, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he was prepared to compromise increased drug costs to 
the sick and elderly for research dollars. Later he’s quoted as 
saying that he favoured the Eastman recommendations and was 
against the patent legislation being proposed. He didn’t like this 
proposed drug patent legislation so much that he convinced Ottawa 
to shelve the idea, but Ottawa wasn’t convinced for long, 
obviously. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a new Minister of Health 
who appears to be in league with Brian Mulroney and Ronald 
Reagan and who appears to support this regressive policy of the 
federal PC government, and still no one seems to know exactly 
how much the drug patent legislation is going to cost us. 
 
As late as December 9, 1986, the Premier is quoted in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix as saying he didn’t know how much more 
Saskatchewan consumers were going to have to pay through 
increased drug prices through the drug prescription plan 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier support Mr. Mulroney and the 
drug patent legislation. Indeed, how can any member of this House 
support it if they don’t have some ideas as to the cost to the 
taxpayer of Saskatchewan and to those who need medication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — That doesn’t make any business sense, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, no business sense at all. I don’t know of one 
single small-business man in this province who would agree to go 
along with an increase in rent when he doesn’t know what the 
increase will be. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe that the Premier and the 
Minister of Health and the PC government believe for one minute 
that the drug patent legislation is the best alternative for 
Saskatchewan and Canada. They know that it’s not for the benefit 
of Canadian and Saskatchewan consumers. They know it is simply 
the federal government caving in to the U.S. drug manufacturers in 
its pursuit of a free trade pact with America. 

 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — They know it’s a Reagan and Mulroney pact to 
co-operate to protect intellectual property rights. Translated, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that means to protect big multinational drug 
companies at the expense of Canadian and Saskatchewan 
consumers and at the expense of the sick and the elderly. To say 
drug prices would not increase is, to put it politely, to deceive 
oneself, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Harry Eastman, who headed a study of 
the drug patent situation in 1984, has stated unequivocally that 
prices would rise and that the purpose of changing the legislation 
would be to allow a bigger reward for the drug firms. A bigger 
reward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for an industry that already enjoys 
substantial profits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve recently had an opportunity to speak to a 
representative from Policy Concepts, which is a Toronto consulting 
firm, and this firm has done considerable amount of research into 
the drug patent question and into the impact with respect to the 
drug industry and the economy. And I think it is imperative that I 
share the information I received over the telephone in a 
conversation with a representative, with this House, and if the 
members opposite are not aware of the research done by Policy 
concepts, I think they should be. If the public’s not aware, I think 
they should be. It’s important that these facts be brought out for 
consideration by everyone. 
 
I was informed, Mr. Speaker, that the generic industry represents 
20 per cent of the pharmaceutical market. Generic drugs sell at 50 
per cent of the cost of brand name drugs, so in effect 20 per cent of 
the drugs are being sold at 50 per cent of the cost. 
 
In addition, the price of brand name drugs has been discounted by 
20 per cent in response to generic drugs, so we have 80 per cent of 
the drug market being sold at 80 per cent of the cost. But it’s also 
important to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that pharmaceutical sales 
are growing at a compound rate of 15 per cent per year. And it’s 
also important to know that recently some introductory prices on 
some drugs have been significantly high. However, given these 
givens, and even if sales continue to grow at only 15 per cent a 
year, we will be seeing a substantial increase in drug profits. 
 
The estimated loss of savings, according to policy concepts, would 
grow to $650 million in the year 1995 — $650 million, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for 1995 alone. I was informed that it is estimated that 
$4.2 billion will be lost to drug companies from 1986 to 1995. This 
is pure profit, Mr. Speaker, an additional $650 million in 1995 and 
$4.2 billion over 10 years. But even, Mr. Speaker, if it’s half that, 
it’s too much. 
 
According to policy concepts, Mr. Speaker, Coopers & Lybrand, a 
national accounting firm, took a look at the impact of money being 
taken out of the economy, the impact of money being lost. They 
looked at what the net loss of jobs would be if one took a certain 
number of dollars out of the economy. They arrived at the 
conclusion that 26 man-years are lost for every million 
  



December 16, 1986 

290 
 

dollars. That means that in 1995, if indeed 650 million leaves the 
economy, we are talking about 17,000 man-years that will be lost. 
 
And if one does a purely statistical extrapolation over 10 years, the 
figures are absolutely astounding. I couldn’t believe it, so I 
contacted the firm again and I was told that if one was to give it a 
very conservative estimate, we would be talking about 9 to 10,000 
jobs over the 10 years not being created because of the money that 
is drained out of Canada and flowing to multinational 
foreign-owned companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — But we are told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
will be 3,000 jobs created over the next 10 years. We’re not sure 
where they’ll be – whether they’ll be in Saskatchewan or in Eastern 
Canada. We are told these jobs will be increased through a $1.4 
billion input by the drug industry in research dollars. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s pretty miserly, if indeed 4.2 billion is drained out of 
the Canadian economy by an increase in drug profits, or if indeed 2 
billion is drained out of the economy. 
 
And when one considers that approximately 9 to 10,000 jobs will 
not be created because of a drain of our money to the South or to 
some European countries, 3,000 jobs doesn’t have the appearance 
that the members opposite would like it to have. 
 
I have to ask myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how the Premier and 
Brian Mulroney can be so duped by Ronald Reagan and the 
multinational companies that they would approve this drug patent 
legislation. That’s like when my son talks my daughter, Mr. 
Speaker, into giving up her quarter for two pennies. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my daughter is only two years old and she doesn’t 
know better. But can we say the same of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan? Can we say the same of the Minister of Health? 
 
Let’s look at the people who are going to pay the price – the 
taxpayers, the sick and the elderly. They’ll pay the price, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Costs will go up for our prescription drug plan. 
And I bet it’s not unreasonable to speculate that we’ll see an 
increase in the dispensing fee. Even if it only goes up to $.475, for 
example, it’s a substantial increase for seniors, some of whom take 
five and six drugs at a time; or for people with certain illnesses 
who are required to take three or four drugs at a time. 
 
(1545) 
 
Last but certainly not least, it will be a substantial increase to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. Does this province have extra money, Mr. 
Speaker, to send out of this country to create 3,000 jobs in who 
knows where – perhaps eastern Canada – and lose many, many 
more jobs by the drain of money out of our province and out of 
Canada? I think not. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to be able to speak on this motion. This is a motion 
which condemns the Government of 

Canada for proposed changes to the Canadian patent legislation. 
 
Let me begin by noting that Saskatchewan residents currently 
enjoy the only universal drug program in Canada. This means that 
the residents of our province are and have been protected against 
major cost fluctuations in drug prices. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
no doubt that the drug plan in this province is the best in the 
country. And let me assure this House and the people of our 
province that under our Progressive Conservative government our 
province’s drug plan will continue to be the best in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that to 
discuss this issue knowledgeably we must have some background 
on the present drug situation in Canada, and I would like to lead off 
with that. 
 
In 1969 the federal government’s Patent Act was amended as it 
applied to pharmaceuticals. It was amended so as to allow generic 
companies to import and sell drug products that had been patented 
elsewhere. In return for this right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the generic 
companies were required to pay a royalty of 4 per cent of their 
selling price to the patent holder until expiration of the 17-year 
patent period. This was called compulsory licensing. Not 
surprisingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the patent holders felt that they 
should have exclusive rights to their patents for the full 17-year 
period, just like those who patent other inventions. 
 
In April of 1984 the federal government, which was Liberal at that 
time, called a commission of inquiry on the pharmaceutical 
industry. This commission was chaired by Dr. Harry Eastman, a 
professor economics from the University of Toronto. The 
commission released its report on May 22, 1985. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Eastman commission recognized the 
value of the competition from the generic drug firms that had 
resulted from amendments to the Patent Act in 1969. As a result it 
recommended retention of most of the Patent Act amendments of 
1969 which had allowed for the growth of the generic industry here 
in Canada. 
 
The federal government’s first proposals for a new Patent Act were 
brought out in June of 1986, but these left something to be desired 
from Saskatchewan’s point of view. And I’m pleased, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to report that after serious consultation with the provinces, 
including ourselves, further changes were made, amendments were 
made to those June proposals. 
 
On November 10, 1986 the federal government tabled a new Patent 
Act. The new Act, which included changes made to the June 
proposals, would provide more substantial patent protection. In 
fact, it recommended exclusive periods ranging from seven to 10 
years for most new products. The changes made in the original 
proposals, in fact, have substantially improved the new Act, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I would like to inform the House of some of 
these changes that members opposite 
  



December 16, 1986 

291 
 

choose, by design, to ignore. 
 
First, a clause was added to clarify that all generic drugs now being 
produced will be exempt and we will have continuing access to 
them. No such clause was in the June version. 
 
Secondly, the exclusive rights for new drugs were effectively 
reduced from 10 years to seven years, providing that the generic 
company manufactures the ingredients in Canada. This compares 
to the June version which specified 10 years for all new drugs. Let 
me say that in practice this new seven-year period represents very 
little change from current experience. 
 
In the third change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the industry will be 
required to provide sales revenue information for all of their drugs 
in Canada. The June version required this information only on 
patented products. This sales revenue information will help the 
drug prices review board hold industry to its commitment to double 
research and development expenditures from the present 5 per cent 
to 10 per cent of sales by 1995. It’s expected to generate an extra 
$1.41 billion of research moneys here in Canada. The new version 
also allows the government to make regulations defining research 
and development that will take place in Canada. 
 
A fourth change requires that the drug price review board hearings 
be held in public. And this should aid the board’s effectiveness. 
 
A fifth change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provides for the federal 
minister to establish a panel to advise on the review board 
appointments as a better way to assure a fully independent board. 
 
These changes indicate clearly that the efforts of our government 
and other provincial governments in recent months have paid off in 
helping to create a much more suitable program. Let me say that 
the drug prices review board being set up as a part of this new 
regime is going to be a vitally important agency, and I can tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is being well structured. 
 
First, I understand that Professor Harry Eastman who chaired the 
commission of inquiry will be the chairman. As well, consumers 
will be represented on the board. Also, the board’s price control 
powers will apply to all drugs – current and future. 
 
As well, the board will have the authority – and this is important, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, — to recommend the revoking of patent 
rights if industry does not meet its research and development 
commitments. And in one further step, these amendments will be 
given a full review in 1990 and again in 1995. 
 
The drug prices review board will also have the power to set price 
ceilings to control inflation. And industry again must comply or the 
board could remove its patents right. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
is clear to se that the drug price review board will have some pretty 
powerful tools at its disposal. And factors that would be considered 
in cases of an increase would be things like the consumer price 
index and the price of comparable drugs. 

 
Of course the hearings and decision of the price review board will 
be open to the public, and the provinces will be given the statutory 
right to make representations directly to the board in cases where 
they suspect price abuse by companies. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the interests of the provinces 
are being carefully guarded during the transition period of this 
program. Since it will take a few months before the prices review 
board becomes effective, the federal government will pay the 
provinces $100 million to be divided amongst the provinces on a 
per capita basis. 
 
And I might add here that because our drug plan in Saskatchewan 
is of a universal nature, unlike many other provinces, we are 
pressing Ottawa for a distribution formula more directly related to 
per capita drug expenditures by the province rather than on a 
population basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been some questions here in Saskatchewan 
as to how much this new plan will cost us. And let me speak very 
frankly here. Say we had the worst-case scenario in which there 
was no prices review board – and remember that the legislation 
requires one – and that the federal government did not set up the 
proposed compensation fund. We believe that this province’s costs 
would rise about 10, 12, $15 million a year. 
 
But even under this worst-case scenario, which won’t happen, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And there’s a reason for it. At least 40 new generic 
drug products are scheduled to come on the market between now 
and the implementation of the new Act. And these 40 new drugs, 
which will be accessible to the public, will not be subject to the 
changes in the Act. 
 
We estimate that if the review board effectively reduces the 
inflation rate of drug prices, it could offset all, or certainly a big 
portion, of that $12 million. So the cost of this program to the 
province will be little or nothing, yet there will be many other 
important advantages. 
 
I should add that because the drug plan pays the entire drug 
material costs on behalf of residents in this province, consumers—
all consumers—including the elderly that the NDP always target to, 
will not have to bear the increased cost. 
 
As I indicated, in our discussions with Ottawa we did have a 
concern over the long term that drug costs could climb under this 
plan. That is why we lobbied the federal government hard to 
address this situation. We asked for effective cost control 
mechanisms and we demanded performance guarantees. And of 
course we demanded a positive share of increased research 
expenditures. 
 
It is because of our efforts and the efforts of the Minister of Health 
that the drug prices review board will be there with the needed 
teeth to monitor performance, promises, and prices. We of course 
were also pleased with the federal commitment to review the policy 
in 1990 and again in 1995 with the provision to roll back any 
  



December 16, 1986 

292 
 

agreements if performance is not evident or if pricing practices are 
inflationary. Of course the amendments contain provisions for an 
increase of $1.41 billion, over and above normal increases that is, 
in research and development over the next 10 years, and they also 
make raw material manufacture in Canada a prerequisite for 
exclusivity. This can provide 3,000 . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to make a 
few comments relative to the motion under Rule 16 that refers to 
“. . . proposed changes to federal drug patent legislation, which will 
impose unacceptably high costs on Saskatchewan seniors and low 
income families,” as the motion reads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think it would be self-evident that all of us in society are opposed 
to high drug costs. That just makes eminent good sense, Mr. 
Speaker. But once again, here in the debate today and in the 
question period earlier, we have seen the NDP try and take what is 
a relatively complex issue and turn it into a simple duality. And 
this is something I talked about in my throne speech remarks 
earlier in this legislative session, Mr. Speaker. They’re tried to take 
a complex issue which definitely has positives and negatives, as the 
government House Leader so eloquently laid out earlier today, and 
turned it into a them-us, black-white, yes-no kind of issue. And, 
Mr. Speaker, quite frankly when it comes to this issue, the public 
of Saskatchewan and the public of Canada deserve better. Because 
to do that, Mr. Speaker, it is not right, it is not fair, and quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is not responsible government to simply 
dissolve this issue into a simple duality. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, have put forward the argument that 
somehow with this legislation either you’re for generics or you’re 
against generics. It’s got nothing to do with that. We all agree that 
generics have been a big boon in lowering low drug costs. They are 
somehow trying to distil the argument and make it simply that. 
That is not the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we are talking about here is not whether existing drug costs 
are going to go up or down. The fact of the matter is they do not go 
up. In fact, they will probably go down because of the increased 
pressure, competition and the natural entrance of generics over the 
next few years. So, Mr. Speaker, that in itself is not an argument at 
all for the existing drug market. 
 
What is at issue is new drugs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I heard 
one of the members from Saskatoon refer to earlier today 
propranolol, a heart medication. With this kind of legislation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the issue really becomes: do we in Canada want to 
have the next generation of heart drugs? Do we want to have that 
technology or that chemistry or that medication that will, in fact, 
replace propranolol? That is the issue. We’re looking to the future. 
What new breakthrough in science will occur in Canada because of 
this legislation for the benefit of all heart patients, perhaps? With 
this kind of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that chemistry may well be found in 
Canada. It may well be found in Saskatchewan as opposed to 
Switzerland or West Germany or France or somewhere else, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There has been much mention of studies, Mr. Speaker . . . but what 
happens, and what can happen, and what will happen, and what 
might happen. Well, from my brief experience of 10 or 15 years or 
so in the health science area, all the studies that I was made aware 
of, Mr. Speaker, were these: that there is a very definite cause and 
effect relationship in the patent drug legislation between – if you 
provide incentives, you definitely get the corresponding investment 
– the research and development investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With incentives in R&D come jobs. With R&D, Mr. Speaker, 
comes leadership and the diversification of our economy. With 
R&D, Mr. Speaker, we become masters of our own destiny – 
masters of our own destiny down the road. Without research and 
development in this field, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are essentially 
relegated to a colonial status when it comes to developing health 
care products. 
 
The other buzz-word, if you listen to the debate this afternoon, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the other buzz-word that constantly emerges as 
part of the consistent rhetoric of the opposition – I heard it when 
the hon. member was speaking, from all members, I suppose, from 
Saskatoon, whether it was to do with agricultural chemicals – and I 
fail to find that in the motion – but it was part of the debate, or 
whether we were talking about health care products. The 
buzz-word was this, Mr. Speaker; they reduced the argument in the 
first instance to generic versus non-generic, and that was a 
non-issue. The other smoke-screen they flew, -ms, was the 
buzz-word “multinationals.” If it’s a multinational, it must be bad, 
because all multinationals, according to the NDP, are corporate 
robber barons. So if you know nothing about a topic, and 
multinationals are involved, it must be bad. 
 
That simply duality of view again, the simplistic argument, the old 
ideology, and quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope they keep 
that up because if they do they’ll be over there for a long, long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s the same kind of arguments that they 
always advance, whether it’s health care products, if they’re oil 
companies, if they are a multinational, they must be bad, Mr. 
Speaker. Well I ask them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a job with a 
multinational any less worthy than somebody who works for 
anybody else? Is a job with a multinational any less worthy? I ask 
you, Mr. Speaker, are those people who work for that – according 
to the opposition – that robber multinational baron, Hoechst 
International, who in Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I am afraid I must inform the 
House that time has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
  



December 16, 1986 

293 
 

 
Resolution No. 2 – Benefits to Saskatchewan Families Through 

Saskatchewan Home Program 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to move the 
following resolution: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan be congratulated 
for providing protection to Saskatchewan families 
through development of the Saskatchewan Home 
Program, which establishes both the Mortgage Protection 
Plan and the Home Improvement Plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government has been a 
leader in housing since 1982. Today, during the course of my 
remarks to this legislature, I intend to present positive reasons why 
I believe this resolution I have introduced should be passed. I shall 
outline the success of the Progressive Conservative housing 
programs and, in particular, the development of the mortgage 
protection plan and the home improvement plan. 
 
In 1982 interest rates were sky-rocketing out of control. 
Hard-working Saskatchewan families were facing the prospect that 
their homes would be swept out from under them. It was a time of 
crisis for the family and we could not allow the uncertainty or 
trauma to continue. The Progressive Conservative government 
stepped in and put a ceiling on mortgage interest rates. We 
introduced the mortgage interest reduction program and provided 
cash rebates to Saskatchewan home owners that brought effective 
mortgage rates down to 13 and one-quarter per cent. 
 
Before we moved to protect the home owners, interest rates had 
hovered around 19 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and in many cases much 
more. MIRP (mortgage interest reduction program) has proven to 
be tremendously popular. The program has helped more than 
44,000 households in our province with $63 million in direct cash 
benefits. 
 
But this is 1986. Times have changed, Mr. Speaker. The recovery 
process is beginning to build momentum, and our economy is 
showing signs of improvement on many fronts. Our industrial 
development strategies and our emphasis on economic 
diversification are paying off. Today we must continue to provide 
protection to the family, just as we did in 1982. But we have 
another task as well, to stimulate and sustain jobs for the 
betterment of every community in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan home program is an essential element in our 
commitment to job creation. The home is the greatest single 
investment most families ever make. It is also the single greatest 
financial asset families own in a lifetime. Maintenance of the 
family home increases its value and enhances the quality of life for 
those who live within its walls. 
 
For four years our government has been pursuing a “made in 
Saskatchewan” housing policy that provides protection for those 
who have homes, our opportunity for those who would have to 
have them. Recently, for 

example, we introduced a first-time, new home buyers’ grant of 
$3,000 that has helped people get their first new home. And the 
government has just concluded federal-provincial agreements that 
provide protection and opportunity to low-income citizens. 
 
We have also introduced a senior citizen’s home repair program, an 
initiative that provides seniors with financial assistance to renovate 
or repair their homes. 
 
But as I indicated, our past successes in housing in Saskatchewan 
have emphasized protection of those who own their home and the 
provision of opportunity to those who want to do so. 
 
We must now take the next step, providing for long-term security 
to home owners and introducing means by which our housing 
policy can create jobs and stimulate community-based economic 
activity. 
 
The new Saskatchewan home program will provide long-term 
mortgage interest rates protection, will stimulate a boom in home 
repair and renovations projects across the province, and will create 
thousands of new jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The program began September 1 and has two major features. The 
first, the mortgage protection plan guarantees home owners on 
purchase, or at time of mortgage renewal, an effective nine and 
three-quarters per cent interest rate for the next ten years. This plan 
will apply to all mortgages to a maximum of $50 thousand, just as 
MIRP (mortgage interest reduction program) does, and anyone can 
participate in the plan within five years, and this way everyone, 
whether they have just renewed their mortgage or do not have one 
at present but may before 1981, they will be guaranteed this 
interest rate protection and the security and stability that goes with 
it. 
 
As I indicated, the mortgage protection plan builds on the success 
of MIRP. We expect, and the program demands, that home owners 
get the best possible deal when negotiating a first or renewed 
mortgage. That is the home owner’s obligation; our obligation is to 
promote stability in the market-place and long-term security for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
It is conceivable that interest rate will continue to decline. On the 
other hand there are no guarantees, Mr. Speaker. Whatever occurs, 
the mortgage protection plan will provide security to Saskatchewan 
home owners that their effective mortgage interest rates will not 
exceed nine and three-quarters per cent right straight through to 
1996. 
 
The second part of Saskatchewan Home Program is the home 
improvement plan. It contains two components, Mr. Speaker. The 
first is a matching contribution of up to $1,500 which will be 
available to every Saskatchewan home owner wishing to make 
improvements or repairs to her or his dwelling. The second is a 
loan of up to $10,000 at 6 per cent interest for home renovation. 
This loan is repayable . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! I 
think we should allow the member to continue with the speech 
without too many interruptions. 
  



December 16, 1986 

294 
 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every Saskatchewan 
home owner will qualify for the home improvement plan, and it is 
expected that more than 200,000 will take advantage of this 
opportunity over the next five years. These new housing initiatives 
extend, as I indicated, well beyond the home. Certainly they signal 
a new era for stability for home owners, and they do provide 
opportunity and incentive to home owners wishing to undertake 
those home repairs that they may have been putting off for years. 
 
But equally important, the program provides stimulus for millions 
of dollars of economic activity and the generation of thousands of 
jobs across all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our projections 
indicate that the programs will over the next five years create in 
excess of $1 billion in economic activity and create a minimum of 
25,000 jobs. That’s 5,000 new jobs a year, every year that the 
program is in existence. These are real jobs, both direct, such as 
skilled trades people and small contractors, and indirect, through 
the stimulation of sales. And every community will feel the impact, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course the success of the program is in direct proportion to the 
participation of Saskatchewan people. If every one eligible seizes 
the opportunity offered by the program and participates to the 
fullest extent possible, province-wide economic activity could 
easily surpass $2 billion and the job creation total could exceed 
50,000 jobs during the life of the program. 
 
In this sense I hope every home owner looks carefully at the 
Saskatchewan home program and considers participating. By so 
doing they will not only save money, but they will be stimulating 
economic activity and employment growth in every community in 
our great province. And they’ll be working, Mr. Speaker, in 
partnership with government. We’ll each do our share, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The total cost of the Saskatchewan home program for the first year 
will be approximately $60 million. That is money, however, that 
will be felt directly and positively at the community level, and is 
most modest in comparison to the far-reaching and significant 
activity that will be generated. Every community in the province, 
urban and rural, will feel the program’s impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two concerns foremost in the minds of 
Saskatchewan people: protection of the family, and jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, we listen to those we serve. Job creation will continue to 
be a high priority of this government. Our policies and program 
will reflect that commitment. 
 
The Saskatchewan home program is an ambitious and innovative 
undertaking of this government. It demonstrates our commitment 
to creating employment, to providing long-term security to home 
owners, and to building Saskatchewan as a progressive and stable 
society for many generations to come. I applaud the work of my 
elected colleagues and government officials who contributed to the 
design of this program, and I am 

confident that every citizen in Saskatchewan will share that view, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on October 20th the voters of Saskatchewan endorsed 
the Progressive Conservative housing programs when they 
re-elected this government. The voters said, we have confidence in 
your housing programs to protect Saskatchewan home owners. 
Those innovative housing programs reconfirm our belief of 
providing security to the family through creating employment 
opportunities and building Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Arm River, home owners are 
pleased with these programs. I ask this House to support the motion 
that I have presented, which reads: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan be congratulated 
for providing protection to Saskatchewan families 
through development of the Saskatchewan home program 
which establishes both the mortgage protection plan and 
the home improvement plan. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on 
your election to the Chair. This is the first opportunity I’ve had to 
speak in this session, due to family sickness, and I could not be 
here through a portion of the speech, the throne speech. 
 
I am proud to stand here to second this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
Unlike that of the NDP and what I’ve heard in this House on these 
particular past few days, and seeing and noticing them applaud all 
the negatives, all the downfalls that have occurred under hard 
economic times in this province over the last four years, I am more 
than proud to applaud the Devine administration, the Progressive 
Conservative government, for the initiatives they have taken in the 
housing programs. 
 
I would suggest that, Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatchewan 
are enjoying one of the highest standards of housing in Canada, and 
indeed throughout the world. In the 1980s and 1990s, Mr. Speaker, 
we will be placed under a substantial amount of pressure in this 
province, and that is due to the progress of this province, to the 
growth of this province. And we must stand firm and make sure 
that the housing availability in this province is there for the people 
that are moving into this province and also for our young people 
that are moving out of the schools into the work-force and on to 
their own. 
 
So this adequate supply of housing puts a great demand on 
government. It puts a great demand on government because of the 
fact that the resources must be there to allow these young people 
those types of materials to build. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, this 
is where it all begins. Progress – the expansions of our resource 
sectors, the expansion of our working sector, and the spin-off 
benefits from all of these various sectors which 
  



December 16, 1986 

295 
 

are enhanced into the building of houses in the province. 
 
And as we respond to these demands, the economy will spur, spur 
on. As well, Mr. Speaker, we definitely through this spurring, we 
will be definitely improving the quality of life for individuals in 
this province. 
 
The production of a supply of housing suited to the wide range of 
individual needs of our residents will mean the effective use, as I 
have indicated before, of our resources by the private and 
non-profit organizations, as well as all levels of government. 
Future provincial programs and policies will be directed toward 
forging a viable relationship with the sectors to achieve a necessary 
level of housing quality and quantity. The present and the future 
housing policies of our provincial government are designed to 
encourage and support this co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the continued availability of adequate and suitable 
housing for Saskatchewan can only be achieved through policies 
and programs directed towards long-term needs. The creation of 
these policies involves realistic production targets based on 
demand and specialized needs of the people of Saskatchewan over 
the next decade; and the private sector, continuing to act as the 
major supplier of the house . . . with the government role to create 
an atmosphere conducive to ensuring adequate levels of production 
and to effect direct public support for those unable to compete in 
the market-place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the growth and ageing of the population creates 
a number of significant challenges in the housing sector. As people 
age, which we all will, the costs and tasks associated with upkeep, 
design, and location of their homes, will become liabilities. 
However, it is also a time when many seniors have accumulated a 
significant amount of cash equity in their homes. Consequently, 
many seniors are now living in accommodations more suitable for 
families because no alternative is available. 
 
At the same time, many families could meet the cost of 
constructing new homes. It is for . . . could and could not, I should 
say. And it is for the reasons that they cannot that we have 
announced the first new home buyers program. That program has 
provided dollars for these families so that they could purchase their 
first home. The grant was effective immediately upon 
announcement and it applied to current inventory of unsold new 
homes. The program has and will make housing more affordable 
for those families interested in purchasing their first new home, and 
at the same time it will create opportunities in the housing industry 
by stimulating an additional 2,000 new housing starts and creating 
about 1,800 new jobs. 
 
In August of this year we announced a program which became 
effective on September 1 – the Saskatchewan home program. This 
multi-year program provided home owners with long-term 
mortgage interest rate protection, including matching grants and 
low-interest loans for renovations and home repair projects. This 
program had created approximately 25,000 new jobs and generated 
millions of dollars in economic activities across the province. 
 
The future challenge to the housing sector will be to 

stimulate the construction of new, more appropriate forms of 
accommodations for seniors. This would allow families to obtain 
existing units at prices they can afford, as well as ensuring that 
more affordable new housing initiatives are identified throughout 
the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the housing strategy of this government will focus on 
five objectives: the targeting of direct housing subsidies to those 
most in need; providing a safety net to ensure that basic housing 
needs are met; stimulating the housing sector to ensure delivery of 
appropriate housing quantity and quality; stimulating participation 
of the private sector to ensure affordable housing; and stabilizing 
employment levels for workers in the residential construction 
industry. 
 
That’s why I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker. The spin-offs have been just 
phenomenal, and I see that in my riding. For the first time in the 
history of Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, I want to indicate to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is now – and I’ll announce it to 
you because I’m proud of it – that Saskatchewan has finally 
out-built Alberta for the first time in the history of Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, the families that are 
building are just more than pleased that this government has that 
type of compassion to help them out to get into their own homes. 
The seniors have been pleased so that families . . . They could have 
freed up their homes if they so desired and that families were able 
to purchase their homes to gain that cash equity. There was just one 
example but, Mr. Speaker, as you drive through my riding and all 
the other smaller communities, those housing units have escalated 
as well. 
 
So you see it’s not just in one little area – major area. It is for all of 
Saskatchewan. It’s right across the board, from small communities, 
from the hamlets to the villages to the towns to the cities. It’s for 
everyone. It’s not designated to a particular sector of the population 
– the middle class or the upper class. It’s for everyone. 
 
And these are solid policies and I want to commend this 
administration – the Devine administration – for coming up with 
these initiatives for the people. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to 
take up too much time. I know I could speak an hour. I’ve got a lot 
of notes on it, but I would just like to take this opportunity to say 
that I am more than pleased to second the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a few 
remarks about this resolution and enter this debate. The member 
from Arm River and the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
have made some statements which I feel need to be added to. 
 
The member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, for example, said that the 
PC government was the first government in this province to 
introduce a home purchase grant program. I’d like to correct the 
record, Mr. Speaker, and say that they are not the first government 
in the province to do that but, in fact, the second government to do 
that. 
  



December 16, 1986 

296 
 

 
The NDP government under Allan Blakeney had the home 
purchase program in place long before they even thought of sitting 
on that side of the House. And I think that members should 
recognize what the truth is and what the actual program of the 
government was. 
 
The other comments that were made were interesting as well. It 
was quite interesting to listen to the members opposite claim credit 
for the wonders that they have worked in the housing industry. 
They bragged about their record of job creation; they bragged 
about their record of housing starts. But like everything else with 
the Conservative party and the Conservative government opposite, 
all of their statements are public relations, smoke and mirrors, and 
have no basis to fact. 
 
The actual fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that they have not 
done a heck of a lot for housing in the last four and one-half years, 
and I ask you and every member to go to your constituencies and 
speak with tradespeople, electricians and carpenters and drywallers 
and framers and other people in the housing industry, and ask them 
and their families how many weeks – not how many years, but how 
many weeks – in the last four and one-half years they have worked 
in their trade in this province. And I will tell you what my 
constituents have told me in the last couple of years, and that is that 
not many of them have worked many weeks in the last four and 
one-half years under this government across the way. I think that’s 
a clear reflection of the dismal record of that government. 
 
I’d like to take a look at a couple of other things if I may, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to this motion. One, the past performance of 
the government – one element I have already referred to. Secondly, 
the impact on the current plan on housing starts; and three, the 
fairness and social justice of the home program that has been put 
forward, and certainly the motion that the member supports. 
 
(1630) 
 
The record shows, and the records are in writing put out by 
StatsCanada, and the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation monthly 
reports show very clearly that the record of this government 
between 1982 and 1985 was very dismal in total starts. In 1979-80 
period there were about 28,000 unit starts in this province for those 
two years. In the last two years of the Devine government there 
were not 28,000 but there were 10,000 – one-third of those records. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that ’84 and ’85 were the lowest, 
the lowest starts for units of housing in this province in the last 12 
or 14 years. That is a record they can be proud of because their 
standards are very low. And I contend, Mr. Speaker, that that is a 
record the people of Saskatchewan are not proud of; that is a record 
that the skilled tradespeople in this province are not proud of; and 
finally, Mr. Speaker, that’s a record that our party on this side of 
the House are not very proud of. 
 
I’d like to also say that they were very effective in providing a 
great deal of assistance to home owners by doing away with the 
property improvement grant. That 

was an $80 million grant to home owners, to seniors, to 
low-income people, to renters, to small-business people, and to 
farmers. And what did they do with that grant which provided cash 
in the pockets of these people on a regular basis, which was spent 
in our economy generating three times $80 million of business and 
economic activity and other jobs? What did they do with that, Mr. 
Speaker? They did away with it because they didn’t think it was 
fair. And I contend that it is very fair to have that program. 
 
The record of this government on the property improvement grant 
has been judged by the people of Saskatchewan, in particular in the 
former minister’s constituency who was responsible for taking the 
grant away, the former member from Regina Lakeview. His 
constituents told him in clear terms what they thought of taking 
that property improvement grant away by defeating him with a 
resounding number of votes. And I think that that is going to 
happen not only in Regina Lakeview in the next election, but if 
they continue with this dismal housing record that they have had in 
the last three years, they will see some rural constituencies 
returning New Democratic Party members by pluralities similar to 
those in Lakeview. 
 
That’s the record of the PC government, the record of the PC 
government and party in this province. They don’t believe that we 
should be building houses; they don’t believe we should be 
spending money in this province. They believe in fair programs 
like 8 per cent for Weyerhaeuser — $248 million to Weyerhaeuser 
– but only nine and three-quarters per cent to the families of 
Saskatchewan. Is that a fair program? In my view, I don’t think it 
is. 
 
The fact that both parties, our party and the Conservative party, 
took a housing program into the last election reflects very clearly 
that we both recognize the need to stimulate the housing industry. 
The Tories on one hand felt obliged to produce a program which in 
many ways copied ours but in a pale, pale circumstance. The 
striking difference was the limited amount of down payment 
assistance in its short-term nature. The Tory down payment 
assistance program is taking, in my view, its last gasp as we sit 
here today. 
 
The member from Arm River indicated 144,000 homes have taken 
advantage of this program already. If this program had any 
long-term effect for creating full-time, long-term jobs in the 
housing industry and other industries that tradespeople and others 
to get jobs in, then they would have introduced a program with 
longer-term effects. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the program will be spent by the spring 
in more ways than one, not just in terms of dollars from this 
treasury that we have that is dwindling on a daily basis, but also 
from the fact that there will be fewer and fewer people who will be 
taking advantage of the program at that point. 
 
Now my question would be to the member from Arm River if he 
was listening: how does this sort of program that they have 
introduced create any long-term stimulus in the housing industry? 
We, in this province, have a very 
  



December 16, 1986 

297 
 

large employer; it’s the Government of Saskatchewan. They 
believe that jobs should be created outside of the province by 
giving large grants to multinationals so they can spend the money 
outside and the shareholders can get their shares that live outside of 
this province – many of them outside of the country as well. But 
they don’t believe that spending money for a concrete, 
comprehensive, long-term job creation program in this province is 
one that they want to put forward, and I believe that that’s one of 
the failures of the home program that we are discussing today. 
 
An average house, Mr. Speaker, requires two person-years of work 
to build. When we calculate the return to the provincial 
government on that construction from the sales tax and income 
taxes and other economic activity, the government income 
becomes quite substantial. When we look at the number of skilled 
tradespeople still on welfare, government expenditures to support 
the current underutilization of talent is very substantial as well. 
 
I would suggest that this government consider spending some of 
that dough, not on their corporate friends – the drug companies and 
others – but I think more clearly on people in this province to 
create some jobs. Just for information purposes, Mr. Speaker, we 
are now spending in this province about $7,000 per year on each 
welfare case that we have. 
 
The building permits issued in May of this year, in 1985 – actually 
’86 – were up only marginally from ’85. We don’t have the final 
records from 1986 on the building permits, but I’m sure they’ll be 
coming fairly quickly. When we see the number of housing starts, 
in comparative terms, everyone will recognize clearly that the 
housing starts will not be dramatically affected upward from one 
year, from last year to this year, because of this home program. 
 
It’s very easy for the member opposite who commented, from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, to say that Saskatchewan has undertaken more 
housing starts this year or last year than the province of Alberta. 
It’s very easy to say that, Mr. Speaker, because, as well all know, 
the province of Alberta is on a steeper decline economically, a 
faster incline in terms of people leaving their province, than even 
Saskatchewan, which is difficult to believe, because there are so 
many people leaving this province right now because of that 
government across the way. 
 
I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that the home program is going to 
solve the housing problem that we have. It’s not going to solve the 
unemployment problem that we have, mainly because it’s too short 
term and it’s a little too little too late. 
 
The final comment I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, before I have 
others, is the question of fairness and social justice. The home 
renovation portion of the Conservative plan and the low interest 
rate loans for people who have good credit ratings are only open to 
those who have a measure of financial security already. 
 
This is the government in this Assembly, this government here, has 
characterized their term of office by freezing 

minimum wage, by doubling the number of people in this province 
who are out of work, by increasing the welfare rolls so 
substantially that it staggers the mind, cutting welfare rates and 
welfare benefits to people who are now resorting to food banks and 
other generous groups in the community to feed them when it 
should be a major undertaking of the government to provide jobs 
so that people can feed themselves. They have no commitment to 
pay equity. They have abandoned the farmers who are experiencing 
the worst farm crisis in the last three or four decades. They have 
abandoned in the cities all of the tradespeople and others who are 
not able to find full-time employment in their trades and in their 
skills. And I think that this government will have to come to terms 
with that problem, and they’ll have to do it pretty quick because 
time is getting much dearer for them. 
 
Many of these people would like to participate in the home 
programs – the people that I have referred to – but are excluded 
because the government has failed to give them the treatment they 
deserve. No job; no opportunity for the individuals or the families 
to go to the bank or the credit union to obtain a loan, because they 
have no credit rating. And if you’ve got no credit rating and you 
don’t have a job, it doesn’t matter if the interest rates are at 5 per 
cent or 3 per cent, you’re just not going to be able to afford a 
mortgage or a home. The key is to try and get people back to work 
so they can, in effect, qualify for some of the programs, and look 
after themselves in a way in which they would like. 
 
I’d like to just summarize some of my comments, Mr. Speaker, to 
the effect that the home program, rather than heap praise on it, we 
should look very carefully at how to improve it. But I don’t believe 
that the program addresses the housing start problems which create 
jobs, which generates other economic activity in this province. It 
does not provide a long-term job creation strategy. The jobs that 
are created are very welcome indeed, but they are not of a 
long-term nature. There are some problems in our economy; there 
are some problems in our province with respect to unemployment, 
and it does not address that specific major problem. 
 
The economic failures of government. This government has left too 
many people in the lower income scale unable to participate in the 
more popular parts of the program. I think that’s a weakness of the 
program and something this government should look very seriously 
at changing. It also doesn’t provide, in my view, decent housing for 
those who can least afford it – low-income people and seniors – 
such as the program that our party put forward which would have 
provided those in financial difficulties with good quality, decent 
housing. This party across the way and this government has not 
addressed those issues. They refuse to do that and they are not the 
friends of low income or seniors. I have much more I’d like to say, 
Mr. Speaker, but I at this point would beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
outset, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
  



December 16, 1986 

298 
 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I had begged leave to adjourn . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, order! Allow the member to place 
his point of order. We cannot hear it if somebody’s hollering. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I had – at the ending of 
my remarks – had begged leave to adjourn the debate on the 
motion, and I would like to know if . . . I had moved that we 
adjourn the debate, is what I’d like. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 5 – Need for Policies to Assist the Less 
Fortunate in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to bring this resolution before this House, Mr. Speaker, 
and following my comments I would be most pleased to move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw South: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the fact the government has 
failed to implement policies to assist the less fortunate, 
including the working poor, the unemployed, injured 
workers, residents of the North, native people, the sick 
and the elderly, and further, that this Assembly calls on 
the Government of Saskatchewan to make fairness and 
compassion its priorities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have discovered very quickly since taking my seat 
in this Assembly that sometimes we are somewhat confused by the 
fact that the world does not rotate around the events of this 
Assembly, and that in the world around us, out in Saskatchewan in 
all our home communities, there are a number of people who are 
getting ready for Christmas. And I think it would be fair to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this resolution could be referred to as a Christmas 
resolution. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because as people are getting ready to 
celebrate the birth of one of the greatest humanitarians the world 
has ever known, and to share the joy and love and warmth with the 
people who are closest to them in their families and in their 
communities, that we find as well that our communities and people 
within them are taking a special interest in the welfare of those who 
they see as being less fortunate, and often initiated through church 
organizations and other community organizations, Mr. Speaker, are 
taking collections to offer the opportunity for those who have less 
means to be able to provide on Christmas day and through the 
Christmas season the food and the toys and oftentimes, Mr. 
Speaker, even the clothes, that so many of us take for granted. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I think it’s interesting to note as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
although we commonly assume that people are busy getting ready 
for Christmas by buying fits and wrapping them in expensive paper 
and decorating them with fine ribbons, and trees with tinsel and 
garlands, that that is not the experience of Christmas for many of 
our citizens, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
It is unfortunately true that in Saskatchewan today there are 
literally thousands of people who do not look forward to Christmas 
with the sprit of love and optimism and hope. Because this period 
of time, Mr. Speaker, this period of Christmas reminds them of the 
loneliness that they are experiencing and the despair that they are 
experiencing and of all the things that they do not have while they 
wished – they so sadly wished, Mr. Speaker – that they were able 
to participate in the giving of gifts like so many of their friends and 
neighbours. 
 
We have a tradition in our home, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s a 
tradition shared by many people in Saskatchewan, to sit down on 
Christmas Eve and to watch that famed-now movie, a story written 
in 1843 by Charles dickens, and I refer of course to A Christmas 
Carol. 
 
And Charles Dickens, Mr. Speaker, wrote in a time – 1843 in 
Britain – a time at which it was no uncommon to have workhouses, 
thousands of people unemployed, soup-kitchens, and situations, 
Mr. Speaker, in which there were really two kinds of people. There 
were those who had and there were those who had not. And 
Charles Dickens wrote A Christmas Carol and Oliver Twist and 
others as a social statement, as a social statement about the 
injustice that existed in Britain in 1843. 
 
And let us just review that beautiful story of A Christmas Carol, 
Mr. Speaker, which involved the awakening of a social conscience 
of one of the most miserly, penny-pinching business tycoons that 
existed in the Great Britain of 1843. And we refer of course to 
Ebenezer Scrooge – a man who sneered at the principle that the 
needs of people are more important than profits. 
 
And we all recall, Mr. Speaker, the experience on Christmas Eve, 
of Ebenezer Scrooge going through his social awakening when he 
was visited by three ghosts. And the ghost of Christmas Past who 
took him back to his childhood and reminded him of his loneliness 
and the shaping of his warped outlook on life, Mr. Speaker; and the 
ghost of Christmas Present who told him what others were saying 
and talking about; and the ghost of Christmas Future, Mr. Speaker, 
who reminded him of where he was heading and the true mark that 
he was leaving, or maybe more correctly, failing to leave with his 
fellow man. 
 
And we’re all pleased and inspired, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that as 
Ebenezer Scrooge was confronted by the ghosts of Christmas Past 
and Christmas Present and Christmas Future, that he saw the light 
and underwent a conversion. And we all have a spirit of lightness 
in our heart when at the end of that beautiful story Ebenezer 
Scrooge lifts the little crippled child, the son of Bob Cratchit to his 
shoulders and little Tiny Tim utters those famous words, “God 
bless us, every one.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that if A Christmas Carol were 
to be repeated in Saskatchewan today we would as a matter of fact 
have three ghosts who would indeed be busy little beavers on 
Christmas Eve. And so let us consider, Mr. Speaker, if the ghost of 
Christmas Present were to be reincarnated –if that’s possible – if 
the ghost of Christmas Present were to be reincarnated in 
  



December 16, 1986 

299 
 

Saskatchewan today, what would the ghost of Christmas Present 
see? 
 
If the ghost of Christmas Present looked down on Saskatchewan 
today, Mr. Speaker, he would see a situation in some ways not all 
that different from Britain of 1843. In Saskatchewan of 1986 he 
would see a number of things. He would see in the northern half of 
this beautiful province of ours thousands, literally thousands of 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, in the northern part of the 
province of Saskatchewan, unemployed and living in poverty. We 
all know in this House, Mr. Speaker, that there are communities in 
the north of Saskatchewan in which unemployment rests at literally 
80 per cent and more. We all know, Mr. Speaker that there are 
thousands of people in northern Saskatchewan, many of them 
native in ancestry, for whom welfare has become a way of life and 
the rat race and this vicious circle of existence depending on the 
meagre means of welfare – people without hope, Mr. Speaker, and 
without a lot of prospect for change in their way of life. 
 
And I listened with interest this morning, Mr. Speaker, as I drove 
to Regina and listened to the news, and I heard a comment that was 
made in response to a question to the minister responsible for 
northern Saskatchewan. And the question was this: Mr. Minister 
responsible for northern Saskatchewan, in 1985 the Progressive 
Conservative government took away the food subsidies for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan – the subsidies that enabled 
people of northern Saskatchewan to afford to buy fresh fruit and 
vegetables in their stores and in their own communities. And they 
said, Mr. Minister, you took away the subsidies in 1985 and here 
we are, nine days before Christmas . . . Mr. Minister, what is your 
plan to do with those subsidies for northern Saskatchewan people? 
And I couldn’t believe the answer, Mr. Speaker. The answer was, 
we’re going to replace those subsidies with a conference –a 
conference to be held in February. How cynical can we be. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Speaker, in this Saskatchewan of 1986, is that the 
sign of a government that acts with compassion and fairness? And 
the answer is clearly no, Mr. Speaker. If the ghost of Christmas 
Present was to tour Saskatchewan of 1986, he would see literally 
hundreds of injured workers in this province, Mr. Speaker, having 
to do battle to get their just accord. 
 
Many of us on this side of the House, and I believe on that side of 
the House as well, have come to know that there is probably no one 
single issue, as members of the Legislative Assembly representing 
our constituents, that we deal with – no one single issue we deal 
with more often than problems related to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
In case after case, Mr. Speaker, we run into our constituents who 
have become victims of rules based on the myth of opportunity for 
employment, whose benefits not only are not increasing with 
inflation but are literally dwindling. And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, 
in Saskatchewan of 1986, is this a sign of a government that acts 
with compassion and fairness? The answer again, Mr. Speaker, is 
clearly no. 

 
The ghost of Christmas Present touring 1986 Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, would find that literally thousands of Saskatchewan 
seniors are living below the poverty line – living below the poverty 
line, Mr. Speaker. And the most tragic of all would be the literally 
thousands of widows in this province living below that poverty 
line. Widows who shared their lives with husbands who worked in 
an era in which there were not pensions, or there were very meagre 
pension benefits available when their passing .  . who are literally 
forced now, Mr. Speaker, to rely on the charity of their children 
and who are living on social assistance in their golden years. And I 
ask again, Mr. Speaker, is this in Saskatchewan of 1986, is this a 
sign of a government that acts with compassion and fairness? 
 
And the ghost of Christmas Present, Mr. Speaker, would see 
something else as he toured the province of Saskatchewan. He 
would see nursing homes in communities strewn across the 
province of Saskatchewan with waiting lists that literally run in 
excess of a hundred. He would see, Mr. Speaker, in nursing homes 
in this province, a dire lack of services for those needing level 3 
and level 4 care, those needing the greatest amount of care to meet 
their basic needs. He would see a crying need, Mr. Speaker, for 
psychogeriatric care, which is virtually not being addressed at all in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He would see, Mr. Speaker, many people, many of our seniors 
needing level 3 and level 4 nursing home care, living in hospital 
beds not intended for level 3 and level 4 nursing home care, but 
living in hospital beds because there is no nursing home beds to go 
to; hospital beds that are not there intended for nursing care, and 
hospital beds that do not have the resources to provide the 
rehabilitation that those people need. 
 
And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 1986, is this the 
sign of a government that acts with compassion and fairness? 
 
And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on. The ghost of 
Christmas Present touring Saskatchewan today in 1986. And I 
remind you we are not talking about Britain 1843; we’re talking 
about Saskatchewan 1986. The ghost of Christmas Present, Mr. 
Speaker, would see in this province, in the province of 
Saskatchewan alone, 37,000 people registered as unemployed and 
looking for work. Now that’s not 37,000 people who are 
unemployed, Mr. Speaker; that is 37,000 people who are registered 
and actively looking for work. Mr. Speaker, he would see a 
province in which literally one out of every 12 working-age people 
in the province of Saskatchewan are actively looking for work and 
are unable to find it. 
 
And I ask us to think about the tragedy that’s involved in that, Mr. 
Speaker, as we sit comfortably in this Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon. One out of every 12 of our constituents is actively 
looking for work. And the tragedy it would cause within the 
caucuses of both sides of this House if we took three members 
from that side, Mr. Speaker, and two from this, and cast them 
without work, and the panic that would set in for the families, for 
people affected in that way, and the hope and the despair, and 
particularly at this time of Christmas, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
  



December 16, 1986 

300 
 

reality. It is a reality, a harsh, cold reality for 37,000 people in the 
province of Saskatchewan – the loss of dignity, the loss of 
self-respect, and literally the panic that is felt by families in every 
one of our ridings. And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 
1986, is this a sign of a government that acts with compassion and 
fairness? 
 
And now the cruelest cut of all, Mr. Speaker – the cruelest cut of 
all. Are there any people in our world today who are placed in a 
position of greater disadvantage than those who are required to 
meet the mere means of existence – of survival – by receiving 
social assistance? 
 
And what would the ghost of Christmas Present see if he were to 
tour 1986 Saskatchewan today? Mr. Speaker, we would see in this 
province of ours 60,000 people who have become dependant upon 
social assistance and who have very, very little hope at this point in 
time for living lives that are anything comparable to what we 
consider to be normal at this time of Christmas. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to a brief reflection with a note 
of optimism, but it is not all bad news. It is not all negative signs. 
There is some hope. And I think some of the hope, Mr. Speaker, is 
found from some of the ethical reflections on the economic crisis 
that was put forth some three years ago and prepared by eight 
bishops of the social affairs commission of the Canadian 
conference of Catholic Bishops? And I’d like to just draw some 
words, and may I quote, Mr. Speaker from that publication, and 
they write, and I quote: 
 

Our concerns about the economy are not based on any 
specific political options. Instead they are inspired by the 
gospel message of Jesus Christ, and in particular we cite 
two fundamental gospel principles that underlie our 
concerns. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we prepare for Christmas to celebrate that 
great birthday, let me draw from the words of those who have 
made, following the teachings of that great man, their calling in 
life. They refer to two principles, Mr. Speaker. The first principle 
has to do with the preferential option for the poor, the afflicted, and 
the oppressed. Let me underline and repeat that, Mr. Speaker. The 
principle has to do with the preferential option for the poor, the 
afflicted, and the oppressed. And they go on to say: 
 

In the tradition of the prophets, Jesus dedicated his 
ministry to bringing good news to the poor and liberty to 
the oppressed. As Christians we are called to follow 
Jesus by identifying with the victims of injustice, by 
analysing dominant attitudes and structures that cause 
human suffering, and by actively supporting the poor and 
oppressed in their struggles to transform society. For as 
Jesus declared, when you did it unto these, the least of 
my brethren, you did it unto me. 
 

And let me move ahead, Mr. Speaker, and pass by the second 
principle in respect for the time, and just quote again from this 
historic document, Mr. Speaker, from the social affairs commission 
of the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops and their 
strategies for economic recovery. And they say, and I quote: 

 
In developing strategies for economic recovery we firmly 
believe that the first priority must be given to the real 
victims of the current recession, namely the unemployed, 
the welfare poor, the working poor, pensioners, native 
peoples, women, young people, small farmers and 
fishermen, some factory workers and some 
small-business men and women. 
 

And this option, Mr. Speaker, calls for economic policies which 
realize that the needs of the poor have priority over the wants of the 
rich; that the rights of workers are more important than the 
maximization of profits; that the participation of marginalized 
groups takes precedence over the preservation of a system which 
excludes them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with those words I ask: Is that a sign of a 
government that acts with compassion and fairness? I suggest very 
strongly, Mr. Speaker, that the answer is yes. 
 
In concluding, Mr. Speaker, and urging all members to join with 
me in supporting this motion, let me conclude by quoting He, 
whose birthday the world around us will be celebrating in nine 
days, who said: 
 

Whatsoever you do to the least of my brothers, that, you 
do unto me. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move, seconded by the member 
from Moose Jaw South: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the fact the government has 
failed to implement policies to assist the less fortunate, 
including: the working poor, the unemployed, injured 
workers, residents of the North, native people, the sick 
and the elderly, and further, that this Assembly calls on 
the Government of Saskatchewan to make fairness and 
compassion its priorities. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand to second this 
motion. I’m pleased particularly to have the opportunity to second 
the motion that’s been brought by my colleague from Moose Jaw 
North because I realize his deep commitment to the issues which 
he has brought before us. 
 
I am pleased to be able to second this motion because many of the 
issues involved in this motion are issues that motivated me to seek 
public office in the first place. 
 
There seems to be some comment in the House about both 
members from moose Jaw addressing this motion. Let me say, they 
used to say: can anything good come out of Nazareth? Well, 
something good is coming out of Moose Jaw today – a good 
motion – and I would invite all members to support it. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sure any member on this side of the House would be glad to 
second this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And any member on this side of the 
  



December 16, 1986 

301 
 

House would be glad to speak to it. It’s a motion that affects the 
lives of individuals in every one of our constituencies, in each and 
every one of our constituencies. 
 
As a member of this legislature, there are those who suffer from 
illness, who suffer from age, injury, or economic hardship. And 
fundamental, Mr. Speaker, this motion calls upon the Government 
of Saskatchewan to deal fairly and compassionately with all 
people, but particularly those who suffer most in difficult times and 
where, in the past, this government has failed to deal 
compassionately with those who have suffered, to address that 
failure in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past weekend I was able to attend a variety 
of Christmas functions in my constituency. At two of those 
functions collections of food were taken for the Moose Jaw and 
district food bank. At another of those functions a collection of 
money was taken. And then, Mr. Speaker, I attended our Sunday 
school concert in the church where I am minister. And at the 
Sunday school concert this year – a member opposite would like to 
know—at the Sunday school concern in our church this year, Santa 
Claus came with an empty bad, and rather than presenting gifts to 
our children he received gifts which they brought. I happen to 
know, Mr. Speaker, that Santa Claus will be taking those gifts to 
single parents and families who are attempting to celebrate this 
Christmas on the miserable allowances being provided to them 
from social assistance. 
 
I raise this, Mr. Speaker, because for me it illustrates a fundamental 
change that is happening in our province, a fundamental shifting of 
responsibility from government on to volunteer agencies, service 
clubs, churches and other non-governmental agencies for the care 
of those who are less fortunate. It’s a shift, Mr. Speaker, in my 
mind, which I feel is not well taken. 
 
When early in human history, near the dawn of human history, the 
question was asked: Am I my brother’s keeper? The resounding 
answer was yes. And that yes to, “am I my brother’s keeper” has 
been the foundation of every progressive society in the history of 
the world. We have a responsibility to our fellow human being and 
particularly to the least among us, and it’s a responsibility that 
belongs to us all. It doesn’t simply belong to the churches and the 
service clubs and the volunteer agencies, they’ll do their share 
anyway. It’s a responsibility that belongs to us all. And here in 
Saskatchewan we’ve had a long tradition of building a 
compassionate society, in many ways we’ve led in this continent. 
 
It’s been through our government that we’ll all had a share in the 
care and the support of the sick, and the elderly, and the 
disadvantaged, and the handicapped, and the inevitable victims of 
our economic system. That’s been our tradition, and that’s been our 
pride. And now we see this government turning that tradition and 
pride around. We see this government abdicating its role in the care 
of the least fortunate and expecting others to pick it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very dramatic example of this appeared 

last evening in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald in the two headlines 
on the city page. Let me just read them to you: “Glitzy fund raising 
effort pays off big for hospitals”. Beneath that: “Local hospitals 
look to the area for donations”. And beneath the headline, the 
article reads: 
 

Both Moose Jaw hospitals are looking more and more to 
community support to help them fill the gap between 
government grants and the actual costs of providing 
quality care. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t that long ago when we in Saskatchewan 
accepted the care of the sick and elderly as a responsibility of our 
total society and now it seems that health care is to depend more 
and more on the whims of a gambling public and on the generosity 
of individuals. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, nowhere has this fundamental shift been more 
apparent than in the rise of food banks, and not since the days of 
the Depression have we seen a phenomenon like them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have some personal experience that I bring to 
this House concerning the food bank, its administration and 
operation in Moose Jaw. I’ve sat on the board of directors for a 
number of years and I’ve served with a referral agent which 
enables me to meet those people who come and apply for food. In 
the course of my responsibilities, I’ve met dozens of people who 
have come, many of them with children at home, Mr. Speaker, 
many of them are on social assistance; many of them are of the 
working poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue my remarks later, and so I 
beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:11 p.m. 
  



December 16, 1986 

302 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 225 of the Hansard of December 15, 1986, in the last 
paragraph on the page, Ms. Atkinson referred to the organization 
PRIDE. There are two organizations represented by this acronym 
and the wrong one was indicated. The extension should read: 
(Parent Resources Institute for Drug Education Inc.) 
 
[Note: The online version of Hansard has been corrected.] 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS

