


















































December 15, 1986 Evening


  
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 15, 1986 
 

249 
 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would 
extend to you my congratulations on your appointment. I can 
appreciate after only a few days of sittings that your job is a 
difficult one indeed, and my best wishes go with you, as do the 
wishes of the people of Regina Victoria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want at the outset to thank the people of Regina 
Victoria for their support on October 20th. Their very strong 
support provides pause for reflecting upon the trust that they 
have placed in me. I can commit, Mr. Speaker, to speak without 
fear on their behalf. I can commit to work hard and long hours 
on their behalf. I can commit, Mr. Speaker, to be available to 
hear their thoughts, their concerns, and their problems no matter 
who they may have supported in the election. I look forward, 
Mr. Speaker, to the coming years and to doing the best job I can 
for the people of Regina Victoria. 
 
The members of the House may not be too familiar with Regina 
Victoria, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to take just a few 
minutes to tell them a bit about my part of the province. Regina 
Victoria is that part of east central Regina bounded on the west 
by the Regina General Hospital and on the east by the Ring 
Road. The northern boundary is the CP Rail tracks and the 
southern boundary is primarily Broadway Avenue. Significant 
landmarks include, of course, Victoria Avenue, the Leader-Post 
building, the Al Ritchie centre, the Embury Heights senior 
citizens’ residence, and churches –many churches, Mr. Speaker, 
churches that reflect the faiths and also the industry, the efforts 
of the many people who settled this area of Regina. In the main, 
these were people who worked in labouring, hourly-wage 
occupations, people who worked in the packing plants, in the 
industries, in the steel mills, in the shops; people who worked 
hard to make a better life for their families and who were 
committed to building a better community. 
 
Many of these people were immigrants to our country. They 
came from Germany, the Ukraine, Romania, Poland, Hungary, 
Austria, China, and many other countries to start a new life in 
this great country. They took pride in their jobs, in their homes, 
and in their community. They didn’t ask for much except the 
opportunity to work, the opportunity to educate their children, 
the right to their beliefs, and a fair shake from government. 
 
Today Regina Victoria is experiencing a transition. As some of 
the first settlers pass on, new people are moving in. Young 
families, especially those getting a start as a family unit, are 
taking advantage of the moderately priced homes in our area. 
New immigrants from south-east Asia  

and other parts of the globe are adding a new vitality and 
diversity to our area. 
 
We are also experiencing another type of migration – people 
from within Saskatchewan from the farms that would no longer 
support them, from the reserves that provided no opportunities. 
We welcome them all, Mr. Speaker. It makes Regina Victoria 
an interesting, dynamic, and diverse place in which to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview and the member from Pelly, and indeed all members 
from the government opposite for their contribution to this 
debate. Theirs is a very difficult job – that is to be praiseworthy 
about something that is unnoteworthy. 
 
Now let me qualify that, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps there is 
something noteworthy about the Speech from the Throne. I 
think the throne speech clearly signals that the massive net 
immigration out of -Saskatchewan may have lessened, and 
that’s because Peter Drucker has moved in. And I say this, Mr. 
Speaker, because according to the Leader-Post, Peter Drucker 
played a major role in the Speech from the Throne. And you 
might well ask who is Peter Drucker, Mr. Speaker. The back 
flap of his most recent book claims that Drucker has earned a 
reputation. I quote: 
 

. . . as a trenchant, unorthodox, independent analyst of 
politics, economics, and society. Drucker has been 
required reading in many business courses for several 
years. 
 

And it now seems that a 23-page article written by Drucker in 
the spring 1986 issue of Foreign Affairs is required reading for 
the members of the government. 
 
What does this article have to say, Mr. Speaker? It opens with 
the line that: 
 

. . . the world economy is not “changing”; it has 
already changed – in its foundation and in its structure 
– and in all probability the change is irreversible. 

 
Now this is very deep stuff. Now the concept of change may 
come as a surprise to the members opposite, who are locked 
into the past – but not to New Democrats, who have been 
traditionally at the forefront of positive change, especially in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Drucker then goes on to discuss the three fundamental changes 
which have occurred in the world economy. The changes, I 
think, are given a moral tone by the use of the term 
“uncoupling” – better to be coupled with than an unworthy 
uncouple. 
 
Firstly, Drucker states, “The primary products economy has 
come ‘uncoupled’ from the industrial economy.” Drucker 
suggests that world commodity prices are no longer tied to 
overall levels of industrial production. 
 
And the question is: is this new? The reality is that potash 
prices have long had a cycle of their own. Grain prices  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

250 
 
 

have moved up and down with supply and demand. The price of 
energy products have been manipulated by an OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) cartel. And is 
this what the Premier calls the new world reality, Mr. Speaker? 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is not new to anyone but 
the Premier. 
 
Secondly, Drucker states, “In the industrial economy itself, 
production has come ‘uncoupled’ from employment.” Drucker 
claims that increases in manufacturing output have not led to 
more jobs in manufacturing. And I question whether this is 
news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The service sector has been the major source of jobs over the 
last two decades. According to Statistics Canada, from 1975 to 
1981, service jobs grew by 5,300 per year in Saskatchewan. 
And between 1981 and 1985 they grew by 4,250 per year. 
Manufacturing grew by less than 1,000 per year. Most jobs that 
have been created in Saskatchewan have been in small business. 
Is this news or is this simple history? Yet the throne speech 
would make us believe that Drucker is news. 
 
The shift to an information- and knowledge-based economy is 
also not news, Mr. Speaker. Policies of the NDP in the ‘70s to 
encourage the growth of high tech industries helped to establish 
the sector in the province —far-sighted policies, Mr. Speaker, 
from a party with a vision. 
 
Thirdly, Drucker states, “Capital movements rather than trade 
. . . have become the driving force of the world economy.” 
Capital movements and trade” . . . have not quite come 
uncoupled but the link has become loose, and worse, 
unpredictable.” Capital movements have always been 
significant to the world economy, Mr. Speaker, and in the past 
NDP policy was aimed at encouraging capital to move into the 
province as well as encouraging savings of Saskatchewan 
people to remain in the province. Both Crown corporations and 
the private sector have a role to play in the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one aspect of Drucker’s article which 
received scant attention in the throne speech. Drucker warns 
against deficits. He suggests that: 
 

The American budget has become a financial “black 
Hole,” sucking in liquid funds from all over the world, 
making the United States the world’s major debtor 
country. 
 

I wish the Premier had read Drucker in 1982, Mr. Speaker, 
because under the PC government Saskatchewan has become 
the financial black hole of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Perhaps the deficit will receive more 
attention from future economic students as they puzzle over the 
reasons why, for example, the PC government provided 
significant tax incentives for an oil industry that at the time was 
enjoying its highest prices in history, meaning the government 
had to forego an estimated $1 billion in revenues. 

Mr. Speaker, Drucker also provides an explanation of why this 
uncoupling, or near uncoupling has taken place. He states, “We 
may never understand what has caused them . . .” He adds, “It 
may be a long time before economic theorists accept that there 
have been fundamental changes . . .” He concludes that, 
“Practitioners, whether in government or in business, cannot 
wait until there is a new theory. They have to act.” And I would 
say that Drucker’s views are similar to that of the PC 
government: act now, pay later. And simple concepts like, let’s 
do some thinking and questioning before acting, seem to elude 
this government, Mr. Speaker. I certainly agree with the notion 
that you shouldn’t say “whoa” in the middle of a mud hole, but 
I’m an even stronger believer in the notion, Mr. Speaker, that 
some careful planning will allow you to miss those mud holes 
altogether. 
 
And just some examples, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member from 
Kindersley established what he called a “revolutionary flat tax.” 
Flat tax from the flat earth society. The only question he asked, 
but after the fact, was, why did I not ask more questions before 
I did it? I guess the answer seems to be his shift out of the 
Finance department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Push for free trade and ask questions later. And that’s what our 
Premier did. He endorsed free trade and then began to wonder 
what free trade was all about. He began to use terms like “freer 
trade” and then “assured access to world markets.” In July he 
decided, after the fact, to ask the people of Saskatchewan what 
free trade really meant. And we’re still waiting for the answers 
from the trade negotiations commission which toured the 
province in August. 
 
Now Drucker reaches one major conclusion: economic 
dynamics have decisively shifted from the national economy to 
the world economy. If the Premier believes that this is news, 
then one has to wonder what economic textbooks he was using 
at university. 
 
What does Drucker believe the U.S. should do about its 
problems? Because he was writing about the U.S. And I quote 
directly from the article that the Premier is circulating: 
 

Benign neglect – the policy of the Reagan 
Administration these last few years – may be the best 
policy that one can hope for, and the only one with a 
chance of success. 

 
Benign neglect, Mr. Speaker: is that the PC approach? Benign 
neglect: is that going to be the new reality? Benign neglect: is 
that what Drucker is advocating? And is that the prophet that 
the Premier is trumpeting? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Drucker states that the causes of economic change 
are rarely simple, and I agree with that, but obviously the 
government opposite doesn’t. The PC government has always 
looked for simple answers to complex problems. Whatever 
happened with open for business? The Reach for the Future 
slogan, Mr. Speaker, of the last campaign, is another simple 
solution. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

251 
 
 

This government has yet to move beyond simple slogans and 
produce actual results, and there is nothing new in the speech 
except for the rhetoric. There is nothing new in their analysis of 
our problems and nothing new, I might add, in yet another 
assault from a right-wing government on the poor and 
defenceless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to a 
serious omission from the throne speech, and that is the lack of 
any program, clear or otherwise, for the province’s urban 
municipalities. There is no recognition at all of the serious 
problems being faced by local government in the 1980s. There 
was no statement that property tax levels are an area of concern. 
There was no indication that there would be any attempt to 
reduce the property tax burden. And I thought that whatever 
song Brian was singing in Ottawa would find a chorus here. But 
I looked in vain for any provincial initiative, Mr. Speaker, for 
tax reform in concert with recent federal initiatives. 
 
(1915) 
 
Surely there was an opportunity to say something in light of the 
final report of the Local Government Finance Commission. 
Surely measures to strengthen local government and improve 
the fairness in taxes paid at the local level are important matters 
for a government to deal with. Mr. Speaker, a government that 
truly cares about its people would have made tax reform a 
matter of priority rather than ignore the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a government that was in touch with urban issues 
would also be aware of the very real need that municipalities 
face, and that municipalities need assistance to rejuvenate the 
municipal infrastructure throughout Saskatchewan. Indeed a 
government that was in touch would be aware of the need to 
expand that infrastructure. The estimates may vary, Mr. 
Speaker, but one thing is clear, in that there will be a major shift 
in population from our rural areas and into our urban areas as 
farmers give up the struggle in the face of falling prices for their 
commodities and increased costs of production and 
transportation. This migration will place a severe stress on 
municipal infrastructure and on municipal programs and 
services. Yet there is no recognition of this simple fact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The government’s own program, Mr. Speaker, of building and 
diversifying ourselves, if it is to be successful, will mean 
increased demand for municipal services and infrastructure. In 
fact, a good infrastructure is needed to promote this program of 
building, and diversification. Just like we need facilities for 
tourists before we can promote tourism, we’ll need to invest in 
roads, and water, and sewers, and sidewalks, and parks, and 
culture and recreation, police, fire protection, health, and 
education, and social services, in order to build and diversify 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s municipalities have done a 
creditable job in managing their affairs over the years. By and 
large, our municipal leaders display a real sense of 
responsibility, foresight, imagination, patience, compassion, 
and intelligence, as they continue to keep  

tax increases to a minimum while maintaining services. 
Saskatchewan municipalities provide an excellent example of 
Saskatchewan people working co-operatively to run things 
themselves and to do it extremely well. 
 
The PC government, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, could do 
much worse and probably not much better than to learn from 
our municipalities and other local institutions on how to provide 
services effectively and efficiently. If the government had done 
so, perhaps we would not have the financial mess we have 
today. 
 
And in this context, Mr. Speaker, it is especially difficult to 
understand why the Minister of Finance for one, continues to 
exhort Regina city council to get its financial affairs in order. 
Expenditure growth, Mr. Speaker, as one example in the city of 
Regina, has been less than that of the PC government. Less. 
They do a better job of holding the line. It is simply incredible 
that a Finance minister who presides over an unprecedented 
lowering of the province’s credit rating, and who is up to his 
neck in a fiscal swamp, would seek to admonish a jurisdiction 
that is maintaining its rating and is, simply put, doing a much 
better job. It’s incredible, Mr. Speaker, simply incredible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in April 1985 the president 
of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Herb 
Taylor wrote to the then minister of Finance to indicate that 
organization’s concern with the lack of support for urban 
government. In summing up Mr. Taylor said, and I quote: 
 

To sum up then, it seems to us that the overall attitude 
towards local urban government is to hold the line in 
so far as provincial contribution is concerned, and to 
let property tax burden increase and increase 
substantially. The property taxpayers are going to be 
severely burdened, in our view, this year by virtue of 
the fact that you have put on a 1 per cent flat tax on 
that income. You have removed the property tax 
rebate. You have increased our local tax burden by 
simply not providing any more funds to revenue 
sharing. 
 

Nothing seems to have changed, Mr. Speaker, except that the 
challenge for municipalities has become even more difficult, 
and nothing in the throne speech would suggest the government 
is about to adopt a more responsive attitude to the concerns of 
local government and to the concerns of urban people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late for the PC government to show it 
cares for the concerns of urban people. They have a new 
mandate, and even if they are under-represented in our urban 
areas, they can and they should start anew to forge a better 
relationship with the people in our cities, towns, and villages. 
And to do this, Mr. Speaker, they must be prepared to work 
with urban people and their local government sin a spirit of 
co-operation, with a real sense of understanding of urban 
concerns and with a commitment to respond. Continued 
arrogance and forcing their agenda on urban people will not 
work. It hasn’t worked and will not work. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

252 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch briefly 
on the basic theme that prevails throughout the throne speech, 
and that is that times are so tough, the future is so bleak, 
resource revenues have fallen so significantly, the cost to the 
taxpayers of providing services in programs must be 
constrained. There is a sense here, Mr. Speaker, of: we can’t 
help ourselves; the situation is so bad; and therefore services 
and programs that help people must be put on the chopping 
block. 
 
And as I listened to His Honour, Mr. Speaker, I kept thinking of 
another American. – not Peter Drucker, but of the American 
comedian, Flip Wilson. And Flip Wilson created a character 
called Geraldine Jones. And Geraldine Jones would explain 
every transgression from accepted behaviour and every falling 
by the wayside by, “The devil made me do it.” And, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s the devil or Drucker that’s making them 
do it, I want to put the government on notice that you had better 
move above-board, caringly, sensitively, cautiously, and 
intelligently, as you set out to remake the social framework of 
this province. If you do that, you can expect to receive some 
co-operation from our side. Anything less than that, and you 
will find out what opposition really means in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay 
tribute to our leader, the hon. member from Regina Elphinstone. 
I need not dwell on his considerable achievements as premier of 
Saskatchewan. I think those are a matter of record – a record 
that will indicate intelligent and strong leadership; a record that 
will note a period of strong, sustained growth and excellent 
management under his leadership, and will also record no 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I do want to say something, Mr. 
Speaker, about his tenure as Leader of the Opposition. And it is 
truly awesome and inspiring to have witnessed the excellent job 
he did as our leader since 1982. To lead the New Democratic 
Party in the legislature with so few members, and lead it so 
magnificently, is a testament to his skills and abilities, and 
strong evidence, I think, of his love for Saskatchewan and for 
his party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And as a member of the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased and proud to benefit from his leadership 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I went through the throne speech, as I listened 
to the self-serving accolades of the members opposite about the 
government’s programs and so on, I looked back at the October 
20th election and the results of that election, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think to myself: are we talking about the same province? 
Because surely the things that concern people and surely the 
things that matter to people are not contained or addressed in 
that Speech from the Throne. Surely you haven’t addressed  

jobs; surely you haven’t addressed fairness in taxation; surely 
you haven’t addressed caring; and it’s for all those reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, and those omissions, that I simply cannot support the 
motion that is before us. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, it’s a 
privilege for me to enter into the throne speech debate this 
evening. I must, of course, add my congratulations to the long 
list that has commended you on your election as Speaker of this 
Legislative Assembly. Having had the opportunity to work with 
you in the past and certainly looking forward to working with 
you in the future for many years, it’s going to be really 
interesting and a challenge to myself. 
 
I congratulate too, Mr. Speaker, each member elected to the 
legislature. Especially I welcome each new member. I want to 
welcome them all and I look forward to working with them all. 
 
I will never be able to fully express my deep appreciation for 
the efforts of my supporters during the recent campaign. When 
my confidence seemed to waver, they picked up the slack and 
put me back on my feet. And as you can easily see, Mr. 
Speaker, these people are indeed very special to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech delivered by Lieutenant 
Governor Frederick Johnson could not have come at a better 
time. Fresh with a new mandate to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, your Progressive Conservative government is 
determined to continue diversifying and developing an 
economy which depends so heavily on agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a few minutes I will provide some examples 
which have already been developed by our government, but for 
now I want to continue with our government’s commitment to 
build a strong and more secure future for its people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982 we have established and followed 
through with our commitment to provide for the needs and 
aspirations of individual families and communities. As 
indicated in the Speech from the Throne, that commitment is 
alive and well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech also focuses on the need for 
effective and efficient use of government resources, and 
certainly, given the economic situation surrounding us, this is 
essential direction for our PC government to take. 
 
The plan to introduce legislation in allowing rural development 
corporations to utilize local initiatives and capital will 
undoubtedly assist in our province’s growth. The five-year, $50 
million commitment to assist our small-business community to 
keep up with the latest technology available is a future step 
toward strengthening our economic situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the priorities of the PC government were  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

253 
 
 

made very clear over the past four and a half years. In 
agriculture, job creation, education, no effort or resources were 
spared in order to meet the demands these areas faced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers have gone through some of 
the toughest times – droughts, floods, low commodity prices, 
unfair international competition, to name just a few – yet our 
PC government has stood beside them every step of the way. 
 
Our programs put the necessary cash in their pockets, and as 
evidenced in this Assembly on Tuesday, the determination of 
our Premier has further added substantial flow of new money 
and to farm families throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, we are moving to reduce 
input costs for producers by encouraging the manufacture of 
agricultural chemicals and fertilizers. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
throne speech also identified further protection for farmers 
through legislation to extend the provisions of The Farm Land 
Security Act and The Farmers’ Counselling and Assistance Act, 
both measures I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are not 
unreasonably foreclosed upon and that they receive appropriate 
counselling and loan guarantees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the initiatives contained in 
the Speech from the Throne. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue to work closely with individuals, organizations 
and business, and industrial concerns, co-operating on every 
opportunity to make this province a better place to live. 
 
Our PC government’s determination to diversify the economy is 
based on the benefits that will be derived. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
talking about more new jobs. It is this government’s 
responsibility to provide the opportunity for employment, a 
responsibility we met since 1982 and furthered through our 
support for small business and industrial growth. 
 
(1930) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to prepare our young people to assist in 
ensuring our province’s future economic development, new 
educational opportunities are being provided along with an 
assurance that they are getting an education they require. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said a few minutes ago that I wanted to provide 
some specific examples of economic development created 
through our Progressive Conservative government’s initiatives. 
I want to note the following examples: the bacon plant in North 
Battleford; the Phillips cable plant in Moose Jaw; the new 
pharmaceutical plant in Swift Current; expansion to 
Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon; and, Mr. Speaker, the 
purchase of the Prince Albert Pulp Company, PAPCO, by 
Weyerhaeuser Canada. And just to elaborate on that a little bit, 
it happens to be in the city of Prince Albert. That part of the city 
of Prince Albert is represented by one of the members on the 
government side, which is myself. I represent the largest land 
mass in the city of Prince Albert, everything north of the river, 
and it’s certainly going to be  

a pleasure to me when we open the new paper-mill in Prince 
Albert. I really feel that that’s going to be one of the biggest 
things that’s hit that . . Other than Northern Institute of 
Technology, but I’ll say a few words about that later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the purchase of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) by Weyerhaeuser, the current pulp mill will be 
modernized, preserving jobs already there. The new paper-mill 
will create new permanent jobs as well as hundreds of indirect 
jobs and related economic benefits. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
there will be up to 500 jobs at the peak of construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our PC government believes in action, not 
reaction. And since 1982 we have taken action to develop our 
economy. Mr. Speaker, the people that I represent in 
Shellbrook-Torch River constituency understand and appreciate 
our PC government’s dedication to strengthening our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other incentive developed just recently by our 
government will have a major and beneficial impact on our 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, our constituency has for decades 
called for further development of tourism in our province – and 
that’s very important to me. 
 
The development of a new tourist and hospitality institute in 
Saskatchewan, and a five-year, $50 million program to 
stimulate tourism industry expansion, is truly great news. 
 
I have the only rural municipality in the province of 
Saskatchewan that doesn’t have one farmer. The Lakeland R.M. 
is all resort and lakes and cabins and small business. And of 
course I have the area of Candle Lake, Prince Albert National 
Park, and Waskesiu. And there isn’t a much more beautiful 
tourist area in all of western Canada than the constituency of 
Shellbrook-Torch River. 
 
And this is a real incentive for the people in that area, 
small-business men and outfitters, to attract tourists in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of delivery of our PC government to the 
people of Shellbrook-Torch River is well noted. New school 
construction and renovation. And this is really important, 
because there’s many new schools and additions to schools in 
my constituency. And it certainly fits right in with the whole 
education system, with the Northern Institute of Technology 
which this government built in Prince Albert, and the expansion 
to the community college. 
 
The other two members from Prince Albert will try and tell you 
that the Northern Institute of Technology was budgeted for in 
the 1982 budget. But that budget never passed the legislature. 
It’s easy to put something into the budget if you don’t pass it, if 
you just call an election and then lose. So they never did intend 
to build the Northern Institute of Technology. They never 
intended to make Prince Albert the northern educational centre 
that it is today. And certainly the expansion of the community 
college, which certainly allows the young people in that area to 
take two years of university study before they go on to further 
education, is certainly a plus for our area. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

254 
 
 

They’ve tried to take credit for it. But certainly the former 
members there could take a little credit, and probably myself, 
had a lot to do with getting that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — But I want to relate to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
new schools and the additions that have been built in my 
constituency and are going to fit right in so that children are 
going to be able to take their grade 12 education at these 
schools and then move into the specialty education in Prince 
Albert in the northern institute and the community college. 
 
There’s new school construction and renovation at the Meath 
Park School totalling $693,000 – this is since 1982; there was 
very little done prior to that – the Spruce Home Elementary 
School totalling $940,000; Wild Rose totalling $77,000; the 
Paddockwood Elementary School totalling $1.34 million – 
that’s a brand-new school that they’d waited there for years and 
years. They’ve been trying to get a new school in that town for 
many, many years and were unable to turn their local MLA’s 
head at all in that direction. And certainly they’re proud of that 
school; and of course the W.P. Sandin Composite School in 
Shellbrook totalling $1 million. So these people that go to these 
educational facilities now will have other better facilities in 
Prince Albert to further their education on as soon as they are 
done with their grade 12. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I’m very proud of is the 
new 30-bed special care home has been approved for the village 
of Canwood for the spring of 1987, and I’ve certainly worked 
very closely with the former minister of Health to get that put in 
place. 
 
I must stop here for a couple of minutes. I have to make some 
comments on some comments that were made towards us the 
other day from the other side of the House. The member from 
Regina North West said that if he looked across here, all he 
could see was people with oil on their boots and leather 
letterheads on their stationery. Well I would like to tell him and 
the member from Humboldt who said that we were all rich 
farmers on this side of the House, I would like to tell him, or 
both of them, that if it wasn’t for small- and medium-sized 
farmers like myself getting interested in 1982 and coming into 
this legislature and making policy, the family farm as you know 
it today would no longer be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — The uncaring government of the day let interest 
rates go to 24 per cent. They didn’t really care what happened 
to us, but they were willing to buy our farm. That was the only 
way that they could see keeping farmers in business. Well I’ll 
tell you, our low-interest policies and the things that we’ve done 
for agriculture in Saskatchewan have certainly helped farmers 
more than purchasing their farm. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they’re appreciated. 
 
Mr. Muller: — And they certainly are appreciated and I think it 
shows. 

As far as me having leather letterheads on my stationery or oil 
on my boots, it’s not very likely. If you were to come up into 
my country in July, it may look like light crude to somebody 
from the South, but I assure you it isn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of our government’s record. We feel 
privileged to be part of the building we are continuing to 
provide for our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fully endorse the Speech from the Throne and 
look forward to representing the needs and desires of my 
constituents in this Assembly. With that, thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to take part in this throne speech debate this evening 
and to be representing the constituents of Saskatoon University 
here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’d like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by thanking my constituents who 
have returned me to the legislature after an absence of four 
years. I’m deeply grateful to the constituents of Saskatoon 
University for the support that they’ve demonstrated for the 
New Democratic Party and for myself. And I pledge myself to 
do my very best to represent them in the coming four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to express my thanks 
publicly here tonight to the more than 200 people who gave of 
their time during the months of September and October to send 
me here to the legislature. I appreciated their support and their 
help a great deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I want to, Mr. Speaker, on this my first 
opportunity to speak formally in the Assembly, extend my 
congratulation s to Mr. Rick Folk and Mr. Bob Crowe who 
represented the conservative and Liberal parties in my 
constituency in the last election. They conducted a gentlemanly 
campaign. They were worthy opponents, and I want to extend 
my congratulations to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have two more comments that I’d like to make in 
terms of expressions of thanks before I go into the main body of 
my text tonight. One is that I’d like to express my thanks to my 
family who’ve been a great source of support over these past 
years: my mother and father, Trudy and Reg Prebble; my wife 
Christine; and my father-in-law and mother-in-law, Ben Smilie 
and Adele Smilie, who have a long tradition of political activity 
in this province and have been a great source of support to me 
personally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally I would like to express my congratulations 
to you on your election as Speaker. I know that you’ll serve this 
Assembly well and I wish you well in your endeavours. 
 
I’d like now, Mr. Speaker, to turn to the main text of my 
comments this evening. My constituents have sent me  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

255 
 
 

here to represent them, I think, for five basic reason which I’d 
like to elaborate on briefly tonight. And essentially, Mr. 
Speaker, those reasons largely explain why I will be opposing 
the motion in support of the throne speech this evening, instead 
of supporting it, because the things that my constituents are 
concerned about are primarily the things that are missing in the 
throne speech. 
 
The first one, Mr. Speaker is that there’s no reference in this 
speech to a job creation strategy for this province. There’s no 
plan for long-term job creation outlined in the throne speech. 
 
The second reason, Mr. Speaker, and one of the major concerns 
of my constituents was that they were upset about the unfair tax 
increases that the Government of Saskatchewan imposed over 
the last four years. They were upset about the removal of the 
property tax rebates. They felt that the flat tax that was imposed 
two years ago was unfair, because while the average person 
would have to fork out their share of the flat tax, a well-to-do 
person, who had a number of investments that they could use to 
write their flat tax off, didn’t have to pay anything. They 
basically felt, Mr. Speaker, that that was unfair. 
 
A third concern that they had was the rapidly growing hospital 
waiting list in Saskatoon. And we see no indication in the 
throne speech tonight that that problem is going to be dealt 
with. 
 
A fourth concern that they had was that they felt, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government was not serious about making a long-term 
funding commitment to our universities and our technical 
institutes in this province. And they were concerned . . . My 
constituents are concerned about what they see as a 
deteriorating quality of education on the university campus, and 
rightly so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about a third of my constituents are students. And 
one of the things that they were very unhappy about was the 
fact that two years ago there were major cuts in the 
Saskatchewan student bursary program in terms of students 
who had accessibility to that program. And we see no indication 
in the throne speech tonight, Mr. Speaker, that that situation is 
going to be reversed. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I believe that my constituents sent me 
here because they saw in the New Democratic Party a voice on 
behalf of the environment and environmental protection that 
they did not see in government members opposite. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, we see no reference in the throne speech tonight 
on that concern. 
 
Now what I’d like to do, in the time that I have this evening, is 
elaborate on each of these points, if I may, and explain 
therefore, why I cannot, in good conscience, support the throne 
speech as it’s been presented to us this evening. 
 
The first thing as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that the throne 
speech doesn’t offer is that there’s no blueprint in the throne 
speech for solving what I consider to be Saskatchewan’s most 
urgent problem, and that is our rapidly growing unemployment 
rate. 

(1945) 
 
I go along in parts of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, particularly 
in a lot of the areas in my constituency where there’s a high 
density of apartments, and I can visit in a set of apartment 
blocks and find 15 to 20 per cent unemployment among a lot of 
the people that live there, particularly among young people. Mr. 
Speaker, I consider that this is an outrageous reality in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan today, and I see nothing in the 
throne speech that will deal with that. 
 
In my view, the focus of a new job strategy should be the 
number one priority of the members opposite, the government 
of the day. Mr. Speaker, what we need is a job strategy that will 
be based on supporting locally owned small business and 
co-operative enterprise, rather than depending on megaprojects 
that are largely controlled by large business interests from 
outside this province. What we need, Mr. Speaker, is a new job 
strategy that will be founded on environmentally sustainable 
economic development that emphasize self-sufficiency. 
 
And I’d like to put forward a few specific proposals for that 
kind of a job strategy this evening, Mr. Speaker. The kinds of 
projects that would meet the criteria that I’ve put forward are 
these. 
 
First of all, a major energy conservation program is needed in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And government assistance is 
needed to home owners and to small-business people to be able 
to insulate their homes and their businesses, and their farms, 
upgrade the energy efficiency of their buildings, thereby reduce 
the amount of natural gas that needs to be purchased from out 
of province, Mr. Speaker, and reduce the amount of money that 
has to be put into electrical generating stations. 
 
The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, in my view, would be 
wise to cancel projects like the $500 million Shand power 
project and instead put the money into a major energy 
conservation investment in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Because it’s been proven again and again, around the world, 
that money invested in conservation will generate a far larger 
saving in energy than any equivalent investment in energy 
generating projects will ever create in terms of energy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yet the government opposite has failed to realize that reality 
and are charging the taxpayers of this province hefty bills 
through Saskatchewan Power Corporation for building more 
and more energy generation projects like Shand, Mr. Speaker, 
when alternatively, they should be putting the money into 
conservation instead. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that because 
members opposite are failing to do that, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan will see higher and higher energy bills in years to 
come because of the failure of their policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, an investment in energy 
conservation would result in jobs being created in every 
Saskatchewan community across this province. People in the 
construction industry, in the glass industry,  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

256 
 
 

and the insulation industry, sheet metal workers, people who are 
interested in renewable energy sources like solar energy, would 
all benefit enormously in local communities across this 
province from that kind of an investment. It would create jobs 
in a way that few other projects would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A second example of this kind of more decentralized, 
human-scale, environmentally sustainable economic 
development would be one of the proposals that we put forward 
as a party during the election campaign. And that was a 10-year 
commitment to a major program of reforestation and intensive 
forest management in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got a situation right now in the northern part of this 
province where we have 900,000 clear-cut acres, Mr. Speaker, 
that have never been replanted. And it’s time, Mr. Speaker, to 
get on with the job of replanting the northern forest so that we 
can be sure of jobs in the future from our forestry industry, 
which generates 8,000 permanent jobs a year, Mr. Speaker. We 
can’t afford to lose those jobs. And we could create new jobs in 
forestry through a major reforestation and intensive forest 
management investment, and I urge the members opposite to 
initiate such an investment. 
 
I want to give a third example, Mr. Speaker, and that is that I’ve 
long been of the view that instead of having a fish marketing 
agency that is controlled out of Winnipeg, as we currently have, 
what we need instead is a strategy in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, for marketing the fish that are caught and produced in 
this province, marketing them in Saskatchewan. It’s time for us 
to process and market our own fish locally. 
 
I should have no trouble going into a Saskatchewan restaurant, 
Mr. Speaker, and purchasing Saskatchewan fish, but I do. Most 
restaurants in this province don’t provide fresh Saskatchewan 
fish right now, but I think that’s unfortunate. And it reflects the 
fact that we don’t have a local marketing strategy which could 
create local jobs with a marketing agency, Mr. Speaker, that 
would be owned and controlled by northern fishermen. 
 
A fourth thing, Mr. Speaker, or fourth initiative that I’d like to 
see that I think would create a lot of employment in this 
province and that would be a long-term, environmentally 
sustainable investment, would be for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to encourage and support a locally controlled, 
privately owned vegetable industry and fruit industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — There is no need, Mr. Speaker, for us to be in 
a situation in this province where when we walk into the 
average grocery store, 90 per cent of what we see on the shelves 
has come in from out of province. Mr. Speaker, every time 
people purchase out-of-province vegetables and fruits, we see 
more lost job opportunities in this province. Instead, the 
vegetables and the fruits should be grown right here in 
Saskatchewan. And a city such as my own in Saskatoon, or the 
city of Regina, or any other major centre in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is quite capable of supporting that kind of an industry. 

Members opposite could be promoting that kind of an initiative 
by making sure that there are year-round storage supplies for 
vegetable producers in this province so that they can supply 
supermarkets on a year-round basis. And there should be 
financial assistance for new vegetable growers to get into the 
industry, Mr. Speaker. We’re quite capable of growing our own 
carrots, our own lettuce, our own tomatoes here in 
Saskatchewan, and it’s time we got on with the job of doing it 
and created work for people who need it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A fifth area, Mr. Speaker, a fifth example of 
an environmentally sustainable job-creating initiative would be 
for the Government of Saskatchewan to start to take seriously 
the job that’s required of promoting soil conservation in this 
province, and we’ve seen this for many years now over the last 
decade. In the spring when we’ve had heavy winds and there’s 
been heavy soil drifting, we’ve seen, for instance, the 
consequences of failing to have a good shelter-belt program in 
this province. People could be productively employed planting 
shelter-belts around some of the key wind-drift areas of this 
province where we’ve had heavy soil drifting over the last few 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People could be productively employed starting to clean up 
some of the dozens and dozens of dump sites in this province 
where there are large amounts of toxic and hazardous wastes, in 
many cases that threaten aquifers, and that the government has 
failed to do anything about over the last few years. It’s urgent, 
Mr. Speaker, that that kind of an environmental hazard be 
cleaned up. Why not take this opportunity to get on with that 
job while there are people looking for work and there is a job to 
be done? 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government should establish an 
environmental protection fund and use some of the revenues 
that are generated from resource development in this province, 
place them in that fund and use the environmental protection 
fund as a source of employment for people who are going to 
undertake environmentally sustainable activity, or who are 
going to be involved in projects and job creation designed to 
clean up the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move on now to another topic, and that’s 
the question of taxes and tax reform. And one of the things I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest disappointments 
about this throne speech, is that there is no indication of any 
kind of tax relief for the average taxpayer of Saskatchewan, 
while companies like Weyerhaeuser are able to buy the Prince 
Albert Pulp Company and make no down payment, had have to 
make no annual payment unless they make a profit of 20 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While that’s going on on the one hand under the policies of the 
government opposite, on the other hand we’ve seen the average 
taxpayer of this province lose over $200 as a result of losing the 
property tax rebate; in many cases have to pay out another $180 
to $300, depending on their salary, to meet their commitments 
for the government’s new flat tax. And that’s just patently 
unfair, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

257 
 
 

And my constituents want to see, Mr. Speaker, a restoration of 
the property tax rebate. They want to see the flat tax abolished 
once and for all. The members on this side are committed to 
working for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A third concern of my constituents, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they are alarmed and perturbed, as am I, about 
the growing hospital waiting list in Saskatoon. We now have 
8,535 people, Mr. Speaker, waiting to gain entrance to one of 
the three hospitals in our city. I’ve got constituents, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve got one constituent who’s been due for hip 
surgery that’s classified as urgent. Her doctor’s been trying to 
get her into the hospital since June and it’s only in December, 
late December that she’s going to be able to get in. Now that’s 
just appalling, Mr. Speaker. She’s been suffering a lot of pain as 
a result of not being able to get into the hospital and it’s high 
time that members opposite, as the Government of 
Saskatchewan, made a major commitment of funds to hiring 
additional staff in our hospitals in Saskatoon and Regina so that 
those waiting lists can be gotten down. Because the problem is 
not a lack of beds, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lack of staff. And that 
problem has to be remedied immediately. It’s a very urgent 
matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Members opposite could also go a long way to 
remedying the problem, Mr. Speaker, if they would build 
additional level 4 nursing home beds in the city so that some of 
the people in hospital right now who are requiring level 4 
nursing care could move into a level 4 nursing facility where 
they would be comfortable, and some of the beds that are in the 
hospital right now, that through no fault of their own they 
occupy, could be freed up for people requiring elective surgery. 
An initiative of that kind, Mr. Speaker, would go a long way to 
resolving the problem in Saskatoon, and I urge the government 
to implement it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major concerns of my constituents is 
the deteriorating quality of education at the University of 
Saskatchewan and at the University of Regina that’s come 
about as a result of a lack of funding commitment by this 
government to post-secondary education. We heard members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, during this throne speech debate and 
during question period, claim that they’d done a good job in 
terms of looking after the needs of our post-secondary 
educational institutions. 
 
Well I beg to differ, Mr. Speaker, because the constituents 
whom I represent in Saskatoon University – many of whom are 
faculty, staff, and students at the university – their experience 
has been that there has been a series of tight budgets which 
have resulted in an unprecedented funding crisis at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a severe shortage, Mr. Speaker, of funds for basic, 
essential services on our campus, like our library, for instance. 
Our library, unfortunately, was recently ranked as 98th out of 
104 libraries surveyed in North America as a result of a lack of 
funds to put in place new books, new periodicals, and other new 
library acquisitions that are  

essential to maintaining a high quality library. And that’s as a 
result of the lack of a funding commitment, and we see no 
evidence of change of that in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve got a situation in my riding, Mr. Speaker, where my 
constituents who are students at the University of Saskatchewan 
are forced to go into classes of 250, 350 – introductory classes. 
You can’t have a meaningful relationship with a professor in a 
class of 350, Mr. Speaker. That’s what a lot of classes like the 
first year psychology classes at the University of Saskatchewan 
are right now, and that’s simply unacceptable. And it comes 
about as a result of a lack of a funding commitment by this 
government to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
There has been a 30 per cent enrolment increase at the 
University of Saskatchewan over the last few years, Mr. 
Speaker, and there has been no additional money for permanent 
new faculty or permanent new staff despite that funding 
increase. Now I don’t call that a commitment to quality 
education, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite may, but I do 
not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I call on the government to make a long-term, 
five-year operating funding commitment to the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina that will guarantee, 
Mr. Speaker, that the real cost increases that those two 
campuses face each year are covered every year; and the, that in 
addition to that, Mr. Speaker, that the government provide 
supplementary catch-up funds each year for the hiring of 
additional faculty and additional staff so that we, in fact, over a 
four- to five-year period can see a real improvement in the 
quality of education on the university campuses. 
 
That’s what’s required, Mr. Speaker. Not idle rhetoric to a 
commitment to quality education but a funding commitment – a 
long-term funding commitment to quality post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the members on this side 
of the House stand for and that’s what we call on members 
opposite to implement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn to a final area of concern to my 
constituents, and that is in general the question of a 
commitment to peace and a commitment to a safer environment 
in this province and globally, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
specifically address four issues in talking about this 
commitment that’s required. 
 
(2000) 
 
The first one I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the Rafferty 
dam which I find to be a very interesting project – a project 
being promoted by the members opposite, a project that’s going 
to involve a large financial commitment which taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan will have to pay for some time, in the range of 
$100 million. And, Mr. Speaker, I call tonight upon members 
opposite to cancel the Rafferty dam immediately – to cancel it 
because it’s an unnecessary project. It’s going to cause a great 
deal of environmental damage, and it’s a project, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s filled to the brim with patronage, no matter how you look 
at it. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

258 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what the Rafferty dam 
really translates into when you look at the details, is the creation 
of a giant mud-flat, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re going to 
see in the Souris Valley when this is all done. Some people, Mr. 
Speaker, have suggested that the mud-flat will be so big that 
perhaps members opposite will want to sponsor the 
international mud wrestling contest. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have a different sense of perhaps why the 
member from Estevan wants to build this project. He’s looking 
for a mud hole to say “whoa” in, Mr. Speaker. That’s all I can 
think of, because Rafferty is going to be an environmental 
disaster. This beautiful valley, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 
flooded. Thousands of valuable acres of hay land and grain land 
are going to be destroyed, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see 
three community pastures flooded by this unnecessary dam, Mr. 
Speaker, One of the nicest parks in southern Saskatchewan, the 
Doctor Mainprise Park, is going to be destroyed by this project, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s it all in aid of, Mr. Speaker? It’s in aid of two 
things. One, supplying water to the Rafferty dam, which is not 
. . . or to the Shand power project rather, which would not be 
needed at all if the government would decide to air-cool the 
project; and second, it’s being built for the purposes of 
providing 100-year flood control relief to the city of Minot. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not the responsibility of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the residents of Saskatchewan 
to provide flood control to the city of Minot. That’s their 
responsibility. Our responsibility is to make sure that taxpayers’ 
dollars are well spent, and to protect the environment. And the 
Rafferty dam project does neither, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
disgraceful project, and the disgrace is added to by the fact that 
some of the notable personalities in Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation’s leadership happen to have land in the vicinity. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I urge the government opposite to cancel 
this project immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, a second environmental issue 
that I wish to raise tonight and that I raised in the Assembly six 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, when I last had my seat here . . . Six 
years ago I raised the question of 2,4-D being identified as a 
cancer-causing substance and I urged the minister of 
Agriculture of the day to begin the process of phasing out the 
use of 2,4-D in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today the evidence on 2,4-D is unequivocal. 
We’ve had a recent study done in Kansas, in the state of 
Kansas, which indicates clearly that 2,4-D is cancer-causing. 
Now this major weed control agent has been used in this 
province for the last 30 years, and this means that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and the home owners of Saskatchewan in their 
gardens and their other domestic uses have been exposed to a 
cancer-causing substance for the last 30 years. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time to bring this atrocity to an end. If we wonder 
why  

cancer is on the increase it’s because of things like the use of 
2,4-D. We cannot continue to promote and permit the use of a 
cancer-causing agent on Saskatchewan farms and in 
Saskatchewan gardens across this province without even any 
warning to the users involved. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because Health and Welfare Canada is now 
clearly lobbying the Government of Canada to have 2,4-D 
banned, surely the time has come for this legislature to provide 
the leadership that is required to do two things: first of all, to 
accelerate the phase-out of 2,4-D as a weed control agent by the 
farm community in this province; and to begin the process of 
helping and supporting farmers to put alternative methods of 
pest control into place. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the time has 
come for this legislature to ban the use of 2,4-D in homes and 
gardens. 
 
It’s absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, that consumers of this 
province, that home owners of this province, should be 
encouraged and told that they can safely use a lot of the weed 
control agents that incorporate 2,4-D in their gardens and on 
their lawns, without being told that it’s cancer-causing. Every 
summer, Mr. Speaker, for the last 30 years in this province, 
little children have wandered across lawns where 2,4-D has 
been applied and no one has told the parents involved that the 
substance is cancer-causing. And it’s time to bring that kind of 
nonsense, Mr. Speaker, to an end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Third, and finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
address the question of uranium mining, which as members of 
this House and my constituency know, has bee a long-time 
concern of mine. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the first thing I want to say is that over the 
last four years, since I last sat in this Assembly, there has been a 
dramatic development in terms of proposed new uranium 
developments in this province. And the site of most of those 
uranium mines, Mr. Speaker, has been the Wollaston Lake area. 
And we now have a situation emerging where we have already 
one uranium mine, the Collins Bay B zone uranium mine that is 
located right on the edge of Wollaston lake. It’s as close to 
Wollaston Lake, Mr. Speaker, as the average cottage in 
Saskatchewan is to a lakeshore. It’s about 100 yards away. 
 
I find it ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, that we can tolerate the mining 
of tens of millions of tons of radioactive material within a 
stone’s throw of a major commercial fishery resource in this 
province. But what is even more alarming, Mr. Speaker, is that 
what we’re going to see in the next few years, if this legislature 
doesn’t put a stop to it, is three other uranium mines located 
right along the edge of Wollaston Lake, all controlled by 
Eldorado Nuclear, the federal Crown corporation. And in some 
cases Eldorado will be working in co-operation with the 
provincial government’s Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation. 
 
Now it is almost certain, Mr. Speaker, that if we see a situation 
where there are four to six uranium mines located on the edge 
of a major commercial fishery  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

259 
 
 

resource like Wollaston Lake, that Wollaston Lake will be 
irreparably polluted in the long term as a result of those 
uranium mines operating and leaving their legacy of radioactive 
tailings which will be radioactive, Mr. Speaker, of over 150,000 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, secondly, I want to alert members of the 
Assembly and members of the public to the fact that over the 
last four years there has been a lot of additional evidence 
pointing to the reality that -Saskatchewan uranium is being used 
in nuclear weapons – not just by countries like South Korea, 
where the military government purchases uranium from 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation on an annual 
basis, and almost assuredly diverts at least small amounts of it 
into its weapons program – but no, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 
military dictatorships like South Korea, which the Government 
of Saskatchewan sells uranium to, we now have clear evidence 
that some of our major customers like France and the United 
States are using Saskatchewan uranium for nuclear weapons 
purposes, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the situation has deteriorated to 
the point where 5 out of every 6 pounds of uranium that this 
province sells to the United States becomes part of a military 
stockpile that the United States draws upon daily to 
manufacture hydrogen bombs and to breed plutonium for things 
like the MX missile. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker. There’s a little bit of 
Saskatchewan uranium in almost every U.S. nuclear weapon 
that’s being made today. And we don’t hear a sound from the 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker. They continue to allow 
Saskatchewan uranium to be sold for nuclear weapons purposes 
and they don’t ask a single question about what happens to us, 
Mr. Speaker. And this I think, Mr. Speaker, is a disgrace. And 
it’s a disgrace that every Saskatchewan resident who learns and 
knows about it will share, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, with members 
on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, we see a situation in northern 
Saskatchewan now, at Cigar Lake, the richest uranium deposit 
in the world, where the Government of Saskatchewan, members 
opposite, are going to be going in partnership with COGEMA, 
the company, Mr. Speaker, that’s controlled by the French 
atomic energy agency – which in other words, Mr. Speaker, 
COGEMA is the people who test nuclear weapons in the South 
Pacific. 
 
COGEMA is controlled by the same people, Mr. Speaker, who 
arranged the blowing up of the Rain Warrior in New Zealand 
last year, Mr. Speaker. COGEMA, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 
the partner of the Government of Saskatchewan in a venture, 
Mr. Speaker, at Cigar Lake. And I find that, Mr. Speaker, to be 
intolerable because what that means is that COGEMA will be 
supplying uranium to the French industry, and will be 
purchasing uranium itself, Mr. Speaker, which it is on record as 
stating that it is not prepared to separate the military and 
civilian uses of the uranium that it purchases. And yet 
government members opposite not only freely sell to it, but 
they’re now going to go in partnership with it. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that Cigar Lake should be 
cancelled; that this partnership between Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation and COGEMA should be cancelled, 
and that sales of uranium to France and the United States should 
be immediately cancelled because neither country is prepared to 
assure Saskatchewan residents, at this point, that our uranium 
will not be used in their nuclear weapons programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on just one 
other aspect of this nuclear debate before I close, and that is that 
I was alarmed to see that shortly after the Chernobyl accident 
occurred in the spring of this year, one of the senior members of 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was in Saskatoon telling a 
local business audience that Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
is still actively considering nuclear power as an option for this 
province in the long term. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that to be 
absolutely bizarre in light of the consequences of the Chernobyl 
accident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the consequences of Chernobyl are now 
well-known to the Saskatchewan public. I want to only touch on 
two. 
 
First of all, it’s been well established that the consequences of 
that accident in the Soviet Union alone, Mr. Speaker, will result 
in over 6,000 excess cancers, and that’s just in the Soviet 
Union. It doesn’t include the rest of western Europe, for which 
there is no accurate estimate yet. 
 
And second, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to members of this 
House and members of the public listening tonight that the 
longer-term consequences of Chernobyl are just beginning to 
become clear, and I want to give one example. In Norway, 
Sweden, and Denmark it’s now clear that the residents of those 
three countries who have long depended for, as a major source 
of their livelihood, on caribou hunting – namely the Lapps – are 
now not going to be able to hunt caribou for at least the next 
decade and probably the next 20 years, Mr. Speaker. The Lapps 
are going to be forced onto an existence of social welfare as a 
result of caribou and reindeer hunting being destroyed in their 
country, Mr. Speaker. And that reason that the caribou and 
reindeer hunting has been destroyed is because of the legacy of 
radioactive contamination that the Chernobyl accident in the 
Ukraine has left. That’s just one example of the irreparable 
damage that has been caused by Chernobyl. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Power Corporation officials, Mr. 
Speaker, are contemplating the construction of a nuclear 
reactor, still, in this province – after Chernobyl – and I find that 
to be absolutely unbelievable. Why would we want to locate, 
Mr. Speaker, a nuclear power station in a province that is one of 
the bread baskets of the world and risk the contamination of 
crops and water supplies in the event of any sort of a serious 
nuclear accident? I say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s completely 
unacceptable. 
 
So I call on the government tonight to do the sensible thing in 
light of the fact that there is no solution in sight to the problem 
of how to look after long-lived radioactive  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

260 
 
 

wastes; in light of the fact that the problem of radioactive 
tailings in northern Saskatchewan is rapidly growing; in light of 
the fact that we now know that at least three countries we sell 
to, three major customers of uranium – South Korea, France 
and the United States – all allow our uranium, or in some cases 
very consciously use our uranium, to be used in their nuclear 
weapons programs, Mr. Speaker. And in light of the disastrous 
consequences that come with a nuclear power accident, should 
one occur like the one that occurred at Chernobyl in the 
Ukraine, it’s time, Mr. Speaker, in my view, to ban all sales of 
uranium immediately to the United States, France and South 
Korea; and then, Mr. Speaker, in my view, it’s time for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to legislate an immediate 
moratorium on all new uranium mines in this province and then 
begin to gradually phase out the existing mines as alternative 
jobs become available, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2015) 
 
I believe that that’s what needs to be done, not just for the sake 
of Saskatchewan residents, but for the sake of all residents of 
this globe, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of the children of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who will inherit this legacy of 
radioactive waste if we continue uranium mining, and for the 
sake of all generations yet to come – the unborn generations of 
this world who deserve to inherit a clean environment and 
cannot hope to do so if the policies of members opposite, if 
policies like the Government of Saskatchewan continue to be 
pursued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the reasons I’ve outlined I cannot support the 
throne speech, and I urge all members of the Assembly to vote 
against it. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to 
rise to speak on another throne speech in this legislature. This 
Speech from the Throne contains an impressive list of programs 
this Progressive Conservative government will introduce in our 
second term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
you on your office, your high office. I had the pleasure of being 
a colleague of yours over the last four years, and I know all 
colleagues of yours have great confidence and wish you the 
very best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to also take this time to congratulate the mover and 
seconder, the member from Eastview and the member from 
Pelly. They did a very commendable job. And also I wish to 
congratulate each and every person that was elected and 
re-elected for a first, second term or more to this legislature. 
This is a high office. 
 
When you’re elected to the legislature, it’s a great process of 
making law. I say to all new members that being elected to the 
legislature. I ask them to take it very seriously. We are very 
fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to live in such a great country that we 
have this system of making laws. 
 
I heard one of the members opposite one day saying that they 
felt that we were a dictatorship-type of a  

government. Well they are wrong, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
the province of Saskatchewan know they are wrong because we 
were elected by the people of the province of Saskatchewan and 
that isn’t what happens in dictatorship governments or 
countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today I wish to take a look at the 
record of the Progressive Conservative government and our 
plans for the future. Eight years ago I was elected as the MLA 
for Arm River. Eight years ago the people of Arm River chose 
me to be their MLA. And during those eight years I have seen 
many changes in Saskatchewan, changes for the better since the 
election of the Progressive Conservative government in 1982. 
 
The record of the PC government has been a record of solid 
performance. The PC government has been dedicated to 
proving protection and opportunity for all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We have always believed it is the Saskatchewan people who 
build Saskatchewan, not big governments, Mr. Speaker. We 
have built a strong health care and education system at a time 
when other provinces were reducing theirs. 
 
I have great respect, Mr. Speaker, for the member from 
Saskatoon University. I was his colleague for four years. But I 
do have to contradict on some of his statements. I know that 
he’s genuine in what he believes, but when he stands up in his 
place tonight and says that health care has slipped under the 
Progressive Conservatives, well I have to contradict him. 
 
We listened to this in 1978, Mr. Speaker, when they used their 
scare tactics that under the Progressive Conservative 
government they will lose medicare. They won several elections 
this way. But I can tell you that I was very, very proud to go 
throughout this province for the last four years, especially this 
last year in election time throughout every bit of this province, 
and people were very proud of the Department of Health under 
the member from Indian Head-Wolseley – very, very proud. 
And I know now that the member from Meadow Lake will be 
carrying on the same type of health care facilities that the last 
member did for four years, and I wish to congratulate the new 
Minister of health. 
 
Any time anyone says that health care slipped, Mr. Speaker, just 
stop and go back into real reality, back into time. Since 1944, 
there has never been a decrease in the budget for Health, and in 
the last year I think it’s about $2 billion designated in this 
province in the budget for health care, education, and social 
services. It has increased every year; so services have not gone 
back; they have gone ahead, and which they will under the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan home program, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the Saskatchewan Builds, are all 
examples of our belief in protecting people and improving 
opportunities. Mr. Speaker, we have stood up for small 
businesses; we have stood up for seniors; we have stood up for 
farmers. And I am proud of that record, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

261 
 
 

The Progressive Conservative government has done more for 
farmers than any other government in Saskatchewan’s history. 
And I’m very proud to be a part of a government that has done 
just that. 
 
Let us take a look at a few examples of the excellent programs 
the Progressive Conservative government has established for 
farmers. I’m just going to run through a few of them. The 
production loan program. Now the members opposite – only the 
few members that they had in the last four years would 
remember what they did – they were against that Bill even 
though in the end they did vote for it. But what they wanted, 
Mr. Speaker, was $25 an acre for just a select few. That’s the 
difference in concept between our philosophy and their 
philosophy, Mr. Speaker. We said, it shall be for every farmer 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We put $1 billion . . . 1.4 
billion, to be exact, into the hands of the economy of this 
province. So if everybody is spending $1.4 billion, then all 
people get part of the action and it helps the economy of this 
province. 
 
But under the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, their philosophy 
was just a few dollars to a select few. They would take it in . . . 
The bank would take the money and give them a . . . squeeze 
out a few dollars to sow a crop, and it didn’t create any 
excitement in this province at all. And that is one of the main 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, why we are back here as government – at 
$25 an acre for each and every farmer in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Farmers’ oil royalty refund, that was another program. I’ll just 
go through some of these to remind the people what we did for 
farmers. The farm purchase program; livestock cash advance 
program. 
 
Now as I travel throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, the 
livestock cash advance is one of the greatest things that came 
under the member from Weyburn when he was the minister of 
Agriculture. And I think we owe a lot to him when he brought 
this into this legislature — $125 for cash advance; free interest 
for everyone that has any type of a cow, calf, steer, whatever; 
$25 I believe it was for hogs, and 125 for horses. Now this was 
a great program because it was interest free. It wasn’t a gift; it 
was interest free. And as I talk to farmers, Mr. Speaker, they 
were just really pleased with this program to help keep that 
facility going on their farm, try to keep that cattle operation 
going. 
 
We also had the livestock investment tax credit, Mr. Speaker, 
and the feeder associations loan guarantee. There was a meeting 
out in the member from Thunder Creek’s riding the other night, 
at Tugaske, and some constituents of mine were at that meeting 
and they’re starting up an association there. That’s another 
reason why farmers voted for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The feeder-to-finish market insurance; Farmland Security Act – 
we’re going to be discussing that Bill here probably tomorrow – 
the natural gas distribution – farmers were very pleased. We 
know that when we made that promise in 1982 to bring natural 
gas, we know the farmers were pleased about that program 
because we know that approximately 85 or 90 per cent of the 
farmers in Alberta had gas and we were sitting here with about 
10 per cent,  

and it’s about time that they had a government . . . they knew in 
1982, it was time they had a government that would bring these 
kinds of facilities to their farm so they were equal as their 
counterparts in Alberta. 
 
Our Premier, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Agriculture, has won 
the respect of the federal government in his protection of 
farmers. That is why Ottawa was committed to $1 billion for 
farmers. Some day here last week, I believe it was, when that 
announcement came about the deficiency payment, I almost felt 
sorry for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. I almost felt sorry 
because I haven’t talked to a farmer that isn’t happy and pleased 
to get $450 million in this province. And we had the member 
from Quill Lakes stand up that day – he stood up in this House 
. . . But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people from 
Saskatchewan are not cheering the member from Quill Lakes, 
because it was a sad day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take a moment just to tell a story 
about a neighbour of mine that talked to me on the coffee row 
the first day I was home and after the member from Quill Lakes 
made the statement in the House. He was not a supporter of 
mine but he was a good friend of mine and he said, “I read in 
the paper where the member from Quill Lakes made a statement 
about a miserable payment.” And he said, “Will you show me 
that in Hansard because,” he said, “it will make it a lot easier 
for me to vote for you next time because I’ve had enough of 
those kind of remarks in this legislature.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — And I just want to, before I put this book 
down, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to remind all Saskatchewan 
tonight exactly what he said: 
 

I ask you, Mr. Premier: do you think that the 
miserable 420 million that you extracted to win an 
election . . . 

 
He called it a miserable payment to win an election. 
 
I have never, Mr. Speaker, seen any government that didn’t do 
things to win an election. Naturally we do things to win an 
election, but we do things that people want to so they will vote 
for us. And that is the way it always has been and the way it 
always will be. And if you don’t do it, you’ll end up where they 
are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because it’s right. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Because it’s right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a farmer myself, so was my father, and I’m 
proud to be a farmer. And the farmers in the Arm River 
constituency believe in this Progressive Conservative 
government and the way it stood up for the farmer. One of the 
key reasons farmers believe in this government is because this 
government believes in farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne contains even more 
for Saskatchewan agriculture. When our pioneers came to 
Saskatchewan, they came here because they believed in hard 
work. They had faith and determination. Our pioneers did not 
come here because of big  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

262 
 
 

government and socialism. 
 
One of the reasons I first ran for MLA in 1978 was to work on 
behalf of effective and efficient government. That is why I’m 
pleased that in the Speech from the Throne there is an 
announcement that this government is going to bring in 
legislation to reorganize the Saskatchewan government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative approach to 
government means effective and efficient government. The 
constituents of Arm River will welcome this news that we 
intend to restructure provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan put their faith in 
Progressive Conservative government because they believe in 
farmers, small business, seniors, women, and young people. 
Saskatchewan people want to build, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
people want to look at the future with confidence, and that is 
why they elected a Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the voters gave us a vote of confidence on October 
20th. They re-elected this government because they have faith 
in our plans and programs, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
the leadership to build for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982 the population of Saskatchewan has 
gone to over 1 million people. Our unemployment rate has been 
the lowest in Canada. This government has made job creation a 
number one priority. 
 
The Saskatchewan builds program will create even more new 
jobs in tourism and small businesses. The new department of 
human resources, labour and employment will be essential in 
taking care of the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, job opportunities are important for the future of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, how does all our records compare 
to that of who sit in opposition? They have no new ideas; they 
have no vision for the future; they were rejected and put back in 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are they without policies, they have a 
ship without a captain. The crew of that ship is going to be so 
busy fighting each other over the captain’s job, they will forget 
what their real job is. But, Mr. Speaker, that is their problem, 
their choice, and that is why they sit in opposition. I’d rather 
talk about the excellent record of our Premier. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have a lot to be proud of. This past year 
our pavilion at Expo ’86 was on all accounts one of the best at 
Expo in Vancouver. And I’m very proud of that, and I heard 
some of the members say they wouldn’t even think of wasting 
their money to go there. And I’m proud and proud that 
Saskatchewan people went there and enjoyed themselves and 
said it was the best in all Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is a new growth industry for 
Saskatchewan. The Speech from the Throne announced the new 
programs for tourism development, the new tourism and 
hospitality institute. Mr. Speaker,  

Saskatchewan will become the tourism centre of the prairies. 
That is because this Progressive Conservative government has 
the leadership to build tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at the building of Saskatchewan’s 
economy that this government has done since 1982. Over 
45,000 new jobs for people, hundreds of new businesses, record 
new home construction . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Somebody over there is saying no, Mr. 
Speaker. Well I tell you, this home construction is one of the 
biggest things that’s ever happened in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When I was travelling throughout the province this summer, 
just after we announced that program, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to 
tell a story about the $1,500 program. In fact, this took place in 
Lanigan. Mr. Speaker, this individual, when we were talking in 
a local café said to me, “Are you Mr. Muirhead, the MLA?” 
And I said, “Yes, I am.” “Well,” he said, “Mr. Muirhead, I liked 
many things that the Devine government has brought in, but I’m 
not too pleased about $1,500 for 30 and $40,000 swimming 
pools.” I said to this gentleman, “Do you know of anybody 
building a $40,000 swimming pool?” He said, “Yes we have a 
gentleman that is building one not too far from this area, and 
it’s just about $40,000.” And I said, “Well, I think that’s good 
business on behalf of this government to put up $1,500 to get 
that man to write a cheque for $38,500.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is the difference 
again between the philosophy of this government and the 
philosophy of the opposition. 
 
All of these things did not happen by chance, Mr. Speaker; they 
happened because of planning, vision, and determination of a 
good government. The Progressive Conservative government 
was the people returned to office on October 20th. 
 
Back in October, Mr. Speaker, I visited every community in 
Arm River and many throughout the province. I had a chance to 
talk with hundreds of people in their homes, on the farm, at 
work, and at coffee rows. I’ve always believed in keeping close 
touch with my constituents. That is why I believe they elected 
me as their MLA three times in a row, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I visited with these folks in Arm River, I of 
course heard many comments from them about their hopes, 
their concerns, and their ideas about Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, these people told me time and time again that they 
wanted a government that listens to the people, that has the 
courage to take problems head on and deal with them. And that 
is exactly, Mr. Speaker, what our Premier did these last four 
years. We were under real bad economic times and our Premier 
met them head on. 
 
They told me they wanted to continue helping with such 
programs as farm debt moratorium, the home  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

263 
 
 

improvement program, the mortgage program, etc., etc. But 
they also told me they wanted a program that will build for the 
future, Mr. Speaker, that will work hard to strengthen their 
economy. All these things the people of Arm River told me are 
what this government believes in. That is why I was returned to 
this legislature. 
 
In the next four years we shall see Saskatchewan move ahead 
even more than the last four years. People from the other 
provinces are taking notice of Saskatchewan. They like what 
they see, Mr. Speaker. People are saying Saskatchewan is a 
province where the action is. Mr. Speaker, that action is the 
excellent programs of a Progressive Conservative government – 
this government. The Speech from the Throne spells out our 
plans for the future. They are the solid and practical plans for 
the betterment of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to close with a message to the 
constituents of Arm River. I would like to have this put on the 
record. Eight years ago in October 1978 to be exact, they 
elected me to serve as their MLA for the Arm River 
constituency. Since that time I’ve been honoured to be of 
service as their MLA. No call, no letter, no personal concern of 
theirs has ever been too small for me. They elected me to be 
their MLA and work for them. John Diefenbaker said that your 
constituents always come first. I believe that and they’ve 
always come first to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Arm River constituency means a lot to me. Both 
my wife Helen and I were born in the riding. As a matter of fact 
I was born on the same section that I grew up on and still live 
there today. When they elected me MLA, it was the second time 
in history their MLA was born in this constituency. The other 
MLA was Wilbert McIvor of Girvin. 
 
For all my adult life I have been active in our communities, in 
the church, civic groups and charity groups. Serving the public 
is a priority of my life. When our pioneers came to 
Saskatchewan, they came here because they believed in hard 
work. They had faith and determination. Our pioneers did not 
come here for socialism and big government. Somehow, all 
over North America during the past 30 years socialism has 
worked its way into government. 
 
One of the reason I ran for MLA in 1978 is to work for less 
government and a return to common sense. Back in the old days 
people got together to build church halls, community halls, and 
rinks. They didn’t wait for a government hand-out. I believe we 
must return to the kind of government where it is the servant 
and not the master of the people. The Progressive Conservative 
approach is less government, helping when help is needed, and 
free enterprise. 
 
The Socialist attitude is government control of everything. 
Think about it. Which way of life do you want for yourself, 
your children, and grandchildren? 
 
Four years ago you elected our Premier and the PC government 
because you believed in the future of Saskatchewan. We have 
helped farmers, small businesses, seniors, and young people. 
We did so because we believe in the future – building a greater  

Saskatchewan. 
 
In the election campaign, the one we’ve just gone through, the 
choice was very clear. The NDP, the party of big labour union 
bosses, big government, state ownership, land bank, and 
socialism, or it was, Mr. Speaker; our Premier and the PC 
government – the government that has best responded to 
helping protect the family farm, the government of good 
old-fashioned common sense and virtues, leadership to build for 
the future. We abolished extra billing on health care, provided 
lower gasoline prices, mortgage protection, and help for home 
owners. You wanted a change four years ago. 
 
As the MLA for Arm River, I’m proud of that record. My 
pledge to the constituents of Arm River is to give you the same 
kind of hard work and representation I have given you for the 
past eight years. I give you my word, and my word is good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to say Merry Christmas and a 
Happy New Year to each and every one in this legislature; may 
God bless everyone. And I will be supporting the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, my first words in this 
debate today will have to be, obviously, to congratulate you on 
being elected to the highest elected position in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan can take the view that they 
have collective responsibility and are viewed collectively. The 
opposition the same way; they have a collective responsibility. 
But you sir, have a singular responsibility. And it’s a most 
difficult position to occupy; and I speak with some experience 
on that. I want to offer you every bit of assistance I can in 
carrying out your mandate. I realize it will be difficult at times, 
and I hope that with good feeling on both sides of the Chamber 
we can assist you in that most difficult job to which you have 
been elected. 
 
I want to say a word or two to the new members in the 
Chamber. I don’t know whether I’m in a position to welcome 
them to the Chamber because I’ve been absent for some time; 
however, I do feel that I can say a word or two about this 
Chamber to the new members and hope that over the years that 
they’re in here, if that should be a long time, that they respect 
the rules of the chamber and take part in its activities in a 
serious way. 
 
Their job is to serve their constituents first and their party 
second, and to co-operate in this legislature to be able to serve 
all of the people of Saskatchewan. I want to encourage all new 
members to do that in their term of office. 
 
I was checking the record, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it’s about 
11 or 12 years – through no accident of mine or no fault of mine 
– that I’ve spoken in a throne speech debate in this House. And 
my words now, of course, must be directed to the people of 
Westmount constituency. They have been good enough to 
re-elect me to the legislature  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

264 
 
 

and I want to thank them by groupings. 
 
In Westmount constituency, which is a central constituency, an 
older part of the city which is encompassed on all sides by other 
constituencies which are growing and newer in the age of the 
housing in the area, we have a lot of senior citizens. And I must 
say, Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens of Westmount constituency 
are among my strongest supporters; even in defeat, were among 
my strongest supporters. And I’ve wondered from time to time, 
why is that so? And I think that over the years the senior 
citizens have seen some of the things we’ve done for them, such 
as hospitalization plan, medicare plan, prescription drug plan, 
senior citizens’ home repair program, and many other programs 
– too numerous to mention – that affect directly senior citizens 
of Saskatchewan and Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
In Westmount constituency we have many, many working 
people. And I ask myself again, for what reasons are they 
supporting me and the New Democratic Party – I might say 
almost religiously, Mr. Speaker – over many, many years? And 
the reason is quite simple: the New Democratic party over the 
years has brought in sound labour legislation for the working 
people of Saskatoon Westmount. Progressive health and safety 
legislation has always been the backbone of legislation of New 
Democratic governments. Meaningful minimum wage has 
always been part of the package that New Democratic 
government has brought to the people of Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
In Westmount constituency we have one of the largest technical 
institutes in the province of Saskatchewan. There are a large 
number of students live in the constituency and go to Kelsey 
Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences. They are aware of the 
value of continuing expanding education facilities and 
programs. 
 
And I was interested the other day when the Minister of 
Education was speaking in the House. The way he approached 
the subject was to stand on the shoulders of previous 
governments and wave his hands and say what fine job he was 
doing in education. Well that’s quite easy to do, Mr. Speaker. 
We will see, as time passes, whether the programs of this 
government will truly benefit the young people who are 
attempting to get an education, whether it’s in technical schools 
or in our universities. We will find in due course whether the 
policies that he advocated in the last four and a half years stand 
up to the test of time of 20-odd years of New Democratic 
government which has brought good education to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I regard the voters of Saskatoon 
Westmount constituency as being intelligent voters, and I am 
pleased to be here today as their member in the legislature. 
 
Four and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker, I received a Dear John 
letter. And it was most interesting because it was on the 
letterhead of the province of Saskatchewan, the Premier’s 
office. 
 
(2045) 

And he was telling me in this letter that he was pleased that I 
was able to provide a certain amount of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan over the years. And I must admit, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at the time I read the letter. I read it with mixed 
emotions since I had just been defeated. However, since it was 
the Premier of the province that sent it to me, I set it aside and 
saved it. 
 
However, in the Dear John letter, for those that are unaware of 
what a Dear John letter is, that’s a letter that is sent, the story is 
said, to a soldier who had gone off to war and his intended in 
due course had grown weary of waiting and had sent a Dear 
John letter to him which was telling him that he no longer stood 
in affection of that person. 
 
Now over the next period of time after that letter, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I watched this government begin their term of office. 
And they started almost immediately with the water purifiers in 
the Legislative Building so the cabinet ministers could have 
clear water to drink. I guess that was to allow them to make 
good decision on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I watched with interest the unjustified mass firings by the 
transgression team that this government set up at the change of 
government And I watched government extravagance grow 
upon government extravagance. And within six months, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I started getting requests from the people in 
Saskatoon Westmount area. The intelligent voters of Saskatoon 
Westmount were saying to me, run again John. And I took them 
at their word. And I ran for ward 4 in the civic scene. And let 
me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ward 4 completely 
encompasses Westmount constituency except for two polls. I 
ran in that election and was elected with I believe it was the 
second highest vote of all the aldermen that got elected that 
year. 
 
Now I don’t suppose it was because they were electing me. I 
think the people of Saskatoon Westmount, in ward 4, In their 
own way wanted to send some kind of a message. They were 
seeing what I was seeing. They were seeing the government 
extravagance. They were seeing the firings. They were seeing 
the start of a kind of corrupt practice in the government. Now 
that is unfortunate. 
 
However, I spent some time in city council, and I want to say a 
couple of words about that a little later, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But soon the people, these intelligent voters in Westmount 
constituency were saying to me, run again, John. Run again. So 
I did. And we had, I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the largest 
nominating convention ever in the history of Saskatoon 
Westmount constituency. And when the votes were counted, 
after the election, I had obtained a substantial number of those 
votes, and that’s why I’m here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the voters in Westmount constituency have asked me to 
bring you a message in this Chamber – as we’ve all been asked 
to bring a message to the Legislative Assembly. The message 
that the people of Westmount have said to tell this government 
is that they don’t like their extravagances; they don’t like their 
debt; they don’t like their expensive advertising. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

265 
 
 

And I just want to take a moment or two to deal with some of 
that advertising, because I’ve brought some samples with me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just picked one day, and this was in the 
spring of 1986. There was discussion and rumour that there was 
an election due and the advertising in the daily paper was 
mounting each day. And on March the 22nd . . . I just cut out all 
the ads in the Star-Phoenix and here they are here. Oh, there is 
several, and I didn’t get them all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
there’s a numerous amount of them. And if you add them up it 
would – and I assume they appeared in all the daily papers in 
Saskatchewan – the total would be well over $25,000 of 
advertising for one day. And just in the newspapers. At the 
same time this was going on in the newspapers it was going on 
in radio and television as well. And the people in Westmount 
constituency said, we don’t like this. 
 
The first ad shows the MLA for Saskatoon Centre, Mr. Jack 
Sandberg – he was an MLA then – and I was trying to figure 
out why would he appear in a government ad with regard to a 
corporation in Saskatoon. Then I got thinking if I’d seen 
something about Mr. Sandberg a while before. And it was that 
in late ’85 the Premier had appointed him the vice-chairman in 
charge of urban activities. In other words, getting Conservatives 
elected in urban Saskatchewan. Now I’m curious, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, whether the Premier has had Mr. Sandberg into his 
office to have a talk with him about how he did on his project in 
urban Saskatchewan. So this is some of the advertising, and 
there is much, much more of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Here’s another one. This one appeared in certain newspapers all 
over Saskatchewan . . . And this is a very multi-coloured ad. 
Both sides. Very expensive. And this appeared in the Meadow 
Lake Progress, the Lloydminster Daily Times, the North 
Battleford News-Optimist, The Nipawin Journal, The Melfort 
Journal and Advance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know, I 
know, you want me to take it as read. But I want to put this on 
the record, all the newspapers in Saskatchewan that this ad 
appeared in. The Tisdale Recorder and Parkland Review, The 
Kindersley West Central Crossroads, Yorkton This Week, Swift 
Current – The Sun and Grassland Advertiser, Weyburn Review 
and Booster, The Estevan Mercury and Southeast Trader 
(Express) in the week of March 24th, 1986, right at the height 
of the feeling about the province that there would be an election 
in Saskatchewan. And I would suspect this one advertisement, 
on one day, would cost well in excess of $75,000 of people’s – 
taxpayers’ money, and the taxpayers in Westmount 
constituency did not appreciate it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did not 
appreciate it at all. 
 
There was much more advertising. Of course that was the 
spring an election did not come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. However, 
we’re moving into September and it looks like time for some 
more advertising by the Conservative Party. And I’ve pulled 
just a few of the ads. Now these ads were not occurring alone, 
without any support. They had support ads on radio and 
television at the same time that the newspaper ads were on. 
Here they were, page after page after page and getting bigger 
and bigger as we got closer to the time for the election, all paid 
for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, running into thousands, if 
not millions, of dollars. And the people in Westmount 
constituency did not appreciate their hard-earned  

taxpayers’ dollars being used for this kind of advertising. 
 
And then we come up to just two days before the election was 
called. We’d been running continuous ads in all the newspaper 
in Saskatchewan – radio, television. Then came the one on the 
upgrader – a full insert into the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix – 
probably appeared in all the other papers in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And it has some very interesting pictures. I’m 
not going to spend much time dealing with it, but I would 
suspect that the advertising budget for the upgrader – and I 
think this is a fairly close estimate of the size of that advertising 
budget – would exceed, in the public relations department 
dealing with this, would exceed $1 million. You could watch 
television ads pretty well any time you turned on your 
television – the upgrader, the housing program, other programs. 
The people of Westmount constituency didn’t appreciate their 
hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars being spent in this way, and I 
suppose that’s part of the reason they decided to send me back 
to the legislature, to bring that message to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Westmount constituency didn’t appreciate the 
conservative government of this province supporting Brian 
Mulroney when he was trying to de-index senior citizens’ 
pensions and it was easy as could be to go out in my 
constituency and have dozens of people remark on this 
particular subject to me during that time it was before the 
public. 
 
The workers of my constituency, leaving aside the senior 
citizens, the workers of my constituency didn’t like your 
changes in labour legislation in Saskatchewan. They didn’t like 
it at all. I suppose that’s why they sent me back to represent 
them in the legislature. The people in Saskatoon Westmount did 
not appreciate the fact that the government took away their 
property rebates and grants. They didn’t appreciate that at all, 
and they didn’t appreciate any of the things that the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan didn’t like either. So they didn’t like it 
either – the working people didn’t like it. 
 
Now what about the students in Saskatoon Westmount? Well I 
must thank the member for Kindersley for appearing at Kelsey 
Institute during the election campaign. It was wonderful to have 
him there, and I would welcome him any time he wants to come 
back to Kelsey Institute. And they are still, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they are still on the same track. The throne speech 
says: 
 

. . . important in the development of people will be the 
work of the Departments of Education and Advanced 
Education and Manpower. 
 

And they go on to say: 
 

My Government is committed to enabling each of the 
province’s educational institutions to play its role in 
developing excellence. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the students of Kelsey Institute, 
before the election, didn’t appreciate the cut of $1.3 million in 
the Kelsey Institute budget; they didn’t appreciate the order that 
came from on high that the staff should be cut by 20, to be 
obtained by allowing attrition  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

266 
 
 

to take place in the staff, which is a shotgun approach to 
reducing staff and one of the worst ways that staff could be 
reduced. And they didn’t appreciate the consequential cuts in 
classes that occurred because of this. They don’t appreciate it 
now after the election, either. 
 
None of the people of Westmount constituency appreciate your 
patronage list, and it’s been referred to in other times in this 
Chamber. We have the name of Dutchak, and we have the name 
of Mr. Pringle, and we have Mr. Hill, and we’ve got the ones 
left over from the previous set of appointments – Mr. Petersen. 
If you run through, there’s a huge list. The people of Saskatoon 
Westmount did not appreciate that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now this record of patronage, extravagant spending, huge debt, 
wasteful government, and Crown advertising, special deals for 
special people, was followed by a headline in the Star-Phoenix. 
And this headline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, occurred right in the 
middle of the election campaign. And the headline was, “RCMP 
mistake Devine aides for robbers.” That’s easy. And I was out 
on the campaign trail, and the members opposite will be 
interested in some of the comments I got. Some people said, 
well, I’m sure it wasn’t a mistake. And some people said, well, 
leave the aides alone; why don’t you go right to the top after 
what’s been happening in Saskatchewan? 
 
So the people of Saskatoon Westmount I’m afraid, like some 
other people, became a bit cynical about some of the things the 
government was doing. And that’s one of the reasons they 
probably changed their mind in Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
I listened to the member from Arm River speaking just now. 
And he said how wonderful it was in Arm River – I believe 
Arm River constituency where a person that was building a 
$40,000 swimming pool was able to get $1,500 from the 
government, and that, in fact, caused him to spend the $40,000. 
Well, it’s an interesting theory, and this government has 
practised it before – it’s called a trickle-down theory. And the 
ideas is if you throw enough money at the top, come of it will 
trickle down to the bottom. And I’ve never heard it expounded 
more adequately than a document that was just circulated in 
Westmount constituency within about the last month. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who did that? Who authored it? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I don’t know whether I want to say 
who did this, but this document was circulated in Westmount 
constituency, and I’m going to quote directly from it, word for 
word: 
 

The poor do not get poorer while the rich get richer. 
When the rich get richer, the poor get more and better 
paying jobs and services. When the poor get poorer, 
the rich get less rich. 

 
This is a direct quote from somebody expounding Conservative 
policy in Westmount constituency. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was it? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now I wouldn’t want to mention that 
person’ name because they’re not here to defend  

themselves today. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now this particular document, the throne speech, is a difficult 
document to deal with because it doesn’t say very much, Mr. 
Speaker, but I do want to deal . . . I said I would refer to civic 
government because I spent three years in civic government, 
had an opportunity to watch civic government up close, to see 
what decisions they had to make, what pressure they were under 
in making those decisions. And I know this will be of special 
interest to the Minister of Finance because he will have to deal 
with this problem, and I hope he determines a different way of 
dealing with the problem than he has over the last number of 
years, or his predecessor before him. 
 
And I have here the assistance received by the city of Saskatoon 
under various cost-shared programs. And I listen to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs over there the other day saying how well they 
were doing by the cities and how appreciative the cities were of 
them. Well I’m here to tell him that that’s not altogether true. 
 
I have the cost sharing and these are the items: urban assistance, 
transit capital, transit operating, RAP program (regional 
assistance program), community capital, culture and recreation 
and so on down the line, library and so forth. And I have a 
period of time from ’78 up to ’85, and I want to put these 
figures on the record to show that the urban governments, 
whether they’re urban or rural governments, as long as they are 
municipal governments, they are not satisfied with this 
government. 
 
In the period 1978 to ’79 under a New Democratic government, 
the grants rose by over $1 million for the city of Saskatoon – 
over $1 million. In the period ’79 to ’80, those same grants, in 
total increased $6.6 million. In the period ’80 to ’81, those 
grants rose another $3.8 million. Then came the change in 
government – 1982. This is when we got a new minister of 
Finance. Now he’s had a lot of trouble with figures over the last 
few years, so much so that that someone else was put in charge 
of the figures. And in his first year the grants to the city of 
Saskatoon in total dropped $3.6 million. Then in the following 
year they dropped $649,000 – wasn’t much drop that year. 
 
Then in the next year they dropped another $2.5 million just in 
the city of Saskatoon. And it happened because in the first year 
of office this government said, we’re going to abandon that 
formula that a New Democratic government brought in which 
would allow you to plan ahead on your municipal financing. 
We’re going to abandon that; we’re going to freeze the grants; 
you’re not going to get more than 7 per cent increase this year. 
And the second year they said, you’re not going to get more 
than 5 per cent increase. And the third year they said, you’re 
going to get zero. Wow! And the drop in grants to the city of 
Saskatoon over this period of time, when this government was 
putting the screws to urban financing, was $5.69 million. 
 
The city of Saskatoon during that period tightened their belt 
every year while this government tightened the screws on them. 
The city of Saskatoon emptied virtually every reserve that they 
had. And this government has not  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

267 
 
 

got their message yet and I suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because of the imprudent financing that this government has 
carried on, in the next budget the situation will be just as grim 
for Saskatoon city and other urban centres in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is not good enough. And I think that’s part of the 
reason that the people of Saskatoon Westmount decided that 
they should send me back to the legislature to tell the 
government this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a tough choice to make. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I can imagine it was a tough choice to 
make, as the member for Souris-Cannington says. 
 
And while the city of Saskatoon . . . There was some tough 
decisions made, but the voters didn’t have a tough decision to 
make in Westmount constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now there’s something else that’s been 
causing the city of Saskatoon concern, and the House Leader 
for the government cannot accuse me of engineering this, but 
it’s the business about low competitive bids. And this happened 
since I was out of city council so that I in no way influenced it 
one way or the other. But the end result of this is that the city of 
Saskatoon is saying to the Premier of Saskatchewan and his 
government, please keep your nose out of our government 
because the Government of Saskatchewan, in accordance with 
what appears to be a policy, is telling the city of Saskatoon 
when it comes to contracts that are tendered that they should not 
take low bid, but they should take something other than low bid. 
And this has been central to municipal governments, urban 
governments, for many years – that unless there’s a very, very 
good reason, you stick to low bids. 
 
And the question that comes up in my mind was, who opposes 
this? The Government of Saskatchewan opposes it. Now how is 
in favour of low tender getting the job? Well, the Saskatoon 
Construction Association is; and they said so during the time 
the Government of Saskatchewan was interfering in the civic 
government. The Saskatchewan construction Association said 
so during the time the Government of Saskatchewan was 
interfering in the business of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And I just issue a warning, if the government needs any further 
warning, that they should cease and desist in interfering with 
the operations of the government such as the city of Saskatoon. 
And I’m sure other civic governments would like to be able to 
say the same thing. But unfortunately the budget’s coming up, 
and they don’t want to suffer any more than this government’s 
made them suffer over the last three years on municipal 
financing. So therefore they probably won’t be saying too much 
about it. 
 
I did in my comments, Mr. Speaker, want to say a few words 
about unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
suffice to say, it’s become a very serious problem – and 
unfortunately I may have lost a note here. I’ve been going by 
memory more than some  

people have in their speeches, Mr. Speaker, you will note. 
 
The gist of what I had to say about unemployment in 
Saskatchewan was that the unemployment, the creation of 
employment in the economy of Saskatchewan, has been 
insufficient. And I have a quotation from the construction 
association indicating that the record of job creation by the 
Government of Saskatchewan has been dismal. And this is right 
from the construction association. And this is one of the things 
that the people of Saskatoon Westmount feel the most, is the 
serious situation with regard to unemployment. 
 
And I implore the government to please do something about it. 
They’ve in the past done great amounts of advertising with 
regard to what they’re going to do on employment. And I notice 
about a year ago they were running all kinds of ads relating to 
winter works. This was in the fall of 1985. And they started the 
true blue, Tory blue machine ads here. And I just collected a 
few of them. They started way back in October 23,’85; and 
October 26, ’85; and again December 7, ’85. And this is not an 
exclusive list; there were many more of them. 
 
Talking about our winter works program, we’re now half-way 
through December; the unemployment situation is more serious 
than it was, at this time. The only thing that’s changed, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the election is over. The election’s over now. 
No need to wave the blue flag because the election’s over now. 
 
The unemployment figures that I was referring to earlier are a 
matter of serious concern. From October, 1986, to November, 
1986, the number of employed has dropped by 15,000; the 
number of unemployed has dropped by 4,000 in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Job creation is not good enough. 
 
The consequences or the reason for this is, in part, Northern 
Telecom lays off 34; CPR lays off 145; Cominco, winter 
shut-down which is in effect now or very shortly. The prospects 
for young people in jobs is dismal – this is not my world; it’s 
someone else’s. I said I had the article from the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association commenting on the government’s 
job-creation record. 
 
Here’s what they say. This is their September, 1986 review of 
the construction association of Saskatchewan. Under labour 
force growth they say, the second worst in Canada; under 
unemployment rate they say, third behind Manitoba and 
Ontario; on job growth they say, second slowest in Canada. 
This is the report of the construction association which 
members opposite attempt to gloss over at every opportunity, to 
suggest there are no problems in this area. 
 
I say: where are the programs that are going to create 
employment this winter? Many of the people in Saskatoon 
Westmount and other constituencies in this province face a 
bleak winter and a bleak Christmas because there are no jobs. 
During the election campaign I talked to many people who had 
not worked at their trades for one and two and longer number of 
years. This is unfortunate. 
 
I think the government has to address this. They have to  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

268 
 
 

admit that their record in job creation has been dismal and they 
should be doing something about it because the people in 
Saskatoon Westmount are crying out for an answer to this 
problem, and something must be done. 
 
It’s unfortunate that I have to spend time talking about a serious 
problem like this. I would have thought that it was easily 
recognized and action would be taken at this time, but 
apparently none is prepared and none is going to happen. No 
action is going to happen. So it will be a long, cold winter in 
Saskatchewan for these people. I would suggest while the 
unemployment in Saskatoon city went up last month from 9 per 
cent to 10 per cent, in Westmount constituency it would be 
approaching 15 per cent or worse. 
 
That’s why the people of Saskatoon Westmount were 
dissatisfied with their voice in this Chamber and wanted 
somebody to come here and tell the government, or take action 
themselves to try and get more jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan who, through no fault of their own, are 
unemployed. 
 
I would have found it easy, Mr. Speaker, to support the 
amendment which was before us earlier today. However, due to 
the many things that this government has left out of the throne 
speech which are serious for the people of Saskatoon 
Westmount, I cannot support the motion before us. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with all 
other members of the Assembly, I’d like to join with them in 
congratulating you on your election to the office of Speaker. I 
would also like to congratulate the mover and seconder. And I 
would like to take the opportunity to congratulate the many 
speakers in this Assembly who gave their maiden speeches. I 
think all did a very creditable job and I look forward to a few 
more years of debate with many of the members. And I think it 
should be lively, to say the least. 
 
(2115) 
 
Lively it may be, Mr. Speaker, but obviously many of the new 
members on the other side did not bring new ideas to the 
Assembly. We’ve simply seen a rehash, over the last few days 
of the debate, of what we had heard over the last four years. 
 
And I was somewhat disappointed that with the number of new 
faces that perhaps the occasional new idea would at least bubble 
to the surface. Unfortunately that did not happen. 
 
We had the member from Regina Rosemont, newly elected, 
delivering to this Assembly the rehash and a recommitment of 
the land bank. Now surely, surely, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite know that the people of Saskatchewan rejected the 
land bank in 1982. And people of rural Saskatchewan rejected it 
in spades in 1986. And I’m a little surprised. I’m a little 
surprised for a party that did so poorly in rural Saskatchewan, 
so poorly that the only ideas that they brought forward to deal 
with the very serious problems of agriculture was the  

re-institution of the land bank which was part of the problem, 
the cause of the problems in agriculture today. And then we 
have the token farmer from Humboldt, the member from 
Humboldt, who stood up and called for a needs test. 
 
Now the people on this side of the House, and most fair-minded 
people in Saskatchewan know the difficulties that farmers face. 
They don’t need to be told to have another needs study to find 
out the problems of agriculture. Perhaps it exemplifies the 
results of the last election that when members opposite still 
really don’t know the problems facing agriculture, and 
obviously they have no solutions. 
 
They asked for the federal government to take some action to 
lower interest rates. And yet it is the province of Saskatchewan 
that have the lowest interest rates for farmers of any 
jurisdictions in North America. 
 
As I said, it’s surprising to me that members opposite did not 
pick up a signal in the most recent election and realize that the 
land bank is dead as far as the farmers and the people of rural 
Saskatchewan are concerned. And those that wish to resurrect it 
will be doomed to losing every single seat in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We get another example, Mr. Speaker, of 
the old ideas. They’ve opposed every project – and we went 
through the litany over and over again of Weyerhaeuser – how 
much they oppose it; the opposition to any packing plants in the 
province, they’ve opposed those. I suppose the surprise came 
from the new member from Saskatoon Centre who has decided 
in her initial speech to this Assembly that now we must 
question seriously the employment value of high-tech industries 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now Saskatoon, as a city, benefits by high-tech industries in 
terms of employment, jobs, opportunities, more than any other 
community in this province. And here we have a newly elected 
member from Saskatoon. We have to question seriously the 
employment value of high-tech industries. You know it reminds 
me, Mr. Speaker, that at the time of the industrial revolution 
there were some people that wouldn’t accept change, and they 
were called Luddites. And what they used to do is they would 
take sledge-hammers to the new machines that were being 
invented, and they tried single-handedly to stop the industrial 
revolution. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen through this throne speech 
is the New Democratic Party have become the 20th century 
Luddites. That is really what’s happened. They’ve opposed 
every new project for economic diversification and now, right 
out of Saskatoon, the heart of Saskatoon, one of the members 
stands up and says we don’t want the high-tech industries. We 
don’t want that because it means change and it means 
uncertainty and perhaps they don’t have a long-term life span. 
 
But there better become a realization and a recognition of the 
members opposite that the world has changed out  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

269 
 
 

there, that there is a new society and it’s based on new rules. It 
requires imagination, and it requires the ability to take some 
chances, and it requires governments to respond in new ways to 
the problems of the 1990s and into the 21st century. 
Saskatchewan people have always shown a willingness to make 
those adjustments. The province basically was created, as the 
throne speech indicated, in a time of great change. This 
government has the confidence that the people of Saskatchewan 
will take the new opportunities in the new society and respond 
and build and develop and change, and continue to look for new 
opportunities. 
 
But I would like to make another comment. The members 
opposite . . . And I hope the delusion continues, because they 
say that they had no urban-rural split, that they really did well in 
rural Saskatchewan. As matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if you 
listen closely to the speeches, the members opposite believe that 
they won every single rural riding in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They talked about how close it would be. Oh 
and only if, and only if, and only if – they would have won 
every seat in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me quote one of the leadership hopefuls of the members 
opposite now who doesn’t have a seat in the legislature, the 
former member from Shaunavon, who stood up after the 
election and talked about how he had the biggest percentage 
increase of any member in the New Democratic Party, any 
candidate in the New Democratic Party in the last election in 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s what he said and that’s his 
campaign theme, and probably many of you have heard it 
already. And I see some heads nodding, so I’m assuming that 
the message is out. He said that he had a 5 per cent increase in 
the popular vote. It was the largest increase in the vote of the 
NDP in the last election in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, I went back and checked because I thought it was a little 
high. It turns out, though, he was right. It turns out he did have 
the biggest increase, and it was 5 per cent. Then I took a look 
how many votes that was. And do you know how many votes 
increase that member had in Shaunavon, the candidate in 
Shaunavon? Seventy-one votes – 71 votes as what the member 
in Shaunavon had, and he’s going around telling everybody that 
was the biggest increase – the biggest percentage increase – that 
percentage increase turned out to be some 71 votes. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the speeches made by members 
opposite, by the Leader of the Opposition . . . I’m quoting for 
the hon. member from Saskatoon – who looks somewhat 
surprised that this statement would be made – Mr. Eisler’s 
column where he is quoting Mr. Lingenfelter who said that he 
had the biggest percentage increase in rural Saskatchewan at 5 
per cent. No one mentions it was only 71 votes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt, he said that we 
haven’t tried to do anything for the women in rural 
Saskatchewan. That we’ve ignored the farm wife. I suggest that 
the commitment of this government to a Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan – which is the first anywhere in North America, the first 
voluntary plan with a government matching contribution in any 
jurisdiction  

in the world – will do much to give some financial security 
upon retirement for the women in rural Saskatchewan. And I 
suggest this commitment by this government and by our 
Premier indicates that – at least for most fair-minded people, as 
they recognize it, see it as a sincere effort to try and help those 
in rural Saskatchewan have some financial security upon 
retirement. 
 
We’ve had criticisms by the members opposite that the 
government is into irrigation. Well obviously we have a totally 
different philosophy. We believe we should be diversifying in 
rural Saskatchewan. The NDP – and the new members I’m 
talking about, Mr. Speaker, not the old ones that you would 
expect to rehash what they’ve been saying for four years – the 
new members are the ones coming out opposed to new 
programs, new initiatives like irrigation for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We did have a sense from the members opposite of, you know 
we’ve been there before. We used to have in the 1960’s, the 
“ban the bombers.” Well we now have the 1980’s equivalent of 
the “ban the bombers.” And I see the member from Regina 
Rosemont is proudly holding out his ban-the-bomb label again. 
What do we have now? We have the call for the nuclear free 
zone. 
 
Now certainly no one supports the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. But let me tell you the record of the members 
opposite. They call for a freeze on cruise missile testing and yet 
I happen to have before me an agreement signed: one, there was 
a former member by the name of J.H. Brockelbank. That name 
may be familiar to some of you. But that agreement was signed 
by the former CCF-NDP government giving part of the 
province of Saskatchewan up to missile testing – the Primrose 
weapons range. That agreement was signed, not by the 
Conservatives, not by the Liberals, not by the Social Credit – 
that was signed by the CCF-NDP. 
 
And if you think that was past history, it was just CCF, let me 
tell you there is an addendum. There is an addendum to that 
agreement giving more time for cruise missile testing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That was signed in April of 1981 by 
the former minister of intergovernmental affairs, the new 
member from Riversdale, one Mr. Romanow, extending and 
allowing cruise missile testing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
That was signed by the New Democratic Party, not by anyone 
else, and renewed in 1981. 
 
It makes you wonder when here on the one hand they want a 
nuclear free zone, which means of course that you get out of 
NATO and that our obligations as a country to NATO are 
ended. On the one hand they complain because they say that the 
government didn’t support Manitoba on the Bristol Aerospace 
controversy. On the one hand they want to get out of NATO. 
On the other hand they want the weapons being built in 
Manitoba. Please, please, for the sake of a rational debate, 
would you tell us where you really stand on this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I may remind the hon. 
members as well that when they want to get out – and  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

270 
 
 

we’ve heard the speeches again about no more nuclear mining 
or uranium mining in the province – that it was the New 
Democratic Party that signed the agreements with COGEMA, 
not the Progressive Conservatives; that it was that government 
when it was in office that signed virtually all of the uranium 
mining agreements. 
 
So again, we may hear the debates, Mr. Speaker; we may have 
heard the rehash from the new people. And I think all of us will 
be disappointed, and were disappointed, that here was an 
opportunity for newly elected members to divorce themselves, 
to divorce themselves and come with a clean slate with some 
new ideas, some new programs, some new initiatives – and all 
we got was the same old thing. Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
Devine 
Muller 
Duncan 
McLeod 
Andrew 
Berntson 
Lane 
Taylor 
Smith 
Swan 
Muirhead 
Maxwell 
Schmidt 
Hodgins 
Gerich 
Hepworth 
Hardy 

Klein 
Meiklejohn 
Pickering 
Martin 
Martineau 
Sauder 
Johnson 
Hopfner 
Swenson 
Baker 
Toth 
Gleim 
Neudorf 
Gardner 
Kopelchuk 
Saxinger 
Britton 

— 34 
 

Nays 
Blakeney 
Prebble 
Brockelbank 
Shillington 
Koskie 
Romanow 
Tchorzewski 
Rolfes 
Mitchell 
Simard 
Solomon 

Kowalsky 
Atkinson 
Anguish 
Lyons 
Lautermilch 
Trew 
Smart 
Van Mulligen 
Koenker 
Goodale 
 

— 21 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of regular 
motions. I move, seconded by my seat-mate, the hon. member 
from Kindersley: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such 
members of the Assembly as are of the Executive 
Council. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly pursuant to rule 84 hereby 
appoints the committee of finance to consider the 
supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider 
the ways and means of raising the supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 – An Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Government in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading 
of The Government Organization Act, I don’t intend to provide 
the House with a scholarly lecture on the historical 
development, Mr. Speaker, of the executive government in the 
British parliamentary system. Nor do I consider it necessary to 
speak at length on the legal and constitutional relationship of 
the legislature and the executive arm of government. 
 
Members are well aware of these concepts, Mr. Speaker. And 
what is important to reiterate, however, is that the executive is 
responsible to this Assembly and through it to the people for its 
actions. 
 
The policies and programs implemented by the executive, under 
the authority granted by the Assembly in legislation, are what 
really matter. It is on those policies and programs that the 
government is questioned by the opposition and for which the 
executive is answerable to the people. 
 
Secondly, the Lieutenant Governor has asked the leader of the 
party in whom he believes the confidence of the House rests to 
form a government. In the British parliamentary tradition, the 
Premier then calls on individuals whose confidence he has 
obtained to serve as ministers in his government. It is to these 
mend and women that the Premier then assigns responsibilities 
for carrying out on his behalf the duties and powers assigned by 
statute through this Assembly. 
 
These two principles, Mr. Speaker, form the basis of this Bill. 
Firstly, this Bill permits this Assembly to address its efforts to 
the development of policies and programs. This Act would 
delegate to the executive the power to determine how the duties 
and powers given to it by the Assembly will be carried out. It 
does not give new powers to the cabinet. It does not permit the 
expenditure of new money, nor does this Act even allow the 
re-allocation of moneys for new purposes without the consent 
of this Assembly. What this Bill will do is eliminate the need 
for the legislature to consider government structure in its finest 
detail. 
 
In the past, weeks of time . . . weeks of time of this House have 
been taken up dealing with volumes of legislation required to 
effect the re-organization of the structures of government. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

271 
 
 

Under this Act, regulations establishing, disestablishing, or 
modifying structure of government departments will be tabled 
in the House for review by the regulations committee of the 
legislature. 
 
Secondly, the Bill recognizes the prerogatives of the Premier to 
determine the mechanisms of delivery of his government’s 
programs and policies. Because the Premier chooses his 
ministers and sets their duties, he must have the mechanisms 
available to assign those duties as quickly and as early as 
possible. 
 
This Bill provides the tools to permit the machinery of 
government to keep pace with the changing demands. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill is not a radical departure in our British 
constitutional tradition. Similar legislation has been in place in 
great Britain since 1946; in Ottawa since 1970. This Bill is 
based on The Executive Government Organization Act in our 
neighbouring province of Manitoba. That Act was brought in by 
the Schreyer administration in 1970. 
 
Many of the provisions of this Act are carried over unchanged 
from The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
Sections 13 and 21 of this Bill are taken from many existing 
departmental statutes. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move 
second reading of an Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, just a few words on this Bill 
before I beg leave to adjourn the debate, because quite frankly 
the government House Leader led us to believe this Bill would 
be debated tomorrow night or Wednesday, so we’re not quite 
prepared for the full debate. But I think there are some basic 
reactions to it which we can make. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the first basic reaction that must be made, 
that this is typical – this Bill is – typical of everything that the 
Devine government, the PC government has been doing since 
it’s been elected in 1982. It talks once way, but it acts another 
way. It talks in terms of democracy and in consultation and 
openness. It talks about going around and listening to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan – the farmers and the business 
men. It says that it believes in an open, democratic process and 
yet what does it do, Mr. Speaker? It introduces this particular 
Bill which is the antithesis of that democracy; is the antithesis 
of that consultation because it empowers the cabinet of this 
government to virtually do anything and everything that it 
wants to do to any department of government at any time that it 
sees fit to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are three or four very bad fundamental 
features about this Bill which ought to be brought to the 
attention of the House and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. One point I’ve already made, and that is the 
conglomeration of power. I ask the back-benchers of the PC 
party opposite there, who probably have not even seen this bill, 
I ask some of you to take a look at this Bill, and particularly 
sections 5 to 12, and ask yourselves whether that is consistent 
with the policies of what you  

think you stand for? Take a look at sections 5 and 12. Don’t be 
caught . . . don’t be captured by what the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier tell you this Bill stands for. What I ask you to 
do, Mr. Speaker, for all those in the back benches is to take a 
look at section 5 and section 12. And I tell you, perhaps maybe 
the Minister of Finance would be well advised as well to look at 
section 5 and section 12 as well, because he obviously hasn’t 
read it either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, take a look at section 5. I urge 
you to take a look at section 5 and section 12. What does 
section 5 empower this government to do? The following: 
 
The Cabinet may, on the recommendation of the President of 
the Executive Council (that’s the Premier as we know), do the 
following: it may assign to any minister any power, duty, or 
function conferred in law; transfer any other power conferred to 
a minister currently; it may transfer any power from ministers 
to within departments; it may transfer an Act or a portion of an 
Act; it may also transfer to the minister the administration of 
part of the moneys or all of the moneys with respect to the 
particular Act. 
 
(2145) 
 
Under section 12, Mr. Speaker, to compound this power, you 
see here the cabinet having the additional authority, again on 
the advice of the Premier, to establish, to continue, to vary any 
of the objects and purposes of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. He 
doesn’t have the power to sort of assign responsibilities from 
minister to minister; that we could perhaps accept as a 
legitimate power. 
 
No, what this legislation does is it allows, by order in council, 
the cabinet, on the recommendation of the Premier, to establish 
new objects and new purposes of the legislation, Mr. Speaker – 
not responsibilities as to who should be carrying them out, but 
new purposes and new objects. And on top of that, I may 
disestablish the department or any department. Mind you, I 
might say, Mr. Speaker, judging by some of the performance of 
the ministers opposite, there might be a strong argument made 
for disestablishing the departments if for no other reason but to 
doing away with the ministers’ jobs and the way they have been 
performing it. But this is a very large acquisition of power. 
 
I ask the hon. member from Biggar whether he’s looked at 
section 12 or not. You should take a look to tell you . . . and ask 
yourself this question: is that what the PC party stands for in 
terms of democracy? Do you believe that cabinet – do you 
believe that the Minister of Finance – do you love and trust the 
Minister of Finance so much that he can come forward with an 
order in council and do away with any of the government on the 
recommendation of the president of the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — At least your rhetoric says one thing, but if 
you vote this way, obviously your actions take the  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

272 
 
 

opposite point of view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an overkill of the largest magnitude. 
This, Mr. Speaker, permits the Premier of the cabinet, the 
president of the Executive Council and the cabinet, to do all of 
these things. And it purports to do it by, I say, order in council. 
 
I want to make one other observation before I take my place, 
Mr. Speaker. I think not only is it politically insensitive and 
unjust; not only do I think that it highlights the duplicitous 
nature of the government, the rhetoric about democracy and 
consultation and openness on the one hand, but the action of 
working behind the back rooms of cabinet on the other hand; 
not only does it do that, Mr. Speaker, but I think it is an illegal 
Bill, it’s an unlawful Bill, because what this Bill purports also 
to do, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill also purports to do is, it 
purports by order in council to do away something which has 
been enacted by this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I think that surely must be a very dubious legal proposition, a 
proposition that says that a cabinet in back rooms, by regulatory 
power and order in council, can “disestablish an entire 
department.” That means, Mr. Speaker, in effect, do away a 
piece of legislative enactment. 
 
I don’t believe that that’s the way the law works. I don’t even 
believe that the Minister of Finance, when he was former 
minister of Justice, would have subscribed to that policy. A 
regulation is a subsidiary authority. It is subsidiary to the 
statute. The statute defines the terms and conditions by which 
the order in council can be enacted, and what we’re having here 
in this Bill is order in council authority to do away with 
legislation which has been brought forward to this House and 
validly passed and enacted by all the members of this House. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is surely an unlawful provision in 
the width and the scope and the depth, as proposed by this PC 
administration, and ought to be beaten by all the members of 
the House, including some of the back-bench members opposite 
if they . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at first blush some members of the public 
might assume that all that this Bill tries to do is what the Hon. 
Deputy Premier would have this House believe that it does, 
namely sort of effect some forms of efficiency. We’re all for 
efficiency in its administration. This government, more than 
any government, I suppose, in Canada could become more 
efficient and start cutting back on the numbers of ministers and 
start using their functions and purposes more wisely. Goodness 
knows everybody would agree to that. But there’s no reason, 
Mr. Speaker, for doing it in an omnibus Bill which will for ever 
more, unless and until repealed, permit the president of the 
Executive Council – that means the Premier – to effect that 
efficiency, holus-bolus, if not on a daily basis, certainly on a 
regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason for that is they don’t have to be  

accountable. They don’t have to come to this House with a Bill 
and justify the reasons for the changes and the objects of that 
Bill. There are many pieces of legislation which have important 
objects, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this House ought to 
be aware of. 
 
For example, the Department of Advanced Education and 
Manpower. This department is charged, among other things, to 
look after the question of academic freedom of universities. 
Section 9 – that is a mandate of the minister charged with the 
responsibility for Advanced Education and Manpower. It’s right 
here in statutory provision. 
 
If this Bill is passed, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the cabinet 
can change that section in the back rooms of the cabinet room 
without any accountability by anybody on this side of the 
House. 
 
I ask you sir: is that what democracy is about? I ask you sir . . . 
I ask the Premier, is that what he believes the democratic 
process should be all about? Does he believe that he can simply 
do away with academic freedom? I don’t say that they are 
intending to do that, but that they can pass an order in council 
on their whim, if they don’t like what’s happening at a 
university, and discharge by simple OC that sacred trust that a 
minister who is charged with this responsibility must uphold, 
namely the question of academic freedom. Is that democracy? 
 
Take a look at the Department of Justice Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
There are very many provisions with respect to justice: the 
question of upholding the responsibility of law and order; the 
question of making sure the administration of justice is properly 
conducted. That is a legislative mandate enacted by this House 
empowering the current Minister of Justice to carry out his 
duties. That is something by which we can judge whether or not 
he is, in fact, carrying out his duties. We’ve got a statutory 
enactment and we can judge him at estimates time and 
elsewhere to determine whether or not he is fulfilling that high 
obligation of office. 
 
Now if we pass this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice’s 
responsibility – that noble tradition of the administration of 
justice – could be, quote, in the ingenious words of this Bill be 
“disestablished” – disestablished, not by coming to this House, 
Mr. Speaker, disestablished in the back rooms of the cabinet; 
disestablished at some cabinet meeting; disestablished perhaps 
even for some partisan political reason. One could go on and on 
in every department Bill that goes before this House and which 
makes up the government of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier says that has been done 
elsewhere. It hasn’t been done elsewhere like this. In our 
subsequent remarks, after we adjourn this debate, we’re going 
to bring to your attention, sir, the detailed provisions of how 
they’ve done it in other provinces, and it isn’t as massive in its 
scope and width as this Bill – not at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you something else: quite frankly I don’t care if it 
is done somewhere else. I say that that’s not the way that we do 
it here in the province of Saskatchewan when we reorganize a 
department. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

273 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I say that when we come to the task of 
efficiency, when we come to the job of reorganizing 
government, when we have to streamline it – again objectives 
with which we’d agree – when we come to that task, it is the 
obligation of the government of the day to lay forward its plans 
in legislative enactment by which we can judge that enactment. 
 
This Bill denies this, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is an attack, not on 
just the political process in this House, this Bill represents an 
attack on the democratic parliamentary traditions of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. It represents a step 
forward for back room manipulation; it represents a great step 
forward in the conglomeration of cabinet power. 
 
I say shame on the back-bench members for allowing the 
cabinet to pull this one on you. I say shame on the PC party 
which stands for this tradition of democracy. I say shame on all 
of us, Mr. Speaker, if we allow this Bill to pass in this form, 
especially in this way – that the Deputy Leader and the 
Government House Leader have sought to do on this night, the 
last night of the debate on the Speech from the Throne. 
 
They let us believe that the debate would be debated tomorrow 
or Wednesday, but they know themselves how onerous and how 
difficult this Bill is. That’s why they introduce it at 9:30. I say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that this will be a dark day indeed on this 
power grab by a minister and by a Premier who, I regret to say, 
is becoming all too much power hungry, too much possessed by 
a power trip. I say, Mr. Speaker, that if we’d allowed this kind 
of a development on this kind of a sneaky manoeuvre by the 
government, we all would have hung our heads in shame 
tonight. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t going to happen. It’s not 
going to happen without a fight on this side of the House. It’s 
not going to happen until the people of Saskatchewan know a 
little bit about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have quite a bit more to 
say about this Bill in a few moments, once I get a chance to do 
some additional research to it. And therefore I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:56 p.m. 
 


