




















































March 24, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 24, 1986 
 

109 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to all members of the Assembly today, and to 
welcome here this afternoon a group of 54 grade 8 students who 
are seated in the Speaker's gallery, from Rosemont School, 
which is located in my constituency. They are accompanied by 
Mr. Gary Freitag and Dale West, and it's my pleasure to 
welcome you here. 
 
I'll have the opportunity to meet with you for pictures and to 
chat with you after question period. I trust that your time today 
is enjoyable and educational, and I would ask all members of 
the Assembly to join with me in welcoming this group of grade 
8 students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to members of the Legislative Assembly, 
some 75 grade 8 students seated in the west gallery, from the 
Weyburn Junior High School. This has become a yearly event 
for the junior high school there, and I commend the teachers for 
making the trip on a regular basis to see the legislature in 
action. 
 
They are accompanied today by their two teachers, Jim 
Nedelcov and Murray Sproule and, as well, bus drivers Brian 
Tait and Wayne Vilcu. I hope that you students found the tour 
informative. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you after question period, which 
I'm sure you'll find informative, for some pictures and, as well, 
in room 218 to answer some of your questions later. I would ask 
all members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in 
giving them a hearty welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Salary and Expense Arrangements with President of 
Westank-Willock 

 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
minister responsible for Sedco, and it deals with your 
government's handling of the Regina manufacturer 
Westank-Willock. This company lost more than $5 million 
since Sedco took control of it in early '84, yet the company's 
president, in your words, is doing very well. 
 
Can the minister today inform the Saskatchewan taxpayers of 
the salary of one Gordon Campbell, president of this company? 
And can you tell Saskatchewan taxpayers: how much money do 
you pay Mr. Campbell for his weekly air flights to and from 
Toronto, from early '84 till January '86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of the 

question on Friday. The salary of Mr. Campbell is $82,500 and 
he replaces both Mr. Van Wachem Sr. and Van Wachem Jr. 
Van Wachem Sr.’s salary was $86,500; Van Wachem Jr.'s 
salary was $49,000. One man replacing two men — his salary 
$82,500. He's replacing two people whose salary was $135,500. 
 
I would say that, Mr. Speaker, demonstrates not only how this 
man is turning the company around, it demonstrates how he's 
saving in senior executives' salaries. 
 
Mr. Engel: He didn't answer the question, Mr. Speaker. The 
question was: how much did you pay him, in air flights to and 
from Toronto from early '84 till '86, to this man since he took 
office, who lost $6 million for that company that was making 
money before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Campbell is in fact turning Westank-Willock around, saving 
160 jobs. The travel of Westank-Willock, Mr. Speaker, is as 
follows. They have to travel to the various branch offices that 
they have. Those branch offices are located in Vancouver, 
Edmonton, Calgary, Saskatoon, Regina, Winnipeg, Toronto, 
Montreal, Moncton, and Williston, North Dakota. Now the 
travel involved going to each of those locations, Mr. Van 
Wachem himself even admits that they maybe expanded a little 
too much. One of the jobs of Mr. Campbell, of course, was to 
travel to each of those locations to deal with those various 
locations, to deal with those various offices in the restructuring 
of Westank-Willock so it can make money, which it is expected 
to do in the coming years, saving 160 jobs in the city of Regina. 
I think Mr. Campbell should be commended, for the actions that 
he has taken, today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Short and simple, Mr. Minister. His weekly 
flights to and from Toronto to his place of residence, those 
flights: how much did that cost the taxpayers, weekly flights to 
and from Toronto? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, during that period 
Mr. Campbell flew, as I indicated, to Montreal and to Moncton 
and to Vancouver, and very often that involved him stopping 
off in Toronto. They had a very major office of 
Westank-Willock in the city of Toronto. He spent some of his 
time working, both in Toronto and working in the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality and the important thing, if you're 
looking at how and when you're going to save money — if this 
person makes $82,500, replaces two people making $135,500, I 
would say that that is, in fact, saving money, and saving far 
more money than any air fare would cost. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn't want that man to save 
my money because he went to $130,000 loss to a $6 million 
loss. An accumulated loss of $6 million isn't saving taxpayers 
very much money. 
 
How much did his flights cost to and from Toronto? If you 
don’t know that answer, are you going to tell us at a future 
date? 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

110 
 

The second part of my question is: what did it cost to furnish his 
apartment here in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Here we go again with the opposition 
mentality, Mr. Speaker. How much did it cost for a chesterfield 
and a kitchen table? Mr. Speaker, we are dealing a major 
company, a corporation in the city of Regina. This particular . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This particular person, Mr. Speaker is, 
in fact, turning that company around, is making that company a 
valid and viable company, and I think he should be commended 
for doing that. 
 
Mr. Campbell, in fact, has significant experience with the 
Bronfman's group out of Toronto. He has an MBA out of 
Harvard and he is an expert, Mr. Speaker, in turning around 
failing corporations. 
 
Now the members opposite would have you believe that you 
can hire somebody to turn a company around in 30 days. That 
doesn't work. This company had to have major structural 
changes taken to it. This person is in fact turning it around. He 
has landed a very significant and large contract with the 
Cypress-Anvil mine in the Yukon, creating 40 new 
truck-hauling equipment. That in turn will make that company 
viable, turn it around, save the jobs for 160 people in the city of 
Regina. A job well done, I say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — The only turn-around the people in Regina are 
looking for is when the election comes. We don't need 
turn-arounds, Mr. Speaker, that cost us $6 million. But besides 
that loss, you paid for his apartment. What are the costs of the 
apartment, and next, are there any other perks that you've 
offered Mr. Campbell besides his apartment, besides his trips 
back and forth to Toronto? What other perks was he getting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, these 
sanctimonious people across the way talk about perks. If you 
want to hear about perks, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 
when they were in government, would dwarf anything by way 
of perks. If the hon. members would care to be quiet, I'll give 
them a copy and an example of perks in a real way done by the 
NDP. I wonder if they'd like to hear that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $30,000 fishing trip for the cabinet ministers of 
the previous NDP government — $30,000 to be paid for by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. You talk about perks; you talk 
about somebody sanctimonious. Those people over there wrote 
the book on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister 
in charge of Sedco. Notwithstanding what he has said, would he 
care to inform the House whether or not Sedco paid air fares on 
a weekly basis for Mr. Campbell, from Toronto to Regina, and 
whether or not Sedco provided Mr. Campbell with an 
apartment? 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I understand they did not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Would 
you be clear on what they did not? Are you saying, Mr. 
Minister, that they did not provide him with air transportation 
from Toronto to Regina, or are you saying that they did not 
provide him with an apartment, or are you saying both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Both. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Do you 
agree that Westank-Willock had approximately the following 
record of earnings, or losses: 1981, 152,000 loss; 1982, 
500,000; 1983, 900,000 — then along comes Mr. Campbell —
1984, 3.9 million; 1985, 2.6 million without some interest 
charges which were previously included because of a 
conversion. Do you agree that that is the approximate statement 
of the losses of the company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I'll take and bring back to the 
House the exact losses if that's what the hon. member wants. 
But I’m sure the hon. member is not of the view that you 
somehow with a large company the size of Westank-Willock, 
that if you are to replace senior management, if you are to close 
some of the offices that they had, as I listed, across the country, 
that you would not expect a corporation of that size — it has to 
go through some fairly structural changes — to, in fact, do it 
overnight. Now nobody in their right mind would suggest that 
you can do it in a 30-day period. It takes time to turn that 
around. 
 
What I am saying to you is that Mr. Campbell has, in fact, 
turned that around. He has preserved those jobs rather than the 
other option which would have been simply to liquidate 
Westank-Willock; loss of that corporation to the city of Regina, 
loss of those jobs to the city of Regina in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He has made that effort to turn it around. They 
have landed a very lucrative, large contract for the 
Cypress-Anvil mine that's being reopened in the Yukon, that is 
in fact going to return some good dollars, some good profit 
returns to that corporation. It is expected it's going to come out 
from under its problems and become a profitable company once 
again. The problems of Westank-Willock did not start, as you 
very well know, in 1984. They started long before that, as the 
statement would indicate. 
 

Charges Against Regina Business Man 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
minister in charge of Sedco. The other day in this Assembly 
you made a very serious accusation against a Regina business 
man. You suggested that in a recent meeting the man had 
attempted to "blackmail the government," and those are your 
words, and you know the seriousness of that. You and I are 
members of the legal profession. 
 
The business man in question, Mr. Van Wachem, has called 
this: "A complete falsehood," or he is so quoted in the press, 
and has challenged you to repeat the statement outside this 
Assembly. I ask you, sir: would you tender an apology to Mr. 
Van Wachem, or would you give an 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

111 
 

undertaking that you will repeat those statements outside the 
Assembly so that the matter can be dealt with in the appropriate 
form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to this 
Assembly, which I stand by, Mr. Van Wachem came to see me. 
He wished to sell his shares to Sedco. He wished to have a price 
for those shares significantly higher — significantly higher —
than his father had arranged for a sale. I indicated that he would 
not be paid anything more than his father was paid; certainly 
would not be paid a premium. He indicated to me that he was 
prepared to take this to the media, to try to embarrass the 
government, and I indicated to him to go jolly well ahead and 
do that, that I was not going to pay a premium for his shares to 
avoid some, what he suggested, would be embarrassing 
allegations in the media towards me and towards this 
government. And I stand by that, and I will always stand by 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Will you repeat outside the House the 
words you used in this House last Friday with respect to this 
business man? Will you do that, or are you hiding behind your 
legislative immunity so that you will not have to answer to him 
for the charges you made against him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I made my statement 
today, made my statements before — stand by those statements; 
stand by those statements. I believe what Mr. Van Wachem 
proposed to the government was wrong. I told him that it was 
wrong, and I believe it was wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
again: will you repeat outside this House the words you used 
inside this House last Friday, to give Mr. Van Wachem an 
opportunity to clear his name? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I stand by what I said. I 
believe what I said was correct. What Mr. Van Wachem did 
was wrong. I believe it to be wrong, and I stand by that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do you 
stand by it enough to repeat it outside the House where it can be 
tested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I stand by what I said. 
What Mr. Van Wachem did was wrong. I believe it to be 
wrong, and I still believe it to be wrong. 
 

Interview Requested with Premier 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Premier, there is a Mr. Hainstock from Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan, who has formally requested a meeting with you 
on several occasions in an attempt to resolve some differences 
between the Department of Agriculture, Parks and Renewable 
Resources, as it's affecting his operation. My question to you, 
sir, is: when would you meet with that gentleman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I meet with a lot 

of farmers. If you want to give me the information, or if he 
wants to write to me, then I can look at it. But I have hundreds 
of letters from people all across the province, probably, on a 
weekly basis. So I'd look at anything reasonable. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
are you aware that the gentleman is presently in Regina and 
would like to meet with you? Would you care to meet with him 
today or tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will meet with 
people when I believe that it's appropriate. I have a very, very 
busy schedule. People can't just walk in and expect to walk 
through the Premier's door on a moment's notice. I will meet 
with people if they give me a reasonable notice and I think it's a 
reasonable thing to do. I obviously can't meet with a million 
people all at the same time. I will encourage folks to write me, 
and if they will go through the appropriate channels, I'll be glad 
to talk with them. 
 

Sedco Grants for Gainers' Meat Processing Plant 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for Sedco. It deals with the Sedco 
arrangement with Alberta millionaire, Peter Pocklington, and 
grants that are said to be being given out to this individual. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, whether you can inform the Assembly 
and the people of Saskatchewan whether or not contracts have 
been signed and if so, because it means millions of dollars 
possibly going to this individual, whether or not those contracts 
will be tabled in the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I take it that you're asking: is there a 
contract signed with Gainers' and Sedco? Is that your question? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will obviously 
be aware that Gainers' is the name that Mr. Pocklington 
represents, and the people of the province have come to know 
this as the Pocklington deal. I wonder whether or not you could 
tell us whether or not those contracts — whether you intend to 
table them in the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Here we go again, Mr. Speaker, with the 
members of the opposition attacking virtually every project that 
comes into town. Here we go with the people of North 
Battleford, Mr. Speaker, with a very good project — 200, 300 
jobs in the city of North Battleford that the members opposite 
are now saying: don't go ahead and do that one; don't go ahead 
and do that one. But what does their nominating candidate in 
North Battleford say for the NDP? Oh, no, my leader isn't 
speaking the right way on this one. I want that project for North 
Battleford. Mr. Blakeney might not want it, but I can assure you 
I do, and the people of North Battleford do, and so do we. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the former 
minister of Finance. I'll tell what the candidate in North 
Battleford is saying. He's asking where are the contracts. That's 
what everyone in Saskatchewan is saying. Where are the 
contracts that gave out $10 million of taxpayers money? And I 
ask you the question whether 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

112 
 

or not you intend to table the contracts signed with Mr. 
Pocklington in the Assembly, because they affect every 
taxpayer in this province. And I will ask you again — the $10 
million that is supposedly being handed to this Alberta 
millionaire, whether or not the contract will show up here in the 
legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think if the member opposite 
had've remembered when the announcement was made: first, 
there's a bacon plant being built in North Battleford. That's a 
smaller part of the other announcement. The second part of that 
announcement was that in the event that the hog population in 
the province of Saskatchewan can be increased, then they will 
look at building a further project or plant in another part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What the contract that they are supposedly asking for is (a) can 
we tell whether we will give them the contract of getting an 
industrial incentives grant. Mr. Speaker, there is many, many 
companies in the province of Saskatchewan getting industrial 
incentives grants. You don't need a contract to do that. All you 
have to do to get one of those is make an investment of 
$30,000, create a permanent job, and you get a grant for it. Not 
only Mr. Pocklington's company, but every other company 
across the province. 
 
The second thing that they do, Mr. Speaker, is they are 
borrowing money from Sedco. Well, a lot of other people 
borrow money from Sedco, as they do from other institutions, 
and I don't think the member opposite would want us to make 
public every local contract that Sedco puts out. That's like 
asking does every credit union loan that's put out that you 
should be making public, or any other loan put out should be 
made public. Mr. Speaker, some things should be confidential 
in this country, and that is a legitimate loan being made by a 
government financial institution to a legitimate company 
building in this province. We stand by that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
don't believe it should be made public. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. 
What I hear you say is this $10 million sweetheart deal you've 
cooked up with Peter Pocklington, the former candidate for the 
leadership of the Tory party, that you're not going to give the 
details in the Assembly. Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I recall, Mr. Speaker, in another day 
when we used to ask questions, when we were on the other side 
of the House, about a certain motel in the city of Moose Jaw 
that happened to be invested in by an NDP MLA. And we asked 
for details of that. And do you think we ever got details of that? 
And the lecture that we always got from the then premier was, 
those are confidential; those are private investments; they 
should not be made public. They were not made public for a 
right reason; they will not be made public today for exactly the 
same reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask the minister again: when 
we're facing a $2 billion deficit as a result of your 
mismanagement — and that's the reason you are the 

former minister of Finance — I would ask you, when we're 
handing out $10 million of taxpayers' money to an Alberta 
resident who ran for the leadership of the Tory party, when 
there are many people who believe that there's a direct conflict, 
that somebody's getting their pocket filled because they ran for 
the Tory leadership, at the expense of taxpayers in the province, 
why wouldn't you table the agreements and contracts in the 
Assembly if they were above-board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this has been clearly 
made public at the time it was announced as to the details of 
this particular proposal. There is going to be a loan from Sedco, 
and I don't think anybody would suggest that all loans from 
Sedco be made public. And number two would be, they're 
applying for the industrial incentive program that everybody 
qualifies for across the province. 
 
There's been, in fact, 3,600 jobs created through that industrial 
incentive program — some $20 million, Mr. Speaker, advanced 
by the Government of Saskatchewan, and some $130 million of 
investment being made in the province of Saskatchewan by 
business men, regardless of what their politics are. We, in this 
party, Mr. Speaker, if it's a business man, whether he is Liberal 
or Tory or even NDP, we treat it the same way. He will be 
advanced money from Sedco if it's a reasonable project, if it's 
building on our province, if it's creating jobs in our province 
because, quite frankly, that is what we were elected to do. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Is your department simply following tradition 
set by the former government with respect to tabling of this type 
of document? I refer back to maybe the potash debate and the 
contracts that were signed in that era. And are you following 
that tradition today with your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would say to the hon. member we're 
not following, in the sense that we are giving more information 
that would normally have been given by the previous 
government. They give none of this type of information. We 
have moved a long ways in the last four years of providing that 
type of information, providing information as to the salaries of 
many of the people in the Crown corporations. 
 
But I think the hon. member from Regina North West would 
not expect a government to make public all transactions 
involving Sedco and the various thousands of people who have 
borrowed money from Sedco today and over the history of 
Sedco in existence. I don't think anybody should ask that, 
because that is not proper. If that isn't confidential in 
government, then I don't know what should be. 
 

Housing Starts in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Involving housing, once again to the Minister 
of Housing, I would like to ask . . . A document released by the 
statistical service division of CMHC indicates that in 1985 
Saskatchewan had the worst record in Canada for new housing 
starts. Also a senior bureaucrat in your Saskatchewan housing 
department indicates that in 1987 he expects a further reduction 
in 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

113 
 

housing starts in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask the minister: it isn't outlined in your throne speech, but 
what solutions do you have for Saskatchewan residents who 
would like to build new houses in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we're not about to announce 
in this particular forum today detailed housing initiatives. I 
would reiterate, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite and to the 
public that last year urban starts in the province increased by 19 
per cent. There was an increase over the previous year's total in 
the province. We anticipate that there will be an increase again 
this year, 1986. As to what happens in 1987, of course is 
anybody's guess. That's a little ways down the road. 
 
But this, of course, is not the forum to announce specific 
housing initiatives or proposals. Those will be announced at a 
later date. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What went 
wrong in 1985, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we had significant initiatives 
in '83 and '84 that substantially brought forward certain demand 
here for housing in the province of Saskatchewan. And as the 
member well knows, if he would travel out into rural 
Saskatchewan, that we did have rather severe conditions in 
many parts of the rural areas of our province which 
significantly reduce the demand for housing starts in the rural 
areas. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Counter-Trade Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a 
statement today with respect to an exciting new approach to 
buying and selling that this government has taken. Mr. Speaker, 
we are currently negotiating the province's first counter-trade 
agreement, an agreement which ensures that the dollars we 
spend outside of Saskatchewan flow right back in again. 
 
I'd like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker's gallery 
today, Mr. Robert Gillespie, executive vice-president of Canada 
General Electric, and Mr. Gordon Wells, president of Agdevco. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — These are the people Mr. Speaker, who 
along with our base hospitals in the Department of Health have 
been working on this deal for some time. 
 
This nearly $5 million agreement which we see as the first of 
many such agreements, will bring important medical equipment 
to our hospitals. At the same time it will give a boost to the 
provincial economy, which means more wealth for 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, in this kind of arrangement, 
Saskatchewan gets the best of both worlds. 
 
The Department of Health and six base hospitals are buying six 
new CT scanners from Canadian General 

Electric. The cost is about $4.7 million. In return, as part of the 
counter-trade agreement, Canadian General Electric would 
undertake to market $4.7 million worth of products that we 
would not otherwise have sold if there was no counter-trade 
agreement. It also opens the door, Mr. Speaker, for 
Saskatchewan companies to make sales to General Electric 
now, and in the future, of commodities or products the company 
would be looking to buy in our province. General Electric has 
already expressed an interest in this counter-trade deal of taking 
canola, malt, potash, sodium sulphate, electronic devices, and 
manufactured products from Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to add, Mr. Speaker, that we don't see this, this first time 
counter-trade agreement, as a one-shot type of arrangement. 
We've given the mandate to Agdevco, the Crown's export 
trading corporation, to pursue other counter-trade agreements in 
addition to the one it's working on right now. We want to use 
counter-trade again, Mr. Speaker, in helping to meet the needs 
of our province in areas such as education and health, while 
simultaneously providing sales opportunities for our companies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few moments to talk 
about the importance of the first counter-trade agreement in 
terms of health care for the province. Bringing six new CT 
scanners to Saskatchewan means better medical care and a 
shorter waiting period for patients across the province. We only 
have two older-model CT scanners in the province now. These 
will be replaced, and four more units will go to four other 
hospitals. 
 
The equipment combines an advanced X-ray scanning system 
with a computer so doctors can study any part of the human 
body and make a rapid and accurate diagnosis. This precise 
information helps surgeons plan surgery with the least amount 
of danger to the patient. CT scanners can also eliminate the 
need for exploratory or unnecessary surgery, or for painful 
diagnostic brain or spinal studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doctors and patients alike have been waiting for 
more CT scanners to be set up in the province. I want to 
commend the hospitals, Mr. Speaker, for their co-operative 
spirit in the working together to make the group purchase of CT 
scanners possible. Six hospitals will each get a scanner over the 
next 18 months. The first three will go to the Pasqua Hospital in 
Regina, the Regina General Hospital, and St. Paul's Hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And one more thing, Mr. Speaker, about the purchase of the 
scanners. We believe we're getting the best and most 
technologically advanced scanners on the market today. We are 
also getting the most for our money because GE was the lowest 
bidder for the equipment contract. The bottom line is that even 
without an agreement to buy Saskatchewan we will have made 
the best purchase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is very excited about 
Saskatchewan's first counter-trade arrangement, and I'm sure 
that everyone in the province shares in this 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

114 
 

excitement, with the possible exception of the opposition. 
Counter-trade is a great idea whose time has come to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it's sure to benefit 
Saskatchewan in many ways. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to respond to the Minister of, I believe, Economic 
Development, who is announcing . . . of Trade and 
Development. But I want to say that I find it interesting that this 
minister is chosen, rather than the Minister of Health. But I 
would expect in the name to try to achieve some credibility in 
making a health announcement, when we have nurses who are 
telling us that we have a 25 per cent shortage — 25 per cent 
shortage — of staff in the base hospitals, that you would choose 
someone other than the Minister of Health to make such an 
announcement . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This is not an open debate but, 
rather, it's a discussion of a particular announcement. I would 
ask the member to stay with the details of the announcement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if people will listen closely 
they will find that CAT scanners have something to do with 
nurses, and that you need staff in order to run them. And if we 
listen closely, I will go on to explain how this first in the history 
of Saskatchewan use of trade to acquire things is another bunch 
of boloney that this government s attempting to propagate on 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know, and others will know, that Tommy 
Douglas used this process to get the first cobalt treatment in a 
hospital in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But these individuals, Mr. Speaker, have 
selective amnesia when it comes to remembering things. Mr. 
Speaker, the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden will remember 
another individual, Ross Thatcher, bragging about trading for 
electrical equipment in the 1960s. And I'll tell you that this is 
not the first time that countries or provinces have used trade to 
acquire equipment. In fact, I have heard many third-world 
countries — Honduras and others — talking about trading 
bananas for this and that. And I say that we have indeed come a 
long way. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the issue here is health care. 
The issue here is health care. What we are hearing from the 
people of the province is that yes, they need CAT scanners. 
They need these scanners, but they also need people to man 
them, and nurses to look after them, and nurses to look after the 
people who will be in the hospital who will use this equipment. 
And we have reports of many hospitals that already have many 
pieces of equipment that stand unused because people aren't 
hired in order to take care of them and man them. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that when you make this phoney 
announcement, days before an election, on CAT 

scanners — on CAT scanners that people have been needing for 
four years — and you expect the people of the province to 
believe you when you say, elect us and right after the election 
we're going to solve that problem, stretches the credibility of 
even you, sir. And I say that many people will be suspicious — 
will be suspicious — not only at the timing of the election, but 
also the fact that the Minister of Health is nowhere to be seen in 
the Assembly at the time the announcement is made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would just like to respond for a moment to 
the ministerial announcement. I believe that the only credibility 
gap possibly, Mr. Speaker, is in the timing. I believe we need 
these things very desperately. The $100 million with which 
they're being paid for was only announced within the last days. 
That's coming out of the 100 million, according to the 
Saskatchewan union of nursing. 
 
I attended a meeting in Estevan last Thursday night, which 
indicated again to the public that hardware isn't necessarily all 
the people of Saskatchewan require to reduce waiting lists and 
address the problems of health in this province. 
 
There is a meeting tonight in Saskatoon which I am aware that 
the Tories are not attending again. I believe that they should put 
their ear to the grindstone, and not only is hardware important, 
but also staffing is extremely important and is a critical 
necessity to address the health problems in this province. 
 
I accommodate them and praise them for the method of 
payment. I think it's necessary that Saskatchewan products go 
around the world, and if it can be done, if we can pay for it with 
wheat and a shovelful of potash or whatever, I praise them for 
doing that. 
 
But I think it's a little late, and I believe an election campaign is 
in the offing, and certainly this announcement isn't premature as 
far as that election campaign is concerned. But we do need the 
equipment, and unlike the NDP, I do support the purchase of 
hardware required for diagnostic treatment of patients in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Lloydminster Hospital 
Act, 1948 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a bill to amend The 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

115 
 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that 73 to 77 be 
referred to notices of motions for returns debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Questions 73 to 77 inclusive, orders for 
returns debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor, and the amendment thereto moved by Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased today to enter into the 
throne speech debate, and I might say that I'm especially 
pleased because, once again in the tradition of previous throne 
speeches that have been introduced by our government since 
1982, it was a throne speech which captured the achievements 
of our past four years in government. and it was also a visionary 
document which laid out a vision for Saskatchewan as we move 
through the '80s and into the '90s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in my capacity as Deputy Speaker I 
would like to at this time — since we are in the fifth session of 
the 20th Legislature which is inevitably winding towards its 
conclusion — I would like to congratulate you on your role as 
Speaker in this House since '82. 
 
I believe that you have raised the stature of the Speaker's Chair 
in this province beyond question and in the process in a very, 
very short period of time, Mr. Speaker, you have gained 
Commonwealth stature. Also, Mr. Speaker, I know that as 
Speaker you must try to be as neutral as possible. And I believe 
that in the past four years you have conducted yourself with 
remarkable bias neutrality and for that I would like to 
congratulate you. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the fifth session of the 20th 
Legislature is slowly winding its way to its conclusion and 
towards an election. I believe I would like at this time then to 
recall some of the major accomplishments of our government 
since 1982 — truly a government which has gone to the wall, as 
the Premier would say, for the people of this province. And I 
would like to focus, first of all, on one or two major areas. 
 
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is certainly the shining example of 
what our government has done to make certain that 

agriculture remains of paramount importance and of absolute 
vitality in a time, a relative recessionary period in the history of 
this province. And we have done a number of things, Mr. 
Speaker, to make certain that agriculture does remain vital, 
vibrant, and the engine of our economy in this province. I 
would like to just mention a few of our accomplishments. And I 
know that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will be 
especially interested in hearing what we have done for the 
farmers in his constituency as well as throughout the rest of the 
province. 
 
We have, for example, at a time when it was most important, 
introduced a cash advance program for the livestock producers 
of this province. It was something relatively simple to 
introduce. But I must say that the NDP, with all their years in 
power — almost 40 years they have been in power in this 
province — was unable to bring in that simple piece of 
legislation which would help the livestock producers. The grain 
farmers have had the opportunity, through the grains cash 
advance, to have something similar for years, but the livestock 
producer has not. And we have brought in legislation where 
livestock producers are able to get $125 per head interest-free 
for one year; a program, Mr. Speaker, which is very, very well 
received, I know, in my constituency, as it is elsewhere. 
 
We also brought in The Farm Land Security Act to demonstrate 
to the farmers of this province that we have compassion for 
their situation. As we well know, many farmers are facing 
extremely trying times and if it were not for The Farm Land 
Security Act, Mr. Speaker, it is possible that a good number 
would have been foreclosed on. Facing this reality in 1985, we 
introduced a farm land security Act, and by doing so, hundreds 
of farmers and perhaps even thousands are still on the land — 
another example, Mr. Speaker, of the compassion our 
government shows towards the agricultural sector as well as 
other sectors in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also after a few years in power we have quickly 
moved to introduce the construction of an agricultural building 
at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. I think this is 
of significant importance, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP, the 
NDP with 11 years in power, have not been able to introduce 
that simple construction project. It demonstrates clearly what 
they feel about agriculture and the level of priority that they 
give to agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, last fall, was 
speaking to university students at the university of Saskatoon 
and he was asked a simple question by the students. They said, 
why didn't you build an agricultural building while you were in 
power? And I would like to quote from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix what the Leader of the Opposition had to say 
about that. Here are his words as quoted in the Star-Phoenix: 
 

When asked about an NDP promise of an agricultural 
building during its last term as government, Blakeney said it 
was on the low end of a list of new buildings. 

 
Could you just imagine the premier of this province 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

116 
 

saying that an agriculture building was at the low end of a new 
list of buildings. Well I can imagine that. What the premier, the 
former premier, was saying is that agriculture is in effect on the 
low end of a long list of priorities in the NDP Party. That's what 
he was saying; that's what he ways saying. Agriculture is at the 
low end of a long list of priorities. And of course none of us are 
surprised to hear that, because when the NDP were in power 
they did nothing of significance for the farming population — 
nothing whatever. 
 
Now I recall one or two that they did do, Mr. Speaker. I recall 
that they tried to make tenant farmers out of all the farmers in 
Saskatchewan. I recall that. And I might say that was a very, 
very significant issue in my constituency. 
 
I also know that in my riding it was so popular that even people 
in land bank were voting for the PCs, that's how popular land 
bank policy was. 
 
They had another program, Mr. Speaker. I just don't recall 
offhand the year it was. Somewhere in the middle '70s, they had 
some kind of a grant that farmers could buy a few fence pickets 
with. 
 
So there's what the NDP did in 11 years in power, from 1971 to 
1982. They had a grant which a farmer could buy a few fence 
pickets with. They introduced a land bank program which 
sought to make state farmers out of our agriculture community. 
 
Oh, yes, and there was one more thing, and I'll relate that to the 
farm fuel rebate program, which we have just introduced — 21 
cents per gallon, Mr. Speaker. and simple calculation tells you 
that a farmer who farms approximately 1,000 acres of land at 21 
cents per gallon will save at least $1,000 a farm a year. 
 
Now that compares, Mr. Speaker, with the NDP program. Now 
what was the NDP program? And I recall it well — and I recall 
the NDP program. Three hundred dollars, $300 maximum, is 
what the farmers were able to get under the NDP. And after two 
or three years the former administration said to the farmers, you 
don't need that $300; we're eliminating that grant — which once 
again is not surprising, because they always have treated 
agriculture as the former premier just said. Agriculture was on 
the low end of a long list of priorities. And their actions 
certainly demonstrated how they felt about agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the production loan program is another 
extraordinarily beneficial program to our farmers. And of all the 
beneficial programs we have introduced, that is the one which 
has captured the needs of our farmers the most vividly. So those 
are just a few of the various programs we have brought in for 
our farming population. 
 
It might also be said, Mr. Speaker, that as we have gone to the 
wall for our agricultural community, so too we have gone to the 
wall for our senior citizens. Our senior citizens have been 
treated with dignity which they so lacked under the previous 
administration. And we have brought in one or two or three new 
programs which will certainly help them and also the general 
population. 

The respite bed program and the adult day-care program are two 
programs that are widely used by our senior citizens. The senior 
citizens' home repair program, which allows senior citizens to 
receive $1,000 to repair their homes, and by so doing remain 
independent for more years, is also widely acclaimed and 
widely received by our senior citizens. 
 
And in the nursing home construction field, Mr. Speaker, there 
too in the nursing home construction field we have responded. 
While the previous administration had a moratorium of seven 
years in the construction of nursing homes, and in those seven 
years prior to '82 they did not construct one single new nursing 
home, we have taken a dramatically different approach. We 
have a five-year program to build 1,500 new nursing home beds 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Small business, as well, has been recognized, and we have 
introduced an interest reduction program at nine and 
five-eighths per cent. And that program, Mr. Speaker, is being 
used by over 5,000 small-business men in this province. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that in my constituency I have 
recently held four regional seminars specifically for 
small-business men. And I have listened and heard the views 
and opinions and needs of those small-business men. And they 
may be certain that their views have been brought back to the 
government, and I am confident that in the upcoming budget 
their needs will be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, often we hear the NDP accuse us of not keeping 
our promises. I would just like to go back to the three major 
promises we made in the 1982 election. All three major 
promises were quickly carried out on becoming government. 
 
The major, major promise we made was the removal of the gas 
tax. Mr. Speaker, that was the largest single tax cut in the 
history of the province. I tell the people of Saskatchewan that if 
the NDP get back into power they will put that gas tax on one 
way or the other. I want to share with the people of 
Saskatchewan that for four years since I have been a member in 
this legislature, year after year I have heard NDP members 
stand in this House and criticize our government for removing 
the gas tax. I find it very, very interesting that as they lay on 
their deathbed once again, now they say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, oh, don't worry, don't worry, we won't put the 
gas tax back. Well, I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are too smart to be fooled by 
something like that. They know that if those people get back 
into power — which they will not —they will put that tax back. 
 
And I want, Mr. Speaker, to show the people of Saskatchewan 
in categorical terms what that will mean when the NDP puts 
that gas tax back. In four years we have saved the taxpayers of 
this province $625 million, an average of $625 per year for each 
man, woman, and child. If we take a family of four, in the four 
years that we have been in power, Mr. Speaker, we have saved 
a family of four $2,500 in gas taxes alone —$2,500. And you 
may be sure that those families will not vote for the NDP to tax 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

117 
 

them $2,500 every four years. 
 
The mortgage interest reduction plan, Mr. Speaker, is another 
promise which we immediately carried out. Here's what the 
NDP once again had to say about the mortgage interest 
reduction plan, and let me quote from Hansard, June 24, 1982, 
page 270: Allan Blakeney stated that the mortgage interest 
reduction program was only a subsidy to the banks and to 
persons with $150,000 swimming pools, and equipped houses. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg once again, as quoted 
in Hansard, June 23, 1982, page 217 is as follows. The member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said that the mortgage interest 
reduction program was a program ". . . to provide welfare 
payments to people with incomes of $80,000 if they have 
mortgages." 
 
that's what the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said. That's 
from Hansard, June 23, 1982, page 217. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to put that in rather graphic terms, I would 
like to inform the people of Saskatchewan that, according to the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 44,000 families in this 
province got welfare payments on their mortgage interest 
reduction plan. Forty-four thousand families, Mr. Speaker, have 
received benefits totalling $65 million under that program. 
That's another program they don't like, and they may eliminate 
that as well. They like taxes. The NDP like taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farm purchase program — another program to eliminate the 
land bank. Over 5,000 farmers are being helped by the farm 
purchase program, Mr. Speaker, and I want to share with you 
what some farmers in my constituency are telling me. They are 
telling me: Arnold, we're extremely happy that the Progressive 
Conservatives are in power in these times because you and I can 
be sure if they were in power they would be buying millions of 
acres of land under that land bank program, and they would be 
running around telling the people of Saskatchewan that oh, 
these poor farmers, they can't buy it. The state has to buy it. 
Here's big brother. Here's your friendly big brother, the state. 
He'll buy it. He'll buy it, millions of acres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have not purchased a single acre. But in 
those four years, 5,000 farmers are passing on their land from 
one generation to another through the farm purchase program. 
Those are the progressive agricultural policies that the people of 
Saskatchewan like. Those are the progressive agricultural 
policies that the farmers of this province like. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn briefly to my own 
constituency. My own constituency, Mr. Speaker, has benefited 
from a Progressive Conservative government. Now we often 
hear the opposition say, those Conservatives, they don't spend 
money on highways, they say. That's what they say. Well I want 
to share with the people of the province, and especially with the 
people of Last Mountain-Touchwood, that since 1982 there has 
been over $12 million spent on highways in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood constituency alone; $12 million, a very, 
very significant sum of money. And we will continue to do that. 
And the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood can be certain 
and assured that with another Progressive Conservative 
government further improvements will be made on the highway 
system in our constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is another area which we have focused 
upon, and once again the people in Last Mountain-Touchwood 
have benefited significantly from our forward-looking 
educational policies. I want to share with you, Mr. Speaker, and 
with the people of Saskatchewan, that every school in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood which has asked for renovations or 
additions has received them. Every single one. And I might say 
that that is a very, very impressive array. And I would just like 
to go through the number of schools so the members opposite 
realize how well we're looking after the educational needs of 
our citizens. 
 
The following towns have received renovations or additions 
since '82: Lipton, Dysart, Cupar, Southey, Earl Grey, Bulyea, 
Strasbourg, Govan, Semans, Lestock. Ten different towns. 
Every single town which has asked for any improvements has 
received it, Mr. Speaker — every single town. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn very briefly to the area 
of enriched housing, another area in which Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has benefited very, very significantly. 
And while we have built enriched housing units in various parts 
of Saskatchewan, I would like to focus especially on Lipton. 
 
The town of Lipton told me that for years, under an NDP 
government, they could not get any enriched housing units built 
in their town. And they came to me shortly after we were 
elected, and they say: this is the situation; what can you do for 
us? And I said, let's go to work together, and I promise you, you 
will get that enriched housing unit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we stand here in the House debating the 
throne speech, that enriched housing unit is being built out at 
Lipton. Mr. Speaker, Last Mountain-Touchwood can look 
forward to more of those progressive-type programs taking 
place with another Progressive Conservative government. 
 
In the area of health, in the area of health once again our 
constituency has benefited. The town of Nokomis requested an 
integrated facility, and as we all know, that is an area which is 
sadly lacking in Saskatchewan due to the past policies of the 
NDP. Once again the people of Nokomis came to me and said, 
can we get an integrated facility built onto our hospital? And 
once again I said to the people, let us work together, which we 
have done. And once again, Mr. Speaker, as we stand here this 
afternoon debating the throne speech, an integrated facility is 
being built in the town of Nokomis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rural natural gas program is another program 
which the NDP opposed, and I recall that vividly. When our 
party suggested a rural natural gas program, they said it could 
be done — it couldn't be 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

118 
 

done. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just mention a few of 
the towns in my constituency which are benefiting from the 
rural natural gas program. And once again, I have worked with 
the people in these various communities to make certain that 
they receive the benefits of cheap gas. 
 
The following communities, Mr. Speaker, have received natural 
gas: Semans, Raymore, Quinton, Southey, Markinch, Cupar. 
Those communities, the farmers, the rural people of those 
communities, are already receiving the benefits of cheap gas. 
 
Under the 1986 program, Mr. Speaker, Nokomis, Earl Grey, 
Silton, and Craven — they will receive natural gas. And I know 
that the people in the Strasbourg and the Southey district have 
worked hard to put together a program. And I say to those 
people here this afternoon that I will work with you hand in 
hand after the next election to make certain that you will soon 
get natural gas in your communities as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn once again to an issue 
which I'm sure that the members opposite will be interested in 
hearing. Mr. Speaker, as you well know, this past year was 
heritage year, and in our constituency we honoured people who 
were pioneers in various areas of our life. 
 
For example, we honoured in Southey, this summer, the man 
who invented the first rock picker in the world, a man by the 
name of Pete Anderson, and we unveiled a plaque in his 
honour. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I know many of the 
members here travel through Southey as they go home to their 
constituencies, and you might be interested in stopping in 
Southey and having a look at a self-propelled rock picker which 
that man invented, and it's still there on display. I was told by 
the local people that the Department of Highways purchased 12 
of those self-propelled rock pickers and there's still one there. 
As everybody knows in this House, Anderson rock pickers have 
encompassed the globe, and they are being used in different 
parts of the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk briefly about the history 
of health in our province because this summer once again, we 
honoured the man in our constituency, another man from that 
Anderson family, a cousin, who is the father of medicare in 
North America. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that's correct. He was the 
father of medicare. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, often politicians and political parties like to 
take credit for things that have been done, and the little people 
who had the original ideas and who got things going are often 
forgotten, and it seems that in this very, very critical area of 
health care that this has happened. And I want to share with the 
people of Saskatchewan here this afternoon, since the man I am 
talking about lived in my constituency, and his family still lives 
in my constituency — I want to share with them briefly the 
history of medicare which has not been told to the people of this 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the man I am talking about is a man, 

Mr. Matt Anderson, senior, who unfortunately is no longer with 
us. Mr. Anderson was a Norwegian immigrant who came to 
Saskatchewan back around the 1920s. He came from Norway to 
Minnesota, where he was unable to make a living, and from 
Minnesota he moved to Bulyea, where he homesteaded. 
 
In the 1930s, Mr. Anderson noted that many people were 
unable to get adequate health care, and therefore he thought 
back on his homeland, Norway, where health care was already 
in existence. And Mr. Anderson was rather astonished that in a 
nation which had the riches that we had, people unfortunately 
were unable to get the basic needs of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, he thought to himself, why don’t we 
introduce a medicare plan similar to the one in Norway. 
 
He became a reeve for the R.M. of McKillop, and at the annual 
provincial conventions he would introduce a resolution to that 
effect, but each time — each time — the resolution was 
defeated. So Mr. Anderson decided that he will try to 
implement a medicare scheme in his home R.M. Rather than 
trying to do it provincially, he thought, let's do it locally in the 
R.M. of McKillop. And he began to have meetings with the 
people in that constituency, asking them if they would agree to 
a $5 per capita tax up to a minimum of $50 to provide for 
medicare in his R.M. After many meetings and a plebiscite, the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . the people of the R.M. of McKillop 
agreed to it. 
 
However, it wasn't that simple, because it was illegal for an 
R.M. to implement that type of tax. They had to work with the 
government of the day. And the government of the day in 1938 
was the Liberal government, and he worked with them. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, legislation was introduced in this 
House to implement a Bill to allow R.M.s to tax their citizens 
for health care needs. 
 
It's also interesting to note that Mr. Anderson was the only 
civilian in the history of our province, the only non-elected 
member in the history of our province, who was given the right 
to speak on a Bill being passed through the legislature. And 
because of that, his Bill soon became the Matt Anderson Bill. It 
became known as that. 
 
What's even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is a letter I have, 
written by Mr. Anderson to Dr. Lewis Brand, who was a 
member of parliament for Saskatoon. Now the CCF . . . Now 
the members opposite like to pretend they're always in favour of 
it, always in favour of medicare. 
 
But here's a direct quote by Mr. Anderson to Dr. Lewis Brand, 
Member of Parliament, House of Commons, Ottawa, Canada, 
dated July 14, 1966. And here's what he says. He says: "To me 
it appears very inconsistent that, as you will notice in this 
article, that most of the five CCF members spoke against the 
Bill." 
 
Spoke against the Bill. Nevertheless, after dozens of health 
districts proved it to be successful, then in 1946 the CCF took 
credit for the whole plan. Interesting. Very interesting. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

119 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that plan spread throughout the province. 
And the hon. members, as I'm not surprised, ridicule it. I'm not 
surprised that the hon. members sit in their chairs and ridicule 
the little guys in this province, because that's the type of people 
they are. They never were for the little guys. All they . . . They 
run around pretending they are. 
 
But when we talk about a significant achievement by one of the 
great people in this province, one of the little people, they sit 
and they ridicule him. And I want the people of Saskatchewan 
to know — I want the people of Saskatchewan to know — that 
as I talk about Matt Anderson, one of the great people in our 
province, the members opposite sit and ridicule. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that plan of Mr. Anderson spread 
throughout this province. And as a matter of fact, by 1961, 
when the CCF were piloting legislation for the whole province 
through the legislature, Mr. Anderson was a special adviser to 
the CCF government on the legislation they introduced. Nobody 
knows about that either, because the CCF, as this letter 
indicates, have tried to take credit for it by themselves — have 
tried to take credit for themselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I relate that to the people of Saskatchewan 
just so that the little people of this province are given their due 
credit for the things they have done. And this very, very 
important area of health care, where a man from Norway, an 
immigrant, was the pioneer — I would just like to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan that the pioneer of health care in 
this province was one by the name of Matt Anderson. And I 
acknowledge the fact that other political parties used his plan, 
and they implemented right across the province and later right 
across Canada. But I like to give that man, that little person in 
our society who has not been heard of like he should have been, 
the credit that is due to him. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, then, I would like to turn to 
the coming election. Now I have heard those members over 
there, in the last few days, saying, let's have an election. Well 
let me say, let me say, I am saying the same thing. Let's have an 
election. Because I know that the people of this province are 
ready; the people in this constituency are ready; the people in 
Saskatchewan are ready. They're ready to once more repudiate 
the negative, backward-looking policies of the NDP. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are all looking towards this day with anticipation. 
The voters are looking forward to it. And with that I would just 
like to conclude my remarks by saying that I will be supporting 
the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have this 
opportunity today to speak in the debate on the Devine 
government's final throne speech. And when I say the Devine 
government's final throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I mean exactly 
that. 
 
The proud people of Cumberland, who I have been privileged to 
represent during the last four years, have 

told me of their disappointment with the performance of this 
government. They have told me of the opportunities lost, of 
employment lost, dignity lost, patience lost, and lives lost 
through despair and suicide. 
 
The term of your administration, Mr. Speaker, the term of this 
PC government's administration can best be described as four 
lost years. The people of Cumberland have told me, Mr. 
Speaker, of the progress which was made during the Blakeney 
government to improve the lives of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. They tell me that things haven't gotten any better 
now. These people across the Assembly have not kept their 
promises. And so now much of the progress that was made 
during the Blakeney years is all lost. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
conditions are worse now than they have ever been before. My 
constituents, Mr. Speaker, can't afford to waste four more years. 
They want you and the Conservative Party to get lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak for a few moments about 
why I decided to get involved in politics, and why I will 
continue to work within the New Democratic Party for social 
justice. The answer is a desire to serve people, and the answer is 
a desire to create a society which offers fairness, hope, 
compassion, and an opportunity for all. 
 
Many people have commented that my colleagues and I have 
been a very energetic and effective opposition. Our energies 
have come in part from the people and our desire to serve them. 
We cannot rest, Mr. Speaker, while the citizens of this province 
endure the kind of injustice and missed opportunities that have 
taken place under the Devine PC government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot allow bright, loving, cheerful young 
students to become filled with bitterness and stress because they 
have no hope of finding work or using their education. We can't 
allow that to happen. We can't stand by to see these young lives 
wasted. We can't sit idly by while the Premier spends hundreds 
of millions of dollars in his already wealthy constituency of 
Estevan to ensure his personal re-election, while he has ignored 
the northern part of the province which has massive 
unemployment. 
 
I ask the Deputy Premier: where are your priorities? Where are 
your moral responsibilities to the people of the North, with 90 
to 95 per cent unemployment. That is a fact. They need help 
now, Mr. Speaker, and we can't allow this to continue — high 
rates of unemployment. It's too great a waste and it is not fair. 
 
We can't ignore the fact that our provincial government has 
money to give away to the wealthy, to the rich. They have given 
gifts of $300 million a year to oil companies — big oil 
companies. Millions of dollars for millionaires like Peter 
Pocklington. The PC government’s mismanagement and 
political patronage to their rich corporate friends have put 
Saskatchewan and our people $1.5 billion in debt. Hundreds of 
millions of dollars in loan guarantees, Mr. Speaker, for 
companies that don't really need the help. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 
children go to bed hungry and families live in shacks that many 
PC government members today, and their corporate friends, 
wouldn't use because of their prestige and power. And, 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

120 
 

Mr. Speaker, capitalism is a system which does not work for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, this PC government is bankrupt, financially and 
morally. We can't allow this to continue, Mr. Speaker. It's too 
great a waste and it's just not fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — And yet there is even more talk about your 
version of welfare reform and not talk on your part about 
northern jobs, northern housing, and adequate health and social 
services. We can't ignore the fact, Mr. Speaker, that many of the 
unemployed people who find themselves in correctional 
centres, because they steal to get money for food and clothing 
for their children, experience a higher standard of living in jail 
than they can at home. 
 
The PC government, Mr. Speaker, is uncaring. It is unfair, and 
it is just plain stupidity on their part. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — We can't allow these people to continue. We can't 
allow the PC government to continue administration in this 
regard. 
 
And while the people of northern Saskatchewan are forced to 
accept second-rate health care, they hear all kinds of expensive 
advertising telling them how wonderful the Devine government 
is. A million dollars a month wasted on government advertising. 
Obviously you think your advertising money is more important 
than good quality health care in the North, fresh food subsidies 
for northern people, and decent housing programs, and health 
and social programs. 
 
I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Deputy Premier, that this PC 
government is bankrupt, financially and morally. And I have 
told you once already and I'll tell you again: people in this 
province are going to tell you people to get lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — On the positive side, Mr. Speaker, we are at a 
crossroads. The people of Saskatchewan will soon be asked to 
cast their ballots in a provincial election. They will have the 
opportunity to choose between the Devine Conservatives or a 
confident and caring NDP administration led by Mr. Allan 
Blakeney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My constituents have told me that they share the 
New Democrats' vision of a better Saskatchewan, a 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which demonstrates its humanity 
by providing jobs for all people of Saskatchewan as well as 
northern Saskatchewan; by providing essential services to those 
in need; by providing northern people with the ability to regain 
control of their own lives and destinies; a Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, which develops our northern resources, develops 
health, education, recreation, and community facilities, 
develops our forests and fishing industries, as 

well as our northern training and employment opportunities; a 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which develops strong local 
government and strong northern communities through fair 
revenue-sharing programs and an expanded economic base; a 
Saskatchewan which has commitments for native 
self-government and native self-determination; a Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, that builds on strong and independent people. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the vision of Saskatchewan that the New 
Democratic Party and the people of Cumberland constituency 
share and share alike. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as we approach what I believe to be 
the conclusion to this session and this Assembly, and the outset 
and onset of a provincial election campaign in which I will not 
be a candidate, I want to take a few moments to make some 
personal observations upon my time as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I spoke earlier of my motivation for serving, of a desire to serve 
the people of Saskatchewan and my fellow northerners, of the 
need for social justice. As a member of this House, I have been 
able to share with you a vision of what can be, and have 
experienced the honour and satisfaction of serving my people. 
 
I want to thank the people of Cumberland for the privilege of 
serving them for the last four years as their MLA. I want to 
thank my family for their support during what has been in many 
ways a very tough four years. When I grew frustrated with the 
fact that this House and the system was not serving the needs of 
my people, the needs of the people in northern Saskatchewan, I 
could always count upon the love and support of my family to 
help give me strength, faith in the future, and the determination 
to continue the fight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Yew: — I want also, Mr. Speaker, to thank my many 
friends, constituency executive in Cumberland, and our party 
members for their assistance and support. It was, and has been, 
and is, genuinely appreciated. 
 
Finally I want to thank my caucus colleagues. They have 
proven to me that they do care for the people of the North, and 
that they share my hopes for the North, my faith in northern 
people, and my conviction that one day, hopefully soon, that the 
people of the North will be equal partners in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the good Lord, our Creator, for his many 
blessings. I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members 
of this Assembly, that I have respected and have been 
encouraged by your tradition of prayers before going into the 
routine proceedings of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, I hope the 
wisdom and guidance we pray for will be granted and will help 
make Saskatchewan a better life for all our people. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the presentation made 
by the throne speech on March the 17th. Thank 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

121 
 

you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to join in the throne speech debate on this 
date, on behalf of my constituents of Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main objectives of our Premier and the 
Progressive Conservative governments has been to provide the 
citizens of our province with the means to build a better future 
for themselves and for their families. We believe that the 
development of our province must begin with protection, and 
with protection for our families. 
 
Our government has acted to provide that protection —
protection that the people have asked for, but prior to 1982 
nobody had listened to. For example, protection for home 
owners from high interest rates, a saving of over $3,000 per 
year, in some cases, for Saskatchewan families. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don't need to remind you that in the early 1980s, 
when interest rates were approaching and beyond the 20 per 
cent range, that the NDP government sat on their thumbs and 
did absolutely nothing to help the families in our province. 
 
Also, protecting the earnings of Saskatchewan people by the 
elimination of the gasoline tax, a saving of approximately $150 
a year for the average family. Once again, Mr. Speaker, in the 
early 1980s and late 1970s, when gasoline and oil was 
becoming a big industry in our province, the NDP sat back, 
watched our neighbours to the West — no tax on their gasoline, 
but ours was hoarded by the NDP government. 
 
Also, protection of the family farm and rural communities 
through rural gasification, through private telephone lines, and 
through low interest loans. Protection of our small business 
community — the nine and five-eighths interest program, the 
industrial incentive program, the venture capital program, and a 
commitment to develop a tourism industry that right now is 
becoming one of our second biggest industries in our whole 
province. 
 
When we think of protecting our family, we should also think 
of health care in Saskatchewan. Prior to 1982, buying potash 
mines had taken precedence over the building of hospitals and 
nursing homes and cancer treatment facilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan under the NDP. I need only to remind the 
members opposite of the moratorium on nursing home 
construction that was imposed under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across from us is an example of people who would 
rather spend their money buying potash mines that were already 
in existence, rather than purchasing and upgrading 
much-needed health facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, 
we have laid the foundations and have begun building hospitals 
and nursing homes. In my constituency alone, in Saskatoon 
University, we have started on a 78-bed Lutheran Sunset Home. 
Construction began last 

fall on a two-storey addition to the University Hospital. This 
will mean an additional 78 beds at a total cost of about $35 
million. Add to that, about two years ago the children's rehab 
centre opened at Brunskill School, in co-operation with the 
Kinsmen Foundation — something that was sadly neglected by 
the previous administration in our province. 
 
Just recently a contract was let for a $16 million cancer clinic 
and research facility on the campus of the University of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. speaker, a couple of weeks ago I was 
in Saskatoon with our Premier for the announcement of a $78 
million agriculture building on the University of Saskatchewan 
campus. And I heard many people at that time say they had 
been waiting for upwards of 25 years for a new agriculture 
college on the campus. Mr. Speaker, not only is that a great 
addition for the campus of the University of Saskatchewan, but 
for agriculture in general throughout our whole province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also when you look around the province, at the 
campus of the University of Saskatchewan we see needed 
facilities that have taken place in the last four years under a 
Progressive Conservative government. The geological sciences 
building — it was also neglected by the NDP. Mr. Speaker, the 
administration building is almost completed now — a needed 
facility that has been in disrepair for many years under the 
NDP. And now a new college of agriculture. 
 
As a matter of fact on Friday afternoon when I drove into 
Saskatoon, going down College Drive, I looked at the sign 
saying "University of Saskatchewan" and above the sign I saw 
four cranes — four cranes in operation at the University of 
Saskatchewan campus. They are proving our government's 
commitment, not only to health, not only to agriculture, not 
only to higher education in our province, but needed facilities 
and needed programs, needed research that is going to go on in 
this province for many years to come. And these are just some 
of the new projects in the Saskatoon University constituency. 
 
Other health care facilities under construction in our city of 
Saskatoon are the $53 million expansion to St. Paul's Hospital, 
which will increase their bed capacity by nearly 112 beds. And 
also, the Saskatoon City Hospital has begun plans for a new, 
482-bed hospital at a cost of $115 million. Nursing home and 
special care home construction projects include a 50-bed Circle 
Drive personal care home, plus a new 238-bed long-term-care 
facility to be completed in late 1986 or early 1987. 
 
The Minister of Health recently announced an additional $100 
million program to enrich hospital and special care services 
across the province; $40 million is being made available to 
enrich patient care services in hospitals, including the provision 
of 500 — I repeat, 500 additional nursing positions. Sixty 
million dollars will be provided for staffing and other costs 
associated with the new beds they make now available. This 
program was developed in consultation with health care 
officials and will go directly to patient care. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe this compares very favourably with the record of the 
NDP when they eliminated much needed nursing positions in 
the province of Saskatchewan in the late '70s and early 1980s. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

122 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan elected a government 
in 1982 that would listen and respond to their concerns and their 
issues. Our Premier and our government have responded to the 
concerns of men, women, and children in all areas of our 
province. This government has been protecting our families and 
building on our strengths even during difficult times — brought 
on by adverse agricultural conditions and falling world prices 
for many of our resource commodities, difficulties over which 
we, as a government, had no control. Providing jobs and 
opportunities was a commitment in 1982, and is as strong now 
as it was then. 
 
Under our Premier and our government, Saskatchewan has 
maintained, on average, the lowest rate of unemployment in all 
of Canada. This government has a firm commitment to creating 
jobs and opportunities for the people of our province, and we 
have instituted programs and initiatives to give Saskatchewan 
people that opportunity, an opportunity to work here at home 
and not have to leave our province to find work — part of the 
protection of our families in our province. 
 
These are programs and initiatives which work; programs 
developed in consultation and co-operation with other people in 
the province of Saskatchewan; programs like our winter works 
program, a program endorsed by the private sector, the business 
community. Over 5,000 jobs were created last year under this 
particular program. 
 
We are committed to the long-term economic development of 
this province, not the way the previous NDP government did it. 
Their idea of economic development was to buy up the farm 
land; buy up potash mines for hundreds upon hundreds of 
millions of dollars, invest in uranium mines — which now I 
don't know what their latest position is, but I believe they want 
to close them down. Mr. Speaker, that's where they put their 
money in, rather than needed services throughout our province. 
 
For the first time ever, Saskatchewan has a well-planned, 
long-term employment strategy, a multimillion-dollar, five-year 
program for job creation. In the first year of the program, some 
22,000 jobs were created and sustained. The Opportunities '85 
program helped some 10,000 students —young men and young 
women staying at home and earning an income, enabling many 
of them to go back to school and complete their education. 
 
We are encouraged by the success of the youth employment 
program over the past three years. Here is just one example of 
government and small business working together in a 
partnership of progress. My colleague, the Minister of Tourism 
and Small Business, just recently announced the Opportunities 
'86 program — a further commitment of eight and a half million 
dollars to create 8,500 jobs and help our students complete their 
education. 
 
For our youth who are about to enter the labour market for the 
first time, this government has expanded technical and 
vocational training by almost 60 per cent at a cost of almost $55 
million. In addition to technical and 

vocational learning expansion, we have provided $125 million 
to our universities over the next five years under the university 
renewal and development fund providing new research and 
teaching equipment. 
 
I mention the new agriculture college at the University of 
Saskatchewan campus in Saskatoon. And this college will help 
meet the growing demand in agriculture research and enable our 
farmers to continue as leaders in agricultural production and 
agricultural techniques. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of education — which we have made 
very clear is one of our four cornerstones for progress, along 
with employment, health, and agriculture — through the 
institution of the educational development fund our educational 
process in our whole province will be upgraded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but notice that in about the five-to 
ten-year period the population of the city of Saskatoon 
increased by about 50,000 people. And under the NDP there 
was not one new high school built in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, that is not a commitment to education. It's one of the 
fastest-growing cities in the whole of Canada, yet the NDP 
stood idly by and watched the students get into overcrowded 
conditions. And I'm very pleased that since the election of our 
government in '82 there are two brand-new high schools in our 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
Providing jobs and opportunities is a commitment of this 
government, and in that aspect we continue to pursue new 
investment and new markets for Saskatchewan products. Take, 
for example, the high-tech industry. There are approximately 
130 high-tech companies that operate in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and at least 20 of them are in the city of 
Saskatoon. Saskatoon is rapidly gaining national and 
international recognition for new technological advances. 
 
For example, let's look at SED Systems in Saskatoon. One of 
the province's key high-tech companies will consolidate its 
operations into one location. And that project is an $11.8 
million complex which will create 135 construction jobs and 
should be in operation by the end of this year. This is another 
example of business and both the federal and provincial 
government working together, employing approximately 300 
people, and putting Saskatoon and Saskatchewan on the map, 
exporting their products and their services around the world. 
 
(1545) 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have pride. They have pride in 
their homes, in their families, and their work. And under this 
Progressive Conservative government that pride is coming 
back. We saw it in our celebration of heritage year, and we'll 
see it again at Vancouver at Expo '86. Mr. Speaker, in heritage 
year, as has been touched on by the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, over 900 communities in our province 
celebrated heritage year by organizing community functions on 
their own, some of which he so adequately described to us. And 
believe me, there was a feeling of optimism, a feeling of pride 
across our province. And this year, in 1986 at Expo 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

123 
 

'86, we look forward to having a great Saskatchewan presence 
at the Expo, and over 1,000 of our young performers are going 
to be out there entertaining people and showing the rest of the 
world just what kind of talent Saskatchewan really does have. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been provided with strong 
leadership and a sense of pride, and that sense of pride has 
come back — pride and initiative that under the NDP had been 
buried by big government. Today I'm very proud to live in our 
city of Saskatoon and our province of Saskatchewan, a province 
under the leadership of our Premier and the Progressive 
Conservative government that is providing the opportunity for 
the people to realize their dreams and their aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've heard much on the radio lately about some of 
the campaign promises coming up for the NDP. One of them is 
unfair taxes. Mr. Speaker, I've already outlined some of the 
taxes that we have eliminated as a Progressive Conservative 
government, but I did a little bit of digging. I found out that in 
1971 when the New Democrats came to power, the total 
provincial expenditures for the government of Saskatchewan 
was just under $600 million. Mr. Speaker, when they left power 
in 1982, those provincial expenditures were almost $3 billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how their mathematics work, 
but somewhere in there, in order to raise $2.5 billion a year, 
taxes had to be increased. And where did that money go? Did it 
go towards improving our health system? I say not. Did it go to 
improving our education system? I say not. Rather, Mr. 
Speaker, it went to building their own empire of potash mines, 
uranium mines, land bank, things that the people of 
Saskatchewan spoke very clearly against in 1982, and very 
clearly for a definition for the future of our province that is with 
the Progressive Conservative government and our present 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be 
supporting the motion before us on the throne speech. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 
me today to enter into this debate on the throne speech. This is 
the first one that I've had the pleasure of being involved in since 
becoming a member of this House last spring. I think that it's 
very important to the people of this province to realize that this 
throne speech carries on a four-year tradition of growth and 
expansion in our province, a forward, growing-looking outlook, 
which the people of this province appreciate, and I think 
particularly in the field of agriculture. When you speak about 
Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, you talk about agriculture. That's 
our life-blood out there. 
 
I think of the fair and equitable programs which this 
government has brought in over the last four years. And I think 
of things like the farm purchase program, which over 5,000 
people have availed themselves of in this province, and that is 
young and first time farmers who are now actively engaged in 
agriculture that probably would not have been there before. 

I think of the livestock cash advances and the thing that we did 
through our drought relief programs as far as our livestock 
producers went. Never before in the history of Saskatchewan 
has a government taken the livestock sector to heart like ours 
has in the last four years. 
 
My constituency is one which is blessed with irrigation, and the 
$100 an acre incentive programs which this government 
brought in — and have put 18,000 acres under water in the last 
three years, a great many of which were in my constituency — 
has got to be a big plus for this province. Because irrigation is 
one of the things which I consider a resource, a renewable 
resource which can be used over and over and over again, and 
it's something which our province needs to utilize and build on 
for the future. 
 
I'd like to think of our loan production program, which was 
introduced in December, as probably one of the most 
forward-looking agricultural programs ever introduced 
anywhere in Canada, and with the tough times which we have 
had over the last few years with drought and grasshoppers, with 
lower commodity prices and higher inputs, I think this program 
is probably the most well thought out piece of legislation which 
has come along in a long time. 
 
Also our royalty rebate which is going to help farmers with that 
21 cents a gallon rebate on fuel which is a direct result of the 
expanded oil industry which we have in our province, and is a 
direct return to the people of this province so that farmers can 
lower those inputs as they seed the 1986 crop. 
 
We also have the new incentive programs for hogs and cattle 
through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
I think all of these programs lumped together have really been 
appreciated by the rural sector in Saskatchewan and particularly 
by the people in Thunder Creek. Because obviously last spring 
when we had the by-election in that riding, Mr. Premier, they 
responded to the agricultural programs of this government and 
returned me, or put me in this House, with a very comfortable 
majority. And I'm sure that with the things that we've done 
since, they'll increase that majority in the upcoming election. 
 
Id' like to contrast some of this with the previous government. 
You know, last week in this House, Mr. Speaker, we paid 
homage to a great Saskatchewan citizen, a former premier of 
our province, the Hon. Tommy Douglas. And there is no doubt 
that Mr. Douglas did a number of things in this province which 
will never be forgotten because they were good for the people 
of this province — and yet nowhere, in all the eulogies of 
Tommy Douglas and the things said about him, did I ever hear 
that Tommy Douglas could make it rain. 
 
And as I've sat in this House for the last year and listened to the 
opposition formulate or try to formulate an agricultural policy, I 
guess you could sum it up in, pray for rain. Because I haven't 
heard one concrete thing that has come out of this group over 
here as far as agriculture in this province. And if all they've got 
to give to the people of 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

124 
 

this province is a prayer for rain, I suggest they not show 
themselves in rural Saskatchewan come the next election. 
 
You know, the hypocrisy of the members of the opposition is 
just about too much to believe. They talk about used car taxes 
and a few dollars. And to think of the gift tax and succession 
duties which that government perpetrated upon the people of 
this province for four and five years. They were taking money 
off widows and orphans, and it ran into 28, $30 million. And I 
didn't see anybody return anything. 
 
When you think of a group of people, as the opposition are, 
who claim that during their tenure in this province that they had 
all kinds of money — they had balanced budgets and they had 
all kinds of money — and I only have to think about the 
irrigation potential in this province, Mr. Speaker, that has sat 
there unused all during their tenure. 
 
And they admit that they had all kinds of money. And yet when 
we came along through a drought period in this province, when 
that irrigation potential had the ability to maintain the livestock 
sector in the entire south-west region of our province and it 
wasn't utilized, I wonder where their priorities were. 
 
I think about the 22 per cent interest rates which came along in 
1980 and 1981. And every farmer and every business man out 
there had an operating loan in place, and those interest rates 
were sky-rocketing. And once again, the members opposite 
claim that they had lots of money in this province at this time, 
you know. They were balancing their budget and they had all 
kinds of cash revenue. And yet I didn't see one program aimed 
at agriculture to do anything about those 22 per cent interest 
rates. 
 
It makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, if during the period that the 
NDP were in government in this province, they didn't have a 
caucus made up of badgers and pigeons, because they seem to 
have a great fascination with used holes in the ground and tall 
buildings. And if that is their attitude —and it seems to continue 
on, because the only thing that they've offered us is land bank 
and nothing else — then I suggest once again that the NDP not 
bother to show themselves in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, when you talk about my seat and agriculture, there's 
also a few other things that happen out there. There's a quality 
of life involved in Thunder Creek, and I like to think of the 
town of Central Butte. 
 
Central Butte is the largest town in my riding, and it's the only 
place that you can find more than two NDP votes in the same 
block. For years and years the town of Central Butte was 
promised an old-age home, but nothing ever happened under 
the previous administration. Once again, they had lots of 
money, but Central Butte could never get a senior citizens' 
home. Under our government there is now a beautiful, 30-place 
senior citizens' home in the town of Central Butte. 
 
We go to highways, Mr. Speaker. I can remember very 

well in 1975 the NDP candidate in Thunder Creek standing up 
and saying that Highway 42 is a guaranteed proposition; elect 
me and you'll get Highway 42; but you don't even have to elect 
me, because I’ve been down and talked to the minister of 
highways and you're going to get Highway 42. 
 
Well I'm happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that there is now a $1.7 
million project to rebuild Highway 42 from Riverhurst to 
Central Butte. And it will be reality, and people will no longer 
bounce over the pot-holes in Highway 42, and folks going up to 
Lake Diefenbaker to their cottages are now going to have a 
good highway to ride on. But I suggest to you, sir, that if it had 
been left up to the members opposite that that highway 
probably would have deteriorated into a country trail before 
anything had happened. 
 
And then we have Highway 363, which runs down into the 
edges of Mr. Engel's seat — or sorry, the member from 
Assiniboia's seat — and on over to the west, and once again, we 
had a highway that had a lot of promises made about it over the 
years but nothing was ever done. Well I'm also happy to report, 
Mr. Speaker, that Highway 363 is now under construction and 
will be done in the next year so that the people from the 
south-west part of my riding will have a decent road to drive on. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that with the 
programs which this government has announced, both recently 
and in the throne speech, things like individual line service, and 
the ability of our rural producers to be on a par with any in the 
world, that I believe this throne speech is going in the right 
direction. I believe our budget, which is upcoming, will prove 
to the people of this province that this government is going in 
the right direction. It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to support the throne speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure 
for me to join my colleagues today and those who have spoken 
last week in this debate on the throne speech. 
 
Two things are for sure, I guess, Mr. Speaker, this year. One, 
it's spring; and secondly, there's an election coming. It's the only 
time, once every four years, that you find the NDP attempting 
to become sincere — and I'll tell you, the most insincere thing 
you've ever seen is NDP trying to look sincere. 
 
You know, it's every four years, Mr. Speaker, that that bunch 
over there try and perpetrate the con game. I mean, they get 
their suits on, they get their ties on, and they brush their hair, 
and they try and look reasonable, and they even try on occasion 
to sound reasonable; and we've been listening to this for the last 
week, Mr. Speaker. We've been listening to the opposition 
trying to sound reasonable and trying to sound concerned. Once 
every four years — every four years this bunch tries to sound 
concerned. 
 
Every four years, Mr. Speaker, they become concerned about 
small business. These folks, who would have a minimum wage 
of six bucks an hour; these folks, who'd have a payroll tax, 
every four years try and get concerned 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

125 
 

about small business. 
 
Every four years, Mr. Speaker, this bunch across the way 
becomes concerned about seniors — about seniors. These are 
the folks who saw no need to build nursing homes, but every 
four years they become concerned about seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a con game. Every four years — this being 
one of them — every four years this bunch become concerned 
about home owners. This is the bunch that four years ago said 
that interest rates were the responsibility of the federal 
government and couldn't give a hoot if home owners lost their 
homes. But this year they're concerned. Every four years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is the year that the moon comes out and that bunch over 
there are concerned about farmers. They're concerned about 
farmers. Right now, they're concerned about farmers. I mean, 
for years and years they nationalized millions of acres of farm 
land. This year is the fourth year. This year they're concerned. 
 
(1600) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean, this con game goes on and on. This 
is the year. It's one of those years and it's election year. They're 
concerned, all two of them over there. Every four years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they've become concerned, and this year 
they're concerned about young people. This spring they're 
concerned about young people. These are the folks who taxed 
not only the living, but the dead. But this year they're concerned 
about young people. It's got to be an election year. The moon is 
out. There they go. 
 
This has got to be the fourth year. Every four years they become 
concerned about municipalities. The member from Regina 
North East is here and I'll tell you, he was concerned about 
municipalities when he was the minister of finance, because I 
was on council then and I can remember the year that he 
wouldn't give one penny, one red penny, to any municipality 
anywhere in Saskatchewan for capital works. Not one. But this 
year the moon is out and they're concerned about 
municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes sir, they are 
concerned. 
 
They are concerned about municipalities. This is the fourth 
year. This is the fourth year and they're doing their ritual again. 
And now they're concerned about health care and nurses. Now 
this is the bunch that cut 400 nurses out of the health care 
system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Four hundred. But the moon is up and 
they're concerned now about health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
don't know. I don't know how many people are taken in by this, 
but it's got to be an election year and it's got to be spring, 
because this year they're concerned. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth year and they are now 
concerned about the common man. The common man. This is 
the bunch that four years ago made a god out of the family of 
Crown corporations, but this year they're 

concerned about the common man. 
 
Well, I don't know, Mr. Speaker. It didn't come as any surprise 
to me to talk to my constituents over the weekend after hearing 
the promises made last week by the Leader of the Opposition in 
his election platform. It came as no surprise to me that my 
constituents listened to those promises with a healthy dose of 
scepticism — with a healthy dose of that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this bunch over there have been known — I 
mean this bunch now talking from their seats — they are 
producing their kinds of policies that one would expect from 
socialists in an election year, in this four year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
There we go. The WCC member. You know, that member is an 
interesting oddity in this House. He's an interesting oddity. Here 
is a member that got kicked out of the Liberal Party and then 
the WCC took him, and after a week they left. Well, I mean, 
you know, in any other definition of popularity that is called the 
plague. However, he has been speaking from his seat, and I'm 
sure he'll get up later in this debate, I'm sure. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three parties in four years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Three parties in four years. That's right. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP made their promises 
last week, and my constituents who I talked to over the 
weekend, they were a little sceptical about these promises. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, there are two things that my constituents 
get nervous about when you talk about the NDP. The first 
things they get nervous about are the things that they say. And 
the second thing they're nervous about are the things they don't 
say. And I want to deal for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, first 
of all with the things that they did say last week. 
 
First let's deal with the things that they did say. Well first of all 
they said that they were going to have some money to go to the 
people over the age of 60. Well actually when you listen to 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they said that they would have some 
money to go to some people over the age of 60. And actually, in 
the words of the Leader of the Opposition who said it in the first 
place, was that they were going to have very little money to go 
to some people over the age of 60, which I guess is a pretty 
good indication of how concerned they are in the first place. So 
my constituents listened to these promises with some 
scepticism. 
 
Well what else did the NDP say last week? I mean, remember 
the moon's out; some more of them came into the House. Well 
they're going to bring back the PIG grant at a cost of $115 
million; and they're going to end the municipal business tax for 
the cost of 40 million bucks; and they're going to end the flat 
tax at a cost of 100 million bucks; and they're going to increase 
the fuel rebates at a cost of 20 million bucks; and they're going 
to remove most of the education portion off of your property tax 
for another 250 million bucks. And all of this is going to cost 
over 500 million bucks; and oh, by the way, ain't that deficit 
terrible. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my constituents take those promises 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

126 
 

with just a little bit of scepticism, because the only way we're 
going to pay for this, apparently, according to the NDP, is that 
we’re going to tax the rich. And that's okay, except what makes 
the folks nervous is that you people are going to define who's 
rich. And that's what makes them nervous, because they've seen 
who you’ve defined as rich before. You defined widows as rich 
before. Your folks in Manitoba have defined employees as rich 
and employers as rich. As a matter of fact, there is some 
sneaking suspicion that you'll define anyone who can rub two 
nickels together as rich. And that makes my people a little 
nervous when you talk about spending 500 million bucks. 
 
Well remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the moon is out. These 
folks are concerned. They are back here for their four-year little 
act that they put on. It's the four-year con. 
 
Well as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituents are 
nervous, are very nervous about what the NDP say. And there's 
only one thing that scares them more and that's what they don’t 
say. And I'll tell you, what they don't say in the past has cost a 
lot of money. I mean, they didn't say much about potash before 
they took them over. They didn't say much about land bank 
until they started it. They didn't say much about uranium mines 
before they did that. So it's what they don't say that really 
makes my people nervous and also makes them sceptical about 
the promises. 
 
You only have to go back to 1982 and we know what was said 
in the NDP campaign. But we also know what wasn't said. And 
ask anybody in the life insurance business about what wasn't 
said in 1982. Or ask anybody who owned an auto body shop 
what wasn't said in 1982. Or ask anybody who was in the 
funeral home business what wasn't said in 1982. They didn't 
promise to touch those industries, but we know they were going 
to. 
 
In other words, the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have a hidden 
agenda and a public agenda. And they have tasted some of their 
public agenda last week. I briefly dwelt on that. I have noted 
why my constituents are a little nervous about their promises, 
where they're going to get the money. And they are also 
nervous, very nervous about what they will not tell, what they 
will not tell the people in Regina Lakeview. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a great pleasure of mine to 
stand today and voice my support for the measures outlined in 
the throne speech brought down by the Lieutenant Governor 
last week. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a lifelong 
resident of Regina Lakeview, and as its MLA, I'm extremely 
proud to be a Progressive Conservative when I examine the 
record over the past four years, and the vision of Premier Grant 
Devine and his party, the vision for the future, not a future 
made up of Crown corporations, masses of people with 
numbers, but the vision that the Premier has put forward over 
the last four years. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during my six years as an 
alderman representing ward 3, the ward in which much of my 
constituency now rests, and during the subsequent four years in 
which I have been privileged to represent the people of Regina 
Lakeview, the residents of this 

constituency have told me what they expect from this 
government. 
 
First they expect to be reasonably and fairly treated as 
individuals — as individuals. They expect a government which 
helps them when help is truly needed, and then they expect to 
be left alone, to not be controlled and over-regulated by a 
government when it is not necessary. They expected and they 
do expect to be rewarded for hard work, not punished. 
 
And the people of my constituency are compassionate and 
caring people who want to help others less fortunate, in true 
need of help. But they will not be taken advantage of. The 
constituency of Regina Lakeview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
middle ground with people of all walks of life, of all racial 
origins, and of all ages. There's a mix of civil servants and 
business people, doctors and lawyers and architects and young 
families with children and senior citizens and single men and 
women. In fact, Regina Lakeview is a microcosm of all that is 
urban Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982 the constituents of Regina 
Lakeview made a decisive and positive decision — they voted 
for the Progressive Conservatives. They voted for a party which 
promised to strengthen traditional social institutions like 
education and health. They voted for a party which promised 
that we could indeed have a government which maintained and 
improved needed social programs, but equally important — but 
equally important — a party which did not demand that 
individuals would have to sell their souls to a socialist 
government in order to receive these programs. 
 
They did not then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nor do they today 
believe that the government should own or control everything. 
They did not and they do not believe today that being a tenant 
to the government is preferable to being an owner. In short, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the constituents of Regina Lakeview see 
government as a servant of the people and not the other way 
around. 
 
And most important — and most important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — the people of Regina Lakeview, ordinary 
Canadians, are tolerant people. They do not believe in singling 
out one group of people or one occupation simply because that 
group of people are successful, and making scapegoats of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate but true that the socialist feeds on 
attempts to polarize people, to turn one group on another, and 
the group they usually target for this type of attack are those 
who have become successful. Rather than congratulate and 
encourage success, they heap scorn on those who would take a 
risk, who would invest their savings with no guarantees. And 
they especially attack these people if they invest their earnings 
together with others to a common goal of making a profit. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now I realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that this may 
sound strange because the socialists claim to support 
organizations like co-ops and credit unions, whose stated goal is 
to invest together for a common goal. But, Mr. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

127 
 

Speaker, let those very same investors who have their moneys 
in the co-ops or the credit unions invest money in an oil 
company and all of a sudden those same investors are rip-off 
artists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP today keep score on those individuals 
who invest in stocks and bonds or shares in oil companies. 
There is one reason for this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That reason is 
that the NDP hope to feed on jealousy. They encourage people 
to be jealous of those who have worked and saved and invested 
and, as a result, have profited. The socialist encourages, not 
promotes, this jealousy amongst people in order to justify the 
confiscation of the wealth these individuals have created for use 
at the whim of the socialists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Lakeview saw through this 
tactic in 1982, and that is why they turned out the NDP and 
voted for a party of reason, the Progressive Conservative Party. 
They voted for a party who encourages the creation of wealth, 
not one who scoffs at it. They voted for a party who encourages 
each individual to reach for the limits of his or her potential, not 
one which believes that profit and enterprise are dirty words. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they voted for a party, the 
Progressive Conservative Party, who believes that only by 
encouraging the creation of wealth by individuals can the social 
programs which we ask of government be maintained and 
improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government of 
Premier Grant Devine has delivered on the promises made in 
1982. During some of the toughest times in the history of this 
province, tough times brought on as a result through the 
cruelties of nature and of depressed international markets, this 
Progressive Conservative government established the best 
four-year job creation in the nation. 
 
Ordinary Canadians by the thousands have found work in 
Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the policies of this 
government have created an environment which has benefited 
ordinary Canadians more than any other group, for it is this 
group, it is this group who normally is the first to fall victim to 
high unemployment, and this province has the lowest 
unemployment rate in the nation over the past four years. This 
government’s policies have worked during some very tough 
times. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me speak for a moment about oil. 
Because of this government's policies, thousands of new jobs 
were created in the oil patch, and because of the dramatic 
increase in activity, revenue to the government to pay for the 
social programs we demand are up. Now the NDP scoff at this. 
They suggest the small investor from Regina Lakeview should 
not voluntarily risk his money to buy shares in one of the 
hundreds of small independent oil companies which have 
flourished under our administration. Instead, the socialists 
believe that those same small investors in Regina Lakeview 
should be forced, through their taxes, to buy shares which they 
would never own in a state-owned oil company. Then, if that oil 
company makes a profit, well that's okay. But if it showed a 
loss, then those Lakeview investors would be forced, through 
their taxes, to subsidize that oil company 

for the good of the state. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we just 
have to look at the potash industry to know of what we speak. 
It's typical NDP nonsense. It's typical NDP nonsense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Progressive Conservative government is proud of its 
energy policies, and I am proud that the revenues received from 
the activity in the oil patch resulting from our policies is helping 
to pay for the increase in health care, education, nursing home 
construction, and many other services which the people of 
Regina Lakeview desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is indeed open for business. Now 
the NDP scoff at this as well because, well, of course, they are 
fundamentally and philosophically opposed to private 
enterprise. Mr. Speaker, there are many small businesses 
located in Regina Lakeview. They are run by ordinary 
Canadians — entrepreneurs — who work tremendously hard 
and long hours providing needed goods and services to the 
public. 
 
This Progressive Conservative government has no qualms about 
actively encouraging and supporting small business. We do so 
by removing unnecessary red tape, most of it created by the 
former NDP administration. We do it by freeing up the 
market-place for them to compete in, not by creating 
government businesses to compete against them. We do it by 
providing interest rate protection for them so that they have 
some idea what their borrowing costs will be. We do it by 
encouraging government and non-government purchasing 
agents to check to see what they can do to buy products 
manufactured or supplied by Saskatchewan business. And we 
do it by meeting with small-business people on a regular basis 
at their convenience, and for free, to discuss firsthand what 
more we, as a PC government, can do for them. And I mention 
that we do this for free, only to contrast the Progressive 
Conservative attitude toward small business with that of the 
NDP who charge 150 bucks per person for small businesses to 
meet with them. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, this government believes in open for 
business, and our record shows that, despite tough times, this 
belief is well founded. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me turn now to senior citizens. Regina 
Lakeview, as I mentioned earlier, has a large seniors' 
population. And I'm proud of the accomplishment Premier 
Devine's Progressive Conservative government has made in 
four short years for senior citizens. Premier Devine's 
government recently introduced the senior citizens' heritage 
program, a permanent ongoing program of grants to low- and 
middle-income seniors, to assist them to live an independent 
lifestyle with the dignity they deserve. I had the privilege, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of introducing this legislation in the House on 
behalf of Saskatchewan and Regina's Lakeview seniors. 
 
As a member of the legislature for Lakeview since 1982, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I've been pleased that this government has 
been able to introduce a good number of programs for seniors. 
Having seniors in my family has helped me understand not only 
the special problems seniors face, but also the significant 
contributions that 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

128 
 

they have made to society. 
 
And that is why, over the past four years, this government has 
put a great emphasis on senior programs, specifically the 
provision of nursing home beds. Unfortunately, the previous 
NDP administration has put a freeze on the construction of 
nursing homes that lasted for five years. And in fact in nine 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in nine years they built only 245 
new beds. Since 1982 this Progressive Conservative 
government has built 688 new beds, and our commitment is for 
1,000 new beds and 500 replacement beds by the end of 1987. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were pleased to introduce a new foot 
care program for Saskatchewan, and, as well, we eliminated 
extra billing for medical care. 
 
In 1984, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the seniors' bureau was formed to 
establish a focal point within the provincial government from 
which seniors can obtain information, help, and advice. For 
senior home owners a new home repair program was introduced 
with over 20,000 seniors participating in the program. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, low-income seniors had the 
provincial supplement doubled for singles, from $25 to $50 per 
month, and for couples, from $45 to $75 per month. And it's 
interesting to note, in this year of the moon, that under the NDP 
administration, the supplement was increased in total — in total 
— only $5 in seven years. Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that 
Premier Devine and the Progressive Conservative government 
is a government with a heart, unlike the NDP who talk like they 
care but in 11 years demonstrated they really don't care for the 
needs of the elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Lakeview suffered through 
11 years of deteriorating water quality. They asked the former 
NDP government to help to solve the taste and odour problem. 
They elected a premier from Regina, a minister of Urban 
Affairs from Regina, and seven other NDP MLAs from Regina, 
and in that 11 years, did those NDP MLAs do anything to help 
solve the water problem? Unfortunately, the answer is no. 
 
In 1982 the people of Regina decided to vote for a new 
Progressive Conservative government, and did we solve the 
taste and water problems? Did we? The answer is yes. Did it 
take 11 years? The answer is no. It was done in the first of 
many consecutive terms of Progressive Conservative 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I'm on the topic of things which this 
Progressive Conservative government has done for Regina, I 
might just list a few that I have mentioned to my constituency 
in Regina Lakeview. The list goes on and on, and I'll try and be 
brief, but I think it's important . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That would be much appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I think the member for Regina Centre is 
speaking again, which is kind of a help. We thought he might 
have died. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to point out a number of things 
that Regina has seen done for them in the last four 

years. Of course the highlight as far as investment dollars and 
job creation is the NewGrade heavy oil upgrader, which is the 
largest project in Saskatchewan's history. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
$650 million project and alone it will create 3,000 new jobs in 
the construction phase. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP talked a 
lot about upgraders in their last term. They spoke a lot about 
them. They'd even found a site for them, but they never built 
one. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had mentioned before the $15 million 
carbon filtration plant which was built at Buffalo Pound. Mr. 
Speaker, that bunch there had 11 years, 11 years to build this 
and not a penny was put forward, and we drank that green 
sludge until they were defeated in 1982. In 1982 we got into 
power, and it is now built, and we are now enjoying tasteless 
and odourless water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably what some don't realize — and I'll just 
mention it — is that Ipsco has not undertaken a $63 million 
expansion. Ipsco, Mr. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from North-east wants to know how many people 
Ipsco have laid off. I might remind that member that without oil 
policies of this government those people would have been laid 
off four years ago, and it would not be working today under 
your policies. Under your policies Ipsco may well have been 
shut down by now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ipsco is now undertaking a $63 million expansion 
— $63 million expansion. The Kalium mine just outside of 
Regina is undertaking a $100 million expansion. 
 
(1630) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more importantly to the people in 
Regina Lakeview, Regina has had one of the best job creation 
records in the last four years of any city in Canada — in any 
city in Canada. As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last 
year Opportunities '85 created 974 jobs for students in Regina, 
while Opportunities '84 created another 834 jobs. The 
employment development fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, created 
over 1,500 new jobs in Regina, and over 900 jobs resulted in 
this city from the winter works projects. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we're talking jobs; we're talking about the families in my seat 
and other seats in this city. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that Regina — if anyone has 
seen the news in the last month — that Regina has the lowest 
gasoline prices in the nation. We also know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that last month we saw the largest decrease in food 
prices in this city in recent memory. And we also know that we 
have the lowest inflation rate intake country in this city. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over $42.5 million of new school 
construction and renovations have taken place in this city since 
1982 — over $42.5 million. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 
$95 million have been committed for health care projects in the 
city of Regina since 1982. Over $95 million have been 
committed to this city. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982 when interest rates were 22 per 
cent, when the NDP said it was not their responsibility, and we 
introduced a program in this 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

129 
 

House to alleviate that and to save homes — to save homes in 
this city — well, as a result of the mortgage interest reduction 
program, in this city, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 11, 860 Regina 
home owners have received $18.5 million in benefits. Now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that's an average of $1,570 per household 
since 1982. The NDP said it was not their responsibility, and we 
provided that protection for those home owners. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1982 over 1,200 Regina 
families received grants from the Build-A-Home program —
over 1,200 families from the Build-A-Home program — for a 
total of $3.5 million. Mr. Speaker, another program delivered 
by your government to the people of Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can remember when the NDP decided to 
give their friends from the East a nine and five-eighths per cent 
loan — nine and five-eighths per cent loan — for the Cornwall 
Centre. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that there are 605 
small businesses in Regina who have benefited from our nine 
and five-eighths per cent interest program —605 small 
businesses. Those businesses who started in Regina, whose 
owners live in Regina, and whose employees live in Regina — 
605 of them. Not one developer from the East, but 605 
businesses in Regina have benefited from our nine and 
five-eighths interest reduction program. Mr. Speaker, I think it 
is evident that we, in this party, have a different emphasis on 
business than those across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something that I worked on when I was on the 
council in the city of Regina, and I was happy to see proceed 
and get finished through this first term, the first of many terms 
in office was the completion of the Lewvan Expressway. Mr. 
Speaker, the Lewvan Expressway goes south from the tracks, 
the portion that we built at a 100 per cent finance by the 
provincial government for the cost of $5.7 million, proceeds 
through my seat and has helped the traffic flow through my 
seat, and through my colleague from Regina South's seat, a 
great deal. I can tell you, as I'm out in my constituency, the 
people of my seat, and I'm sure my colleague in Regina South's 
seat, have thanked him for the completion. 
 
The completion of that road which was promised for 12 years, 
which was promised for 12 years — well before I was on the 
city council that this thing was promised by the former 
government — but it was built and completed by ourselves after 
1982. I'm happy to say that the people of Regina Lakeview 
appreciate that highway and remember who built it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another accomplishment, another thing that we 
have now provided for the city of Regina, is the Winnipeg 
North campus of the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and 
Sciences. Mr. Speaker, we have expanded the spaces in the 
training schools in this province because we know — and I 
wish that my colleague from Rosemont was here — but I know 
that members opposite do not agree with welfare reform. I 
know that the members opposite would rather simply just hand 
out cheques to those on welfare and not put a training 
component into the system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don't believe that. Welfare reform 

has been a very positive step. And part of that was the building 
of this new Wascana Institute, which now provides over 400 
students a chance to educate themselves, Mr. Speaker — and it 
was not there prior to 1982. This institute, Mr. Speaker, was 
opened in September of 1985, and the cost of that building was 
$12 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, the summer games are coming to 
Regina in 1987. And I am happy to see that a new $6 million 
field house is being built in the city of Regina, another building 
that was sorely needed in this community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have indicated before that I have many seniors in 
my seat. And I would like to remind my constituents and the 
people of the city of Regina of the new housing units for seniors 
that are being constructed now under this government. Mr. 
Speaker, 159 new units of senior citizen accommodation will be 
built at the Trianon and at the St. Basil's projects. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, these projects will mean that there will be more than 
1,600 units of subsidized living for seniors in Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, Palliser Place in the Cornwall Centre is a modern 
complex for seniors, and that also was established by the 
Progressive Conservative government since 1982. 
 
I was happy to note that in my seat there will be 60 additional 
beds, Mr. Speaker, at the Santa Maria home which will expand 
that facility in Regina Lakeview. This facility has long wanted 
to expand; had been after the former administration for some 
time. Of course there was a moratorium, and they could not get 
the approval of the money from the NDP. They now have the 
approval, and construction will be beginning at the Santa Maria 
home, Mr. Speaker, in May of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government 
recognizes the importance of protecting seniors who now 
comprise, interestingly enough, over 12 per cent of our 
population. Mr. Speaker, over 2,100 Regina seniors — over 
2,100 of them — received a grant from the senior citizens' 
home repair grant program. Over 2,100 seniors who wished to 
remain in their home, who wished to upgrade their home, have 
received assistance from this government — and, Mr. Speaker, 
2,100 now and thousands to come. Grants totalling in excess of 
$2 million to the seniors in this city for repairing seniors' homes 
have been received since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another benefit that this city has received since 
1982 can be seen at the exhibition grounds. The Canadian 
Western Agribition has received a total of $5 million from this 
government for expansion. We realize, as do the citizens of this 
city, the importance of the western agribition, not only to the 
city of Regina, but the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
Progressive Conservative government has since 1982 been very 
supportive in the way of grants from the Department of 
Agriculture. Now we were most happy to co-operate with 
agribition and provide $5 million in grants for an expansion 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other institutions in this city which have 
received the assistance of this government, such as 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

130 
 

the restoration of the historic Turgeon residence as a youth 
hostel; as the building of the Regina North West Leisure Centre 
at a cost of $2.3 million; and the restoration of Government 
House, which is the historic lieutenant governor's home. 
Government House was renovated, obviously a major Regina 
historic site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city has received more from this government. 
We have increased funding to the University of Regina. The 
University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, has received an operating 
budget of $37.8 million, which is a 5 per cent increase over 
'84-85, an increase equal to the highest university operating 
budget in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we do believe and we 
have a great belief in operating those universities, and 
especially the University of Regina, for our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along the same lines, we have provided $200,000 
which will be expended for the renovation of Darke Hall on the 
old campus of the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, turning to another aspect of Regina's economy, I 
would like to point out that since 1982, new technology firms 
established in Regina now total 23. Now, Mr. Speaker, never 
before in this city's history, in the history of this city, has there 
been that many new technology firms in existence. And surely, 
Mr. Speaker, this would not have happened under the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have provided for new facilities for the 
provincial archives in Regina. In 1983, the provincial 
government acquired the new and enhanced facilities for the 
provincial archives in the city of Regina. 
 
We have also provided money, Mr. Speaker, to modernize the 
Regina Public Library, and we have increased funding in this 
city for the crisis service centres for women and children in 
Regina. 
 
We have provided, Mr. Speaker, $4.5 million for a new 
court-house in the city of Regina. The members opposite don't 
like to hear this, but I think that my constituents and the 
constituents in the city of Regina should hear this, Mr. Speaker. 
It is funds and it is progress in this city, something that was 
long overdue. Mr. Speaker, $4.5 million have been provided for 
a new court-house in Regina. The new provincial court-house 
will be built along the 1800 block of Smith Street and of course 
will be one of the most modern judicial centres of its kind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about the business climate in this city. It's 
interesting to note that since 1982 there have been three 
national investment dealers who have located in Regina as a 
result of our positive investment climate. Mr. Speaker, 
Dominion Securities Pitfield, Merrill Lynch, and Burns Fry 
have all set up offices in Regina since 1982. Those three were 
absent under the NDP. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a positive economic growth in 
Saskatchewan. And positive economic growth in Saskatchewan 
has reflected in Regina as well. We have in the city of Regina 
created an air of confidence in this economy which has meant 
the construction of new 

business and new offices by the private sector, such as the 
Continental Bank building, Pioneer Place, the SuperValu store, 
and the expansion of the airport, to name some examples. 
 
Regina's skyline, Mr. Speaker, is changing rapidly, and it's 
changing because of private sector development — private 
sector development stimulated by confidence in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on. I could go on, Mr. Speaker, about 
the accomplishments that have been taking place in this city 
since 1982 because of the government of the present day. And 
it's a good story, Mr. Speaker. It's a good story. It's a story of 
accomplishment; it's a story of opportunism and opportunity, 
and it will go on in the second term of this government and 
further accomplishments will be made in this city. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us look to the future. Let's look to the 
future. In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine and 
this Progressive Conservative government have again led the 
nation with the innovative idea of a Saskatchewan pension plan. 
This plan will provide pensions, Mr. Speaker, to those who 
cannot currently quality, such as home-makers, part-time 
workers, and small-business employees — ordinary Canadians, 
Mr. Speaker — ordinary Canadians who again are aided by this 
Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan pension plan is innovative, and 
it fills a need, and it has been well received. By talking to my 
constituents over the weekend, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
it is being very well received. 
 
To highlight the difference between our government, Mr. 
Speaker, and the reaction of the NDP, one need only to look at 
the fact that this government proposes that participation by 
individuals in this pension plan be voluntary — be voluntary, 
Mr. Speaker. We believe individuals can best decide if the plan 
is what they want. The NDP, the NDP with its typical 
condescending attitude toward the individual ordinary Canadian 
does not believe that the individual is intelligent enough to 
choose for his self or herself. The NDP thinks that the program 
should be compulsory. They think it should be compulsory, that 
we should force people to join whether they want to or not. Big 
brother knows best —typical socialist scorn for the intelligence 
of the individual, ordinary Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is running ads claiming Premier Devine 
has not kept campaign promises made in 1982. Let me remind 
the NDP that the day after the election this PC government cut 
off the NDP's gasoline tax — the largest tax cut in 
Saskatchewan history — which is a campaign promise kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we promised to solve Regina's water problem and 
we did. Another promise kept. We promised to improve health 
care and education and we did. We promised to help out 
farmers who needed help and we did. Promises kept, Mr. 
Speaker. We promised and we delivered — the lowest 
unemployment in the nation; 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

131 
 

thousands of jobs have been created; help for seniors; red tape 
eliminated; and much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March of 1982 the NDP told the people of 
Saskatchewan that we had a balanced budget and a heritage 
fund. And based on these statements we also suggested that we 
strive to cut income taxes and sales tax. And, Mr. Speaker, 
despite the fact that we found, on obtaining office, the NDP 
misled the public once again — and there was no heritage fund 
and there was no balanced budget — despite this, Mr. Speaker, 
this PC government has kept its promises and has cut personal 
taxes and has cut sales tax. We have not gone as far as we 
thought we could, because the combination of empty cupboards 
left us by the NDP and falling government revenues, because of 
world market forces and drought, have prevented us from 
cutting taxes further. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these downward economic factors will 
reverse themselves and we will be able to cut taxes and balance 
budgets in contrast to the NDP who raised everyone's taxes by 
huge amounts, hid deficits in Crown corporations, and did all 
this when world markets were strong and nature was good to 
the farmer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individual, ordinary person in Regina 
Lakeview, and indeed in all of Saskatchewan, need only look at 
this Progressive Conservative government's excellent record 
during the tough years in order to realize — and they are 
realizing; and they are realizing — that Premier Devine and this 
PC government have done a very good job indeed. 
 
Yes, we have made mistakes. We admitted them. Yes, we will 
probably make more, for we are only human. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the Progressive Conservative government — a government 
dedicated to the enhancement of the services provided by 
government, such as education and health care, and committed 
to the respect of the individual — this government and this 
Premier will continue to provide this great province with the 
kind of government the people expect and deserve —good 
government. Government as servants, not masters. A 
government as good as the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I add my name to those of my colleagues who 
speak in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I'm very pleased to be able to get into this 
debate on the throne speech today, Mr. Speaker. Listening to 
some of the members opposite, one would think that a throne 
speech would be sort of a blueprint for what this government's 
going to be doing, what they plan for the coming year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when I looked and listened to that throne 
speech, I didn't see anything in there that would indicate to the 
people of Saskatchewan just what this government's going to be 
doing for the coming year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I don't think 
anyone in the province was able to understand or figure out just 
what that throne speech was offering for them. 

I believe maybe what's happening is that the throne speech isn't 
going to be an indication of what they're going to do. They're 
probably saving it all for the budget, more than likely planning 
an election soon. So they're going to have a nice-looking budget 
that's never going to get passed in this House, and nobody will 
have any benefits from it. That, Mr. Speaker, is what I think this 
government's going to do. They are going to make more and 
more promises as they have in the past. 
 
We've heard their promises back in '82 and now it's getting 
close to the election and we're hearing promises again. Every 
minister and every speaker on that side of the House that gets 
up keeps saying that they are going to be doing so much more. 
We heard that in '82, that there's so much more this province 
could be. But, Mr. Speaker, I think the people are still waiting 
to see what that so much more is, that they can be. 
 
They promised smaller government to the people of 
Saskatchewan because they said the NDP were nothing but a 
big government party. Well, we've seen them come and we see 
what they are. That small government they're supposed to be — 
they came in with 25 ministers; that was the small government. 
That was the small government. They bring in more civil 
servants than we've ever seen. The Premier of this province 
spends more money in his office than the Prime Minister of 
Canada. 
 
That is the small government that they were speaking about, 
Mr. Speaker. They promised the people smaller government but 
none of that has happened. None of it has happened at all. The 
government got a little smaller now, they say. 
 
They decided about a month or two ago that they should trim 
that government down a little. So they got rid of some of their 
ministers and they have less ministers now. And they're going 
to go back to the people again in this election and say, we're 
again promising you small government and we're doing 
something about it. We're reduced the number of ministers 
we've had. 
 
But for four years they were using the taxpayers' money to pay 
every one of those ministers for trips. The former minister of 
Highways used some $63,000 in flying around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listen to the member for Regina North. He isn't 
in here at this time but he's still saying that we are going to do 
more. They are going to do more. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of this province think that they've done enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I think they've done enough, that's what the 
people of this province are saying. They can't afford another 
four years of what's been happening. They can't afford to get 
more and more debts put on their shoulders. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is what is happening. That's what has been happening 
in this province for the last four years and the people are saying, 
we just can't afford any more of that. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

132 
 

We've had the member for Kelvington-Wadena. He's a rural 
member. And I could understand the member from Regina 
North saying that they can do more. But the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, a rural member who, you would think, 
would know some of the problems that exist in agriculture . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . As the member for Regina North 
West says, they threw a lot of money at it, at agriculture. Well 
that's true, they did. They’ve done some of that just recently. 
And why would they be doing it now? Because there's an 
election coming up. That's why they're starting to make more 
promises and offer more money for rural Saskatchewan. For 
four years the farmers have been losing their land; they've been 
losing their equipment; they've been giving up their farms to the 
banks and going to work. For four years they didn't think it was 
important enough to give them more money. But now they've 
decided to give them more money. But now they decided to 
give them more and they didn't really give them anything. They 
gave them a loan — another loan. And they're telling them, if 
you're in trouble now, borrow yourself out of debt. We'll give 
you a little more. 
 
Well I don't know of anyone that could borrow themselves out 
of debt, Mr. Speaker. That isn't the solution for the problems 
that we see in agriculture. You can't borrow yourself out of 
debt. That, Mr. Speaker, is what this government is saying to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan: borrow more. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's a banker's Bill. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — As one of my colleagues is saying here, it's a 
banker's Bill. Well I suppose most of the things that are done in 
this House and by this government were only done to benefit 
either the banks or the large corporations. But it certainly wasn't 
done to benefit the farmers, because they didn't benefit anything 
from it. 
 
The member for Kelvington spoke about all the jobs that they 
have created in the last four months. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, as was mentioned here, where? It's a 
good question. I don't think anybody really knows where those 
jobs are created. There's a few more promises being made. 
There certainly is. And we would understand why it's 
happening in the last four months. All of a sudden we see that 
this government is starting to say that there are going to be 
more and more jobs in this province. And that would indicate, I 
suppose, that there has to be an election coming up very soon, 
because they certainly are promising more jobs. We haven't 
seen that in the last four years. 
 
When you look at what's happened in the last four years, you 
see that the unemployment rate has gone up from some 20,000 
to 40,000. You see the welfare rate go up from 40 to 60,000. So 
they put more people on unemployment, more people on 
welfare, and now they're saying, we're going to create more 
jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the figures, they've got to 
create at least 40,000 jobs to break even from what it was when 
they took over. And, Mr. Speaker, I don't think anyone in this 
province is going to believe 

promises, empty promises like this government and the 
members of it are making at this point. The people just aren't 
going to believe that, because all of those that are unemployed 
and all of those that are on welfare and can't get a job aren't 
going to believe that all of a sudden this government is going to 
change, and everybody is going to get a job and they'll be off 
welfare. I don't think the people are going to believe that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let's hear some NDP solutions. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And some of the opposition is saying we need 
some solutions. Well the solutions are simple. Start providing 
programs that are going to create jobs. That is the solution. And 
this government refuses to do that. They refuse to do that. 
 
They just keep saying that everybody is in trouble; the farmer is 
in trouble; oil is in trouble. They're trying to find excuses now 
to get out of doing something that will be of benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is what they're 
trying to do, is try to get themselves out of a corner now, make 
more promises, and say that everything is going to be good. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, one of the people that are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Being 5 o'clock I now leave the 
Chair until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


