


















































June 17, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 17, 1986 
 

2053 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a 
few questions about the planning of the budget that took place 
when you were getting the estimates ready. And my question is: 
on what basis did you plan for oil revenue? What was the price 
that you used when you were figuring out your income from oil 
for the coming year? Was it based on $15 U.S., 20 bucks a barrel, 
or what number did you use when you were figuring out your 
estimate for income for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — $16.30 U.S. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — $16.30 U.S. So roughly $20 when you were 
converting it to our dollars. Would 20 bucks a barrel Canadian be 
a close estimate giving in the fluctuation of the dollar as well as 
the price of oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Probably a little close to 23. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — How have we been making out so far? Can 
you give me a little brief outline since the estimate that you made 
of $23 Canadian, and you set that in motion? Have you had to 
readjust that upwards or downwards for the coming months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well when we did our estimating . . . I'll wait 
until the hon. member is ready. When we did our estimating, we 
were more cautious than, for example, the federal estimates. 
Certainly in the question of oil pricing, it is a guess. I can give you 
ranges from some of the experts of quite a wide range for this 
year. For example, the First Boston Corporation predicts 
somewhere in the range 17 to 18 U.S. Shearson Lehman Brothers, 
New York, expect prices to rise around $22. Chase Econometrics 
forecast prices of about $18. So we took the best guess and then, I 
believe, were somewhat cautious in terms of what we thought it 
would be over the year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Do you have the most recent futures on oil 
on the Chicago market — for Texas oil, let's say, for six months or 
nine months or 12 months, into the coming year? What would 
they be running at at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Somewhere fluctuating between 12 and 16 so 
far. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the area of oil production, what did you 
base the oil production on — the number of cubic metres, or 
maybe if you put into total number of barrels of oil? And you can 
break that how you want, production per day or total production in 
the fiscal year. What was that number that you were using when 
you were estimating income from oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The 1986-87 budget estimate is one  

million, seven hundred and two thousand point five barrels, 
compared to '85-86 budget estimate of two million, four hundred 
and eighteen thousand point one barrels. So it's down 
considerably. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And the other thing that I wanted to ask you 
is, in the land sales project, in the bonus bids that happen on a 
quarterly basis in the province, can you tell me what estimate you 
had for land sales in this fiscal year that we are now into? What 
was the total land sales that you had in your estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Approximately 75. I might add, when I gave 
you that, that was the value of production that I gave you on the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, that's value of 
production. The millions of barrels we're looking — we projected 
about 72.9 in '85-86 — and we're looking at about 73.1 so it's 
approximately the same, but a significant reduction in the 
estimated value of production. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could you give me the June estimate? What 
had you estimated for your June land sale? You say the total 
estimate was 75 million but what would your June . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don't do it by month. We just do the 
annual. I've given you what we projected. I think I gave you '85-86 
estimate, did I not? On the bonus bids of 110 million, we're 
projecting 75, again a significant reduction. Do you want the other 
aspects that go into making up the oil revenues? 
 
The total oil revenue estimated for '85-86 was 654.9. The revised 
estimate is nearly 675, so it's up, but we've projected 
approximately 510 million. Export charge, where obviously there 
— it will be zero; other components of about 22; bonus bids down 
considerably from 110 estimate to 75; and the Crown royalty 
down substantially from 382 to estimate 308. And I'm sorry, the 
freehold tax, down from 130 to 105. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, when we look at your land 
sale income, you're saying that your estimate was based on 
revenue of 75 million, down from 110 estimated last year. 
 
I suppose the interesting thing would be that at your first land sale 
which came in, I believe on June — I'm not sure; June 10, I 
believe — it was down from 40 million last year to 5.2 million. 
And while your estimate was about 30 per cent down, the actual 
on your land sale in June is down by $35 million; down from 40 
million in 1985 to 5.2 in 1986. And I wonder, given that fact, 
whether or not you've revised the estimate for the future land sales 
to reflect the reality of what happened on June 10, where it wasn't 
a 30 per cent decrease in revenue from land sales but a very, very 
drastic decrease in the area of a little over 80 per cent. And what 
that will mean if that continues on is that we will see revenue from 
land sales, not 75 million but around 20 million, if that trend were 
to continue. 
 
And I'm wondering whether or not, whether or not you're 
predicting that the future land sales in September and December 
and next March will shoot back up again to  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2054 
 
 

make up for that. Or are we into a position where we're actually 
talking about another 100 million more on the deficit as a result of 
the downturn in the land sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We freely acknowledge the difficulty of 
trying to estimate oil prices. And I've given you some of the 
ranges of some of the so-called experts on what they're predicting. 
 
The difficulty with regard to . . . We realized on the initial sale that 
prices would be low. The expectations on most of the advice we 
have is that the price will begin to increase later in the year. and so 
not much was posted in the first land sale, recognizing that we did 
not expect initially much interest. So I wouldn't as yet use the first 
sales as any indication that they will necessarily stay like that. So I 
suggest that it's far too soon to estimate, to use the first sales as 
any indication. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'm not sure that it's the first sale and 
that there isn't already a trend developing. 
 
And I want to go back to the March sale — the final quarter of 
1985-86 where the revenue from that sale was $8.3 million. I 
wonder: do you have that quarter for 1985 just so we can make a 
comparison? But my recollection that it was in excess of $20 
million — something in excess of $20 million. But have you got 
that number there? I can probably dig it out of the papers I have 
here, but if you have it maybe you can get that for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, we don't have it specifically. I suppose 
we can endeavour to get it as well. 
 
Certainly the end of last year it looks like we came in over budget 
on them. Certainly right now the trend on the last sale of last year 
and the first are considerably below the last few years. Having said 
that, all I'm suggesting is that based on the information we have, it 
is far too soon to take that as a trend. There are expectations that 
the prices will rise. We have some expectations that there may be 
some special interest in some of the postings that were held back. 
So it's just simply too soon to say whether that trend will continue. 
Certainly if it were to continue, it would throw the projections out 
of whack. It's just simply far too soon to indicate whether that 
trend will continue. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder whether the minister can indicate 
— and clearly we have here at our first land sale in the fiscal year 
'86-87 a decrease from about 40 million to 5 million — was that as 
a result of any changes in royalty in that time period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There was the change in policy announced 
May 1st with the royalty modifications, but we don't expect that 
that would have any effect. Again, keep in mind that there was a 
deliberate move not to post as much, given the fact that oil prices 
are down, and that we just did not expect the bids to develop, 
given the oil environment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I guess the interesting thing is that 
even though the royalty structure basically didn't change, that 
revenue from land sales has plummeted, based on world oil prices 
or the market condition, basically. And I think the minister would 
agree with that. 
 

On the other end of the scale, when the prices are going up for 
land sales, the government takes credit for it. It's difficult for the 
public to keep up with this flip-flop of the Devine government 
who takes credit when land sales are going up, but when land sales 
are going down, then it's not in your control. And obviously when 
you're making money, you take credit for it; and when you're 
losing money, you say it's somebody else's fault. I just make that 
point. 
 
I'm not going to dwell a long time on it because I think you're 
correct now. I think you're correct now in saying the world market 
conditions or conditions within the sale of oil have dictated to us 
that we're getting a great deal less — in fact, close to where we 
were with the national energy program. 
 
(1915) 
 
I refer back to June of 1982 when they were low then because of 
the national energy program, where we got $4.1 million at the land 
sale in June of 1982, and that was as a result of the national energy 
program. And now they're back to 5.2 million, in large part, 
because of the world oil prices. I think you could cut royalties in 
the province even more, and you wouldn't see a significant 
increase in drilling because, I think, anyone who's involved in the 
oil patch knows that unless sales increase and the price goes up, 
you can cut royalties all you want and people aren't going to drill 
more oil wells because there's no sale for it. 
 
I just think that what has happened here is with the royalty-free 
period, we gave away about $300 million a year which it would be 
nice to have now to give stimulus to the oil companies in the oil 
industry when we're in a trough. I don't agree with the policy, the 
public administration to the oil companies when things are 
booming, when world oil prices are the highest on record, and 
how when we could use the money in the oil industry, we don't 
have any. In fact we have a $2 billion deficit. 
 
I just think it's a difference of public administration, where you 
give massive incentives to an industry that' booming, and then 
when it's collapsed we don't have any money to help them out 
because we gave it all away in the good times. 
 
I know you won't agree with that and will continue to say that 
probably you should have given even more incentives during the 
good times, but I think the proof of what is happening is the fact 
that today we have very little revenue from oil, and we have no 
moneys that have been built up during these heady days of 
1983-84 and '85 when oil prices were good. In fact we were going 
into debt at a record pace during the good years in the oil industry 
and didn't put anything away for this rainy day we're now into. 
 
And I just wanted to put that on the record, and maybe the 
minister would put in place his view of the world, whether he 
thinks incentives during the good times is a good idea, and then 
not having incentives during the downturn is the proper way to go. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2055 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I find several aspects interesting. First of 
all, when the so-called good times were going, they were also 
happening in the province of Alberta. But our drilling went up 
triple what it went up in the province of Alberta, so it had some 
significant benefits to both the treasury and to the people of the 
province. 
 
I also find it somewhat interesting that, if I recall the interview that 
the Leader of the Opposition had when he was speaking to the oil 
industry, not thinking that the story he was giving to the oil 
industry would leak out to the public, he said he would accept the 
Conservative policy on the oil industry except on infill drilling, 
which accounts for what — 1 per cent? so it's . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, certainly so. On the one hand, when you 
talk to the oil industry — it's a matter of public record — you 
agree with everything that the government is doing; when you talk 
to the people of Shaunavon, you say that you hate the oil industry. 
So certainly based on the policies of the government, the record is 
also clear that we had far more relative success and actual success 
in the province of Saskatchewan compared to the province of 
Alberta over the last three years as a result of the initiatives of the 
government. 
 
Again, we can debate whether one should or one shouldn't. The 
initiatives did stimulate the economy, did stimulate as well the oil 
industry, and finally, did stimulate a great deal of exploration in 
the province which will be for the long-term benefit of the people 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, there would be many people 
in the province who would wonder about the benefit and the 
economic development that has occurred under your 
administration. Basically, Mr. Chairman, what we have seen is the 
unemployment rate sky-rocket since April of 1982. The number of 
people on welfare has increased from 45,000 to 63,000. The 
deficit has gone from a surplus of 140-some million to a deficit of 
2 billion. 
 
And the argument that we are now in economic good times as a 
result of your great administration in oil doesn't leap out at the 
public. And you're going to have to give more speeches to tell 
them that we are now in a boom time as a result of your oil policy, 
because no one else sees it. And if that is going to be the theme of 
the next election — is elect us because we're such fiscal managers 
of the economy that we went from a balanced budget to 2 billion 
in the hole — you're going to have to have a very slick Toronto ad 
company to sell that one. 
 
And I'm not laying this all on you, because you're new at the job of 
Finance minister. And I think there are those around who would 
argue that you were opposed to the change in the oil royalty 
structure. I remember reading in a book, and you were quoted as 
in cabinet arguing against the change to the royalty structure by a 
cabinet minister who at that time was moving quickly to change 
the oil policy. And I don't blame you for this bad move, but maybe 
I can blame you for not having the strength within cabinet to argue 
that individual down. Because I think you're proving to be right in 
your argument that that  

massive give-away to the infill drilling . . . 
 
And I agree with the leader of the New Democratic Party who 
says that incentives for exploration — they've been there in the 
past under New Democratic governments and they'll be there in 
the future after the next election; that we agree with. 
 
But I'll tell you that the infill drilling or development wells, more 
properly put, is not 1 per cent. I've got someone going to get an Oil 
Week and I will read them out to you, what they are.  They're 
certainly not 1 per cent and if you believe they are 1 per cent, 
maybe that's the reason that we're having so much trouble with the 
deficit, because the developmental well portion of the drilling in 
the province is not 1 per cent, and maybe that's why . . . 
 
If I can get that number for you, you'll find out that you're giving 
away much more than you thought. It will be much, much more 
than 1 per cent. If you say tenfold more than what you gave us as 
an indication of developmental wells, you may be close. But I just 
say that maybe one of the reasons we're $2 billion in the hole is 
because we don't know how much money we gave away for infill 
or developmental wells. 
 
I just clearly indicate to you that the public is not impressed with 
the way we've managed the economy, particularly in the area 
where there was revenue to be had by the public, and that is in the 
area of oil. I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that in the 1970s, the 
price of oil at that time ranged between $3 a barrel and we 
balanced the budget in 1971 and '72 with prices between $3 and 
$20. The interesting thing is, now we're in a time of great 
shut-down in the oil patch, where the government doesn't know 
where it's getting the money from, we are estimating $23 a barrel 
with production that's 50 per cent higher than it was in 1981, the 
last year we were in government and balanced the budget. 
 
Now look at this. We have got 50 per cent more oil production — 
50 per cent more oil production. The price of oil is almost double 
what the average was while we were in government and we can't 
make the books match. Even at that we've had to increase the 
taxes. Property taxes have gone up considerably because of the 
removal of the property improvement. They've gone up because of 
the flat tax and they went up for a time before the government 
turned its head around on the sales tax on used automobiles. 
 
Now I say to you that there are those in the province who believe 
that that is a recipe of mismanagement and they're wondering 
where the money has gone. They're wondering where the money 
has gone, because if you look in the areas of taxation increase on 
ordinary citizens — on cigarettes, for example — the tax increase 
is not 20 or 30 or 40 per cent; it's over 100 per cent in the four 
years this government has been in office. Over 100 per cent. On 
alcohol, similar increases. Sales tax that they promised to reduce 
— not to reduce but to eliminate. We are now paying more in 
sales tax in this province than we did under the former 
government. 
 
In income tax we have a brand-new flat tax, the only  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2056 
 
 

province in Canada that pays two income taxes, under the Devine 
government. And I say to you that in large part we're paying more 
taxes as individuals because the oil companies are paying less; and 
they may have an argument that they should be paying less in 
1986. 
 
You may have an argument — you may have an argument that 
you should have been cutting royalties this year. But I'll tell you, 
you shouldn't have been cutting royalties on oil companies when 
the world oil prices and the Canadian oil prices were the highest 
ever in the province at 30 bucks a barrel, 10 times more than they 
were in 1971 when Premier Blakeney was running the province 
and balancing the budget — 3 bucks a barrel. There are many 
people who don't realize that. 
 
At a time in the province in 1975 and '76 when wheat prices were 
$6 a bushel, the oil prices were running in the area of 10 and $12. 
That's what they were — 10 and $12 — about double what the 
price of wheat was. Well look at the price of wheat now. The price 
of wheat is $3 a barrel and oil is 23, and this government is 
bleeding about the dire straits the oil companies are in and saying 
nothing about farmers. 
 
I'll just tell you that the people of the province wonder who is 
standing up for the real people. They know who's standing up for 
the oil companies, there's no question about that, but they're 
wondering who's standing up for the farmers, the working people, 
the people who are here looking for the opportunity to take early 
retirement that we mentioned earlier, the people who are on 
minimum incomes. We wonder who's standing up for them. And I 
say to you, one of the reasons we can't afford to take care of the 
people in the province now is because we were giving away about 
$300 million every year during the three years that oil prices and 
oil companies were booming. 
 
I just wanted to put on the record, that while we agree that the oil 
companies have gotten into some problems because of world crisis 
now, that for the past three years you people had the highest oil 
prices ever in the history of the province by far, and you had the 
highest production. And during that period you managed to 
increase taxes on ordinary individuals in every area and also run 
up $2 billion in deficit and sell off massive amount of assets — 
coal mines, potash equipment, highway equipment, aircraft, at fire 
sale prices. 
 
And I say to you that that is mismanagement, and I'll tell you that 
that is one of the reasons that we can't have an election right now. 
And I think that what we're hoping is that the government will call 
the election soon before it gets totally out of hand, because I think 
the $2 billion in deficit that we have announced, if we start adding 
in the mistakes that you've made on the budget . . . And I 
mentioned, and my colleague will go into it more, but the 
Saskatchewan income plan, where you show a reduction in what 
you're going to spend and have announced increases . . . And I 
congratulate you for increasing it, but the budget doesn't show any 
increase. It shows a reduction. 
 
On the land sales, where you indicate you're going to get 75 
million in four land sales, and at the first land sale you  

get 5 million — if you project that into the future, that means 
you're going to get about 20, which shows a shortfall of about $55 
million. And in every area, when you add that all up, what I 
believe will happen is your estimate of what the deficit is going to 
be is conservative, to say the least. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I think that totally inaccurate diatribe by 
the hon. member indicates why the public of Saskatchewan 
doesn't like the New Democratic Party, and makes it abundantly 
clear why the public of Saskatchewan does not want to see a New 
Democratic Party government. And I'll put the facts on the record, 
and we will start with the effect of the oil royalty and tax holiday. 
Purely as a result of the holiday, over 5,150 wells have been 
drilled and 27 million barrels of oil have been produced since 
1982. 
 
(1930) 
 
Extra revenues have accrued to the province in the following 
amounts, and I think that this should be on record because it will 
get much recited: increased extra revenues in the amount of 
royalties and taxes, of 8.9 million; additional revenues in the 
amount of bonus bids, of $302 million; additional revenues from 
the export charge, of 22.6 million; and additional revenues from 
the corporate income tax, of $7.6 million. In addition, there have 
been $1.1 billion — that's $1,000 for every man, woman, and 
child — of investment; and 4,900 person-years of employment are 
directly related to the oil policies of this government. 
 
But let us also compare the oil policy of this government to that of 
Allan Blakeney and the NDP. The NDP didn't have a give-away 
program for the oil industry. The NDP's proposal when they were 
government, and they want this brought back, it cost to complete a 
well in this province nearly $110,000. It cost the province 
$110,000 under the New Democratic Party for each well 
completed in 1981-82, and less than half of that under the 
Progressive Conservative administration. 
 
I'll give you some other comparisons. Last year the Progressive 
Conservative program in the oil industry resulted in $149 million 
paid to the people of the province for petroleum and natural gas 
rights. In 1981, the NDP received only $37 million. Last year in 
the province, 3,848 wells were drilled, of which 2,800 were 
completed as oil wells. The last year that the NDP were in power, 
and the hon. member who just spoke was very much part of that 
and very much part of the policy—making, only 807 wells were 
completed — were drilled. I'm sorry — of which 540 were 
completed, less than 20 per cent of what the Progressive 
Conservative policy is. 
 
The difference, of course, is one of philosophy. We try and reward 
the successful wells, that if somebody can drill a well and go down 
as far as they want and as deep as they want, and if they avoid the 
salt-water and they avoid the brine and they avoid the air pockets 
or whatever else is down there, they don't get any money. They 
don't get any money. But if they happen to drill and use their 
expertise and experience and successfully complete  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2057 
 
 

wells — and you'll note the very high percentage of successes 
under our policy than under the previous administration's — then 
yes, they do better. 
 
Why anybody would propose that you get paid by the government 
for drilling dry holes, certainly was much questioned in the oil 
industry, and much questioned by those who are associated with 
the oil industry. 
 
So I'm disappointed to hear the normal restatement of the NDP 
position, the party that supposedly argues for responsibility and 
has already massive give-aways that the public are not taking very, 
very seriously, to say the least. As a matter of fact, I think it fair to 
say that the policies of the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We're 
trying to give the hon. member a little more time on his seniority 
so that he gets a little bit of a pension built up before he retires at 
the wishes of the public. And I know the hon. member of the Quill 
Lakes will appreciate the gesture by the government, but 
obviously the debate will continue for some time. We have a 
fundamental difference. We're trying to reward some success in 
the oil industry; and the NDP wanted to reward those who were 
unsuccessful. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to just reply to the 
minister, who talks about building up pensions. And some 
members opposite build up their pension by moving from one 
party to another at the appropriate time. 
 
I would indicate to the member who was just on his feet that he 
should be moving again fairly quickly if he intends to continue 
building up his pension, as he did when he moved from the 
Liberal Party, who was the party responsible for the petroleum 
incentive program and giving all the money to the oil companies 
for dry holes. He was a member of that party when they were in 
the process of doing that, and I think went to the convention, went 
to the conventions for the Liberal Party when they were discussing 
having the petroleum incentive program to pay oil companies for 
dry holes. He was there at the conventions. And now he 
sanctimoniously stands up and says what a bad idea it was. 
 
Well I'll tell you, it's hard to keep up with this member. But I must 
say that he's been relatively successful in getting elected. When 
the times get tough in one party and he doesn't agree with the 
petroleum incentive program any more to drill dry holes, he jumps 
over to the Conservative Party. But all I would indicate to him is 
that it's time to move again. I'll tell you, I've read the polls out 
there in your constituency and it's just about time to be moving 
along. 
 
I want to go back to a comment, a comment that you made, Mr. 
Minister, on the percentage of wells that are developmental. I 
wonder: have your officials got the . . . I know that they didn't give 
you the information that 1 per cent of the wells drilled in the 
province are developmental. Can you check with them and find 
out what percentage of the metreage drilled in the province would 
be developmental and what would be exploratory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The advice I'm given is that it's less than 10 
per cent and the production from those wells is even considerably 
less than that. And let me advise that it  

wouldn't matter what political party . . . I would disagree with any 
political party that believe in paying the oil industry for drilling 
dry holes or increasing the salt water content of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I just don't think that's the effective way to go. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to ask you to get your officials 
to ask again on the metreage drilled in the province. For example, 
from January 1 of '86 to May 31st of '86, what was developmental 
and what was exploratory? 
 
Because I simply can't believe that they're giving you that advice. 
In fact I have the information here from Oilweek, which is a 
magazine — not a terrible left-wing magazine but a 
Maclean-Hunter publication out of Calgary, Alberta — dated June 
9 of '86. And it has metres drilled week ending May 31st, '86. And 
in Saskatchewan what they're saying is that cumulative to May 
31st of '86; developmental 577,000 — that's developmental, it 
would be eligible for the royalty-free period; and exploratory, 196. 
 
Now that's a little bit different, Mr. Minister, than what you're 
giving me. And I don't believe that your officials are that wrong in 
what they're telling you. But it's three to one, developmental over 
exploratory so far this year. Three to one. That means one-quarter 
is exploratory and three-quarters is developmental. 
 
Now I tell you, with all your expensive help you've got sitting 
around you . . . And I'll send the minister a copy of this for his 
record because he should know. Now with all the hired help you 
have around you, expensive help, then there's something going 
wrong if you're being informed of that. And if you're just making 
it up on the run, I would appreciate if you would get the story 
straight. Because there's more developmental metres drilled, 
according to this Oilweek magazine. And I'll give you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No. Pardon? That three-quarters is 
developmental . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the minister 
said that 1 per cent was developmental . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, he said 1 per cent. Here it's 75 per cent. That's a small 
error. 
 
And in Alberta it's similar to that: developmental 2.7 million 
metres, and exploratory, 1.5. And this is the trend throughout the 
industry. And it's not 1 per cent. And I'm not going to dwell a long 
time, but I think we should get our facts straight because the public 
loses confidence, the public loses confidence very quickly when a 
Minister of Finance will get on his feet and know that little about a 
major industry for developing revenue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will send the information and get it over. 
The Energy and Mines officials are not here; that was the 
information that I was given. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to a 
particular point. And my colleague has been indicating the general 
financial position of the province since your party took office. As 
has been indicated, you are sitting now with a $2 billion deficit; 
indeed probably more than that. The annual amount of interest is 
in the range of $200 million annually. The amount of interest 
alone that we pay on provincial debts since you have  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2058 
 
 

taken over is equivalent to the payment of an entire medicare. And 
we find, as has been alluded to, is that not only have we 
accumulated a massive debt in the province, but that indeed the 
taxes have been increased substantially — the flat tax, the gross 
amount taken in on flat tax, $107 million. You have, in property 
improvement grants that you eliminated, over $80 million benefit. 
And then you put on your ill-fated tax on used vehicles, which the 
public demanded that you remove. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that as you announce programs 
and indeed before the budget is even approved — and that's what 
we're doing here today is approving the estimates for all of the 
departments — and even before the estimates are concluded and 
voted on, what you have is this government again announcing 
expenditures that are not within the estimates. Yesterday you 
announced a program of the extension of the SIP (Saskatchewan 
income plan) program. Nowhere in the budget can you find those 
expenditures. 
 
And this is what has happened. Dealing with a budget by your 
government, Mr. Minister, is not of much significance because 
any estimate of the amount of deficit that you have projected has 
been totally unrealistic in the past four years by your predecessor. 
 
I think the concern that the public has in respect to the fiscal 
management by your party is, number one, the massive debt that 
has been accumulated and that is being transferred on to the backs 
of future generations. And it was indeed, Mr. Minister, your own 
Premier who said that deficits are in fact deferred taxes, and that's 
very true. Because just as we're finding with the federal 
government . . . They ran up a huge deficit, and today what is 
happening is that there's a cut-back in the services, there's an 
increase in taxation, and it's being piled on the backs of this 
generation. 
 
So what I want to turn to is: as you people announce programs, 
programs which you are not in fact paying, what you have done is 
taken the chargex from the people of Saskatchewan and what you 
are indeed ringing up a greater and greater amount of debt. Now 
isn't that a wonderful government, that go out and make promises 
and make promises, and try to get elected on new programs, and 
all that you're doing is taking and charging up to the next 
generation? And what a disaster it has been. 
 
And you come forward with $389 million. You know as a fact that 
that is deception, that you don't intend to reach that amount of 
deficit, that at a minimum it's over 600 million. You know it, and 
still you sit here and you say . . . And when we ask the Minister of 
Health, will you in fact stand up to your federal counterparts to 
prevent them from cutting back on the established program 
funding, your Premier and your minister stand up and say, don't 
worry; look what we have done for health care. 
 
(1945) 
 
Well I'll tell you what you're doing, is you're charging up the 
extravagance of your administration to future generations. All that 
you're hoping to do with this budget and with the previous budget 
is to try to bluff the people one more time into trying to buy their 
votes without the  

realization of the magnitude of the fiscal problems that we're 
facing. 
 
And I'll tell you, you are no more in a position to offer to the 
people of this province a 45 to $50 million pension program, 
because you can't pay for it. You have ran up a debt of $2 billion 
over a period of four years. And if you look, I'll tell you, at the 
gross debt of this province, it has risen from $3.4 billion to $8.7 
billion. That's the legacy; that's the legacy that your party has 
given and passed on to the people of Saskatchewan. And I'll tell 
you, you are boxed in so close at the present time that you're not 
going to be able to fool the people any more. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, and I say to the former minister of 
Finance who is here, the one who brought in the most intelligent 
budget in Canada, so he said . . . The only thing that it was 
intelligent about is that it destroyed him and got rid of him, and it 
was intelligent from the standpoint that the people of 
Saskatchewan got the benefit of getting rid of him. That's the 
intelligent part of that budget. 
 
But let there be no mistake. The public know what's going on; $2 
billion of debt — 2 billion. Do you realize that? Two billion 
dollars of debt. That's $2,000 for every man, woman, and child. 
That's what it is. Four years of Tory mismanagement. They like 
that. They say, oh well, I know what we can do. What we have to 
do now is we've got to turn these polls around, because Decima 
says, we've got to get to the senior citizens. 
 
So what we'll do, we'll announce another program. Not in the 
budget. No, no. It wasn't in the budget, but they came forward 
with a new program for the seniors. And what is that? Are they 
paying for it? Or course not. They're running up a $600 million 
deficit in this budget, at least 600 million, and they haven't stopped 
promising in order to get elected. 
 
What you have been doing just this past year and what this budget 
represents is apolitical masterpiece representing what the polls 
have told you. You're weak with the young people; you're weak 
with the seniors; you're weak with the farmers; you're weak with 
the business men; you're weak with labour groups. You've got to 
change your act. And so they say, well we're 2 billion in debt; 
what the heck does it matter now? Let's go for broke, because if 
we don't win office, they'll never be able to govern with the debt 
and the mess we leave behind. 
 
That's the scenario. Why would we worry? We can't get elected on 
what we're promising, so let's go for broke. Typical Tory 
mismanagement. 
 
And so I'm asking the Minister of Finance . . . Here we sit with the 
biggest mess that this province has ever seen since we entered 
confederation. This is the worst debt position that this province has 
ever been in. And do you know what, do you know what they're 
saying as the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health and 
the Minister of Advanced Education? Me worry? I don't worry. 
We don't want to pick a fight with Brian because Brian has to help 
us to get elected. And do you know what Brian is doing? He's 
cutting back a total of billions of dollars in established program 
funding. And do you know  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2059 
 
 

what they do? They sit on their hands and they say, why do we 
worry? We're putting money into health and we put extra into it 
this year. Well, I'll tell you, the fact is that you aren't paying, the 
future generations are being boxed in, and I say that future 
governments, simply put, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
I want to indicate to you that in respect to established program 
funding, that in 1981 a parliamentary task force on 
federal-provincial fiscal arrangements, echoing a familiar theme in 
Canadian history, defined our nation as a compromise, even a 
paradox. And consistent with this theme, the task force warned 
federal government that it should not risk further cuts to 
federal-provincial transfer payments. It reported they were already 
cut to the bone and the provinces' ability to deliver essential 
services was seriously jeopardized. 
 
And one of the areas that are being cut, Mr. Minister of Finance, is 
in respect to the established programs under the established 
program financing Act at a very substantial amount of cut. We 
asked the Minister of Health how much he estimated that the 
province was going to be losing as a result of the action of the 
federal government. And at that time he said $13 million this year 
was the estimated amount. But he said, on, we will go down there 
and we'll meet with the minister counterparts in Ottawa, and we'll 
put a stop to this; we'll be successful. 
 
Well I'll tell you, the health agencies in Saskatchewan did an 
assessment and they indicated that from the present time up to 
1990-1991 that Saskatchewan could lose, in health care funding 
alone, a total of $154 million. and also they will be losing money 
in respect to secondary education. 
 
And I think, if you look at the record of the funding in respect to 
secondary education, I think you'll certainly realize that there is 
need for further funding. But I think the essence of it is that we 
have to continue to have federal funding in order to have a 
consistency of services across Canada. Because if there is a 
withdrawal of federal funding in the major health care and in 
post-secondary education, the poorer provinces, of course, will not 
be able to provide the services equal to those of the rich provinces. 
 
And the fact is that during the last campaign the federal Tories, in 
their election pamphlet, gave a guarantee, one of their sacred 
trusts, you know, Brian Mulroney's sacred trust. And do you know 
what he said? He said in the election campaign that, I'll guarantee 
the continuation of high support funding for post-secondary 
education and for health. Those were the words that Brian 
Mulroney said. 
 
And here we have the decrease in funding, a substantial amount, 
loss of income, and what do you have? You have the Minister of 
Finance of Saskatchewan sitting on his hands, not making any 
effort to stop the federal government from the cut-backs, which 
will be a very substantial amount. You know, during the hearings 
in Ottawa in respect to the cut-backs, the counterpart, the Finance 
minister in Manitoba, made a presentation to the committee and 
what he asked is that there be hearings go across Canada to 
determine whether or not there should  

be cut-backs in established program funding, and of course the 
Tory majority said, no way. 
 
Well I'll tell you that the province of Manitoba have analysed the 
amount that the loss will be if the Tories go ahead with the 
proposed cut-backs, and I can say to you that they're going ahead, 
because here is a press release: "Payment cuts inevitable," says 
McDougall. 
 
The provinces will have to live with legislation trimming federal 
contributions to higher education and health programs by $6 
billion over the next five years, junior finance minister Barbara 
McDougall said Monday. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, I don't think that we in 
Saskatchewan, without the federal contribution . . . I don't think 
you're doing a service to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
medicare and the health services that we have grown accustomed 
to in Saskatchewan, that you will not in fact stand up and fight for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, could you outline: have you done a 
calculation, based on the proposal of the federal Finance minister, 
what the total cost will be to the province of Saskatchewan if they 
go ahead? And as the federal minister has indicated that they will 
be proceeding, and that the provinces will have to live with the 
inevitable fact that they're going to proceed with the cuts, can you 
indicate the amount of cuts? I'd like you to indicate what action 
you have taken as a Minister of Finance and whether or not you 
believe that there is still a possibility of convincing the federal 
government not to proceed with this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Several points in that diatribe warrant 
justification, only because the public would like to see some sane 
debate. But having said that, one of the reasons that the public 
doesn't like the New Democratic Party is that on the one hand you 
talk about the deficit, on the other hand you make some rather 
grandiose promises — 600 to $800 million, 7 per cent mortgages 
for everybody. 
 
Seven per cent mortgages for every man, woman and child in the 
province and 6 to $800 million cost over the next four years, 
100-and-some million dollars a year. You're going to give a whole 
new property improvement grant, another 100 and some million; 
you're going to do something about the flat tax, here estimated at 
$100-and-some million. Right there you've spent nearly a billion 
dollars, and that's why the public doesn't put very much store in 
your talk about deficit or management or otherwise. 
 
Secondly, it doesn't include things like the promise of the member 
of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg of $50 for every cultivated acre. That 
was over $1 billion that was promised a year ago. And I think that 
he had a program to have one person to kill every grasshopper in 
the province. It got a little extreme. And all of your commitments 
— all of your election commitments are, as you well know, 
causing a great deal of credibility problems for yourselves. 
 
I was very surprised. I was very surprised because I thought that 
when he was on television that the hon.  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2060 
 
 

member would say one thing on television and support the pension 
plan and do something off television and not support the pension 
plan. But to find out tonight that the New Democratic Party 
opposes the provincial pension plan. I think, was well-heard and 
well-watched by everyone viewing tonight. 
 
So it's nice to see your policy on record. I strongly suspect by the 
time the hon. member gets taken back into the wood house by his 
colleagues, he's going to change his mind about the provincial 
pension plan and say, oh, we would have done that, too. Oh, we 
would have done that if we had of thought about it. 
 
But, of course, the New Democratic Party hasn't had a new idea 
since land bank and nationalization of the potash industry, so I'm a 
little bit surprised at the hon. member's position of opposing the 
Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
I think that there is something else, if you want to talk about 
negotiations, which many people in public that are affected by 
program expenditures are increasingly aware of, and that is your 
inability to bargain in 1981, where you gave away the revenue 
guarantee component of the established program funding. And I 
believe the member from Regina North East was Finance minister 
at the time and gave away the revenue guarantee. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In 1982 you gave away the revenue guarantee 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, yes you did . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, you fought like that was 10 lashes with a wet 
noodle, that was, because I'll tell you how successful you were. 
Your negotiating in 1981-82 cost the province over the next five 
years — next five years — $198.7 million. In the second five-year 
component, you cost the province an additional $107 million. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now, I know the hon. members opposite don't want to hear this, 
but the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order, please! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You ask about the 
revenue losses from the NDP negotiating over the 10 years. The 
revenue loss to the province is nearly $405 million. If you want to 
know the impact, the change in the formula, and the established 
program, financing program, or funding formulate — our 
departmental calculations indicate that the formula based on the 
current gross national product forecast, compared to the previous 
formula using the conference board of Canada figures of July of 
1984, indicates that the difference between the new projections 
and the old formula is a net plus over the next five years of $109 
million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate and 
send over your calculation in respect to the amount of the loss over 
the next period of time because we has asked the Minister of 
Health, consistently, to  

provide us with a calculation of it, because the health 
organizations has indicated $154 million in health, and you have 
indicated that $109 million by 1990-91. I can tell you that in 
respect to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I'll be here and 
you'll be out. I'll tell you that. That's the one truth about it all. 
 
But I asked the minister if he could indeed send over the . . . could 
in fact send over the calculation of how he has determined it, and 
what premise that he based it on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I've just sent it over to you, and I've just 
given you the figures based on the current gross national product 
forecast. Now keep in mind that the formula depends on the gross 
national product, and it's a three-year averaging, approximately, 
less 2 per cent. So our estimates right now, based on the current 
gross national product forecast — based on the current forecast — 
means that we will have an increase as opposed to a decrease of 
$109 million over five years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You're indicating that based on the reduction of 
the $2 billion that the federal minister is saying that his is going to 
save annually, and a total of 6 billion over the five years . . . I s 
that what you said, that you're going to be increasing the revenue 
to Saskatchewan? Are you saying that the gross national product 
projected for the future is so bad that out of reduction in the 
formula, a 2 per cent cut, that you're going to increase the funding. 
Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I have indicated, that the projected EPF 
(established program of financing) transfers, cash and tax to the 
province of Saskatchewan, based on the current GNP (gross 
national product) forecast — keep in mind that the current GNP 
forecast is a stronger GNP than that under the Liberal proposals 
when the formula was done — so you have to understand that. 
And I've given you those figures and that would indicate an 
increase of $109 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The Minister of Health, who did a calculation, 
who came into this House, indicated that on the basis of the 
formula, in the first year indicated that they were going to lose — I 
think our calculation was 13 million — and he indicated that on 
his calculations, on his officials, and in conjunction with the 
Department of Finance, that the loss was going to be a minimum 
of $9 million. And he wouldn't hazard a guess into the future 
because he was going down to change it. I ask you, who are we to 
believe? 
 
We had the Minister of Health in here, and we drilled him for 
several days in respect to what was going to be happening in 
respect to the cut-backs proposed by the federal government. He 
indicated $9 million. And if he were honourable, he would stand 
on his feet and enter the debate and indicate that that was his 
calculation. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you trying to put forward 
here? You have one minister saying we're going to lose a 
minimum of $9 million in health care funding in the first year, and 
you're standing up and saying, oh no, we aren't going to lose any. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think that you should take into  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2061 
 
 

account some other factors which are in the budget which may be 
of interest to you, and that is cash payments: the 1985-86 budget, 
439.455 million, increased under EPF this year to 458.82 million. 
The debate will hinge on what your projects of the GNP, and that's 
where the differences in the figures will come. As I've indicated to 
you, if you assume the current GNP forecast, okay? — that's the 
assumption being made — if the current GNP forecast is accurate, 
maintains its accuracy over five years, it means a difference of a 
plus $109 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We don't believe that for a moment, because the 
Minister of Health indicated during his estimates that he was 
going down to meet with his counterparts in order to attempt to 
prevent the . . . and talk to the federal counterparts in order to 
avoid proceeding with the cut-backs. 
 
I take a look here in the PC votes, votes against hearings on the 
road, and from Manitoba they indicate that the province . . . could 
cost his province 313 million in loss of funding. If you take a look 
at the payments cuts inevitable, "the provinces will have to live 
with legislation trimming federal contributions to higher education 
and health programs by $6 billion over the next five years," and 
this is the junior Finance minister, Barbara McDougall. 
 
Now there's $6 billion. Now you tell me under what formula the 
Finance Minister, Wilson, is going to get $6 billion over the next 
five years and Saskatchewan is in fact is going to improve their 
position. Tell me the perverted logic that you're putting forward 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This is precisely why you gave away the 
equalization formula back in 1981 because you're having some 
difficulty. If one makes the assumption of the current GNP 
forecast, there will be over the next five years an increase of $109 
million over the old formula. Keep in mind as well that the 
formula has been modified as of February to adjust for inflation 
which is a new factor not in the adjustments done by any of those 
studies that you have. So I suggest to you that those are perhaps 
out of date and it's based again on current GNP. 
 
Now if you were to take the old calculations without inflation 
based on the liberal assumptions when the equalization was 
changed and you gave up the guarantee, yes, you would have a 
loss of 13. But as our new calculations indicate that based on, 
again, the current GNP forecast, and that's the assumption we're 
making, that there will be a gain over the old formula of $109 
million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When you were speaking about the current GNP, 
are your referring to the Saskatchewan GNP or the federal, or 
Canadian? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I always thought that GNP was gross 
national product, but I am unaware of any changes in the 
definition of GNP. I'm assuming it's the gross national product. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What increase are you indicating for the current 
year in respect to the gross national product? In comparison to the 
present, what is the growth? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The growth, the real GNP is '85 was 4.5 per 
cent — 4.7 points better than was forecast before the present 
national government took office. For 1986, they were calling for a 
growth in the range of 3.5 per cent, which is three points higher 
than that predicted in 1984, which is the basis of much of the 
calculations that you have. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What you're talking about is that there is going to 
be an increase in the amount of funding and there's no doubt from 
year to year that you can get that. But if you hadn't adjusted the 
formula of cutting down the basic GNP plus a percentage from 7 
to 5, you'd end up with a heck of a lot more than 109 million. 
 
I'm not saying that you're not going to get some additional money 
from the federal government, but the fact is that the formula has 
been changed, and not changing the formula and using the gross 
national product, plus the previous percentage, plus the previous 
percentage increase of 7 per cent rather than 5, the amount that 
you would be increasing would be very substantial. 
 
So what you're doing here is a little gymnastics, deceiving the 
public as though, again, you haven't stood up for health care, you 
haven't stood up for post-secondary education. What you have 
done is allow the federal government to cut back on their basic 
funding, and what they're doing is raping the provinces for some 
$6 billion. And if you think that that is not going to affect the basic 
quality of health care and post-secondary education, then I'll tell 
you, a lot of people won't have much faith in you. In fact, the 
public don't have much faith in your fiscal management as it is. 
 
And when you come forward with a perverted explanation here 
trying to sneak it past, saying, oh boy, the gross national product is 
going to increase and therefore even though they decrease the 
percentage down to it, we're going to get some more money. The 
fact is, Mr. Minister, you know that given the increase in the gross 
national product and given the consistency of the increase 
previously, that you would be getting more than 109. 
 
What I'm asking you: if you hadn't changed the formula, wouldn't 
you indeed be getting more than 109, and what in fact would you 
be getting? Quit trying to fool the people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don't know who's trying to fool the people. 
fifteen minutes ago I was being criticized for not doing enough 
and that there was the massive cut-backs in expenditures. We now 
go through the calculations and even manage to convince the 
member from Quill Lakes that what the new formula means, it 
means an additional $109 million. 
 
And so now the hon. member is now criticizing us because we're 
getting more than we were before. So, you know, that is precisely 
why the people don't like the New Democratic Party. On the one 
hand you say one thing to the oil industry; on another hand you 
say another something else to the public. You say in North 
Battleford you don't want Gainers, and you say in Prince Albert 
you  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2062 
 
 

do want the paper-mill; in Regina you say you don't want it. 
 
(2015) 
 
Ten minutes ago you were critical of me for the formula. I give 
you the new figures; it means an increase of $109 million based on 
the current gross national product forecast. Certainly I can see the 
member's confusion when he doesn't even know that GNP means 
gross national product. 
 
But for Heaven's sake, I mean, make up your mind. It's 15 minutes 
for all to see you were critical saying there was a cut-back, and 
then when we showed you there was an increase, you're all 
confused. So now you're saying it's not enough. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that if we want to take a look at the 
commitment of the people of Saskatchewan to the health care 
system, you can look at this year's budget with a 13 per cent 
increase. You can take a look at increases in educational 
expenditures, and you can take a look at an increase in health 
expenditures. And we as well as any other political party, I 
venture, in Saskatchewan, know full well the dangers of not 
protecting the health care system, and we have made that 
commitment and the public recognizes it. 
 
I gather from your optimism in your own riding, they're not telling 
you what the surveys are saying, but certainly they are recognizing 
that this government has the commitment to health care and that is 
further evidenced in the budget. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, we discussed this matter previously 
with the Minister of Health, as I indicated, and on page 538, on 
April 11th of Hansard, and I read what your colleague had to say 
— he says: 
 

But in regards to your question, the best estimate of what 
they're indicating is perhaps about a $13 million reduction. 
Of course, only a portion of that would be towards health as 
you understand, that's EPF funding which is for both higher 
education and health. 

 
Now that's the Minister of Health indicating about $13 million. 
 
Now I guess the simple question is: who are we to believe? I leave 
it to you, Mr. Minister. I ask the people of Saskatchewan: who can 
they believe? Health minister, who was drilled, indicates 13 
million bucks the first year. Minister of Finance comes in and 
says, no, we aren't losing anything, and he goes into his 
convoluted manipulation of numbers. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, that the amount of loss that is going to 
be accumulated, the estimated loss, is going to be approximately 
$213 million to the province of Saskatchewan, calculated on the 
base and the reduction proposed by your counterpart in Ottawa. 
Mr. Wilson the Finance minister — $213 million. 
 
Manitoba is losing approximately $313 million. And I'll  

tell you, they're standing up, and they're fighting. And they have 
asked the federal government to have hearings across the country, 
in order that the public have an opportunity to know what is 
happening. 
 
But here you have stood . . . And I can't believe what I heard this 
evening. I really can't — that a Finance minister here in 
Saskatchewan would stand in this House after the Minister of 
Health has told the public after much drilling that $13 million is 
the loss in the first year on record, and to have the Minister of 
Finance come into this House and to mislead the House . . . This is 
a deliberate attempt to mislead the House. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, somebody has to be not telling the 
truth. The Minister of Health has indicated — and I've read it — 
that there's $13 million that was going to be lost in EPF funding. 
And that's the question that I directed to the Minister of Finance, 
and you know what he stood up and said? We're going to have an 
increase of $109 million. That's what he said. 
 
Now those answers are not consistent. Someone has to be 
stretching the truth, and what I'm asking, and I'm asking the people 
of Saskatchewan to decide — will they believe the Minister of 
Finance, who is trying to protect his counterpart in Ottawa, or do 
you believe the Minister of Health who we drilled here for two 
and one-half weeks, two and one-half weeks and finally pulled it 
out of him? 
 
I'll tell you, the health association said that there's going to be a 
loss of $154 million in health care. As far as the Minister of Health 
speaking from the back of the room, I think he looks more 
appropriate in the back benches, rather than the front, but leave 
that aside, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I ask the Minister of Finance: are you able to explain why the 
Minister of Finance . . . would come in here and tell to the House, 
after complete drilling, and saying that he had discussed it with his 
officials that it's $13 million; and you come into this House and 
you say, don't worry, there is no loss? Is there or is there not going 
to be a loss because of the fact that the formula has been changed? 
And if there has been a change in the formula, would you indicate 
the nature of the change, and would you indicate what your 
calculation of the loss under the EPF? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I've already explained this, but I understand 
the difficulty of trying to say and explain something to an 
opposition member who doesn't know that GNP means the gross 
national product. 
 
If you take the original projections of gross national product, 
which I've indicated that '85 for example, is 4.7 per cent better 
than was forecast when the federal government took office; for '86 
the forecasters are calling for growth in the 3.5 per cent range. If 
you compare that to what the original projections, for example, the 
conference board of 0.2 per cent in 1985 and 0.5 per cent in 1986, 
those were the projections on which those other calculations were 
based. Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's what I'm saying. 
Those were the original projections which led to the estimates 
being given, I suggest by several other studies. 
 
The real gross national product though, in 1985 growth,  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2063 
 
 

was 4.5 per cent better than forecasted, and the projection for '86 is 
in the range of 3.5 per cent, which is three points better than 
originally projected. Keep in mind that the formula is based on an 
averaging of the gross national product, so you're going to get that 
adjustment, and the hon. members . . . 
 
First of all, again I'll explain to you that GNP means gross national 
product. Now the projections and the forecasts are coming in 
higher than they were two years ago . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I'm telling the hon. member — he can argue and disagree — 
the new formula based on the GNP forecast, which I've already 
given, means an increase of 109. If we had the previous no growth 
as the conference board and original projections, yes, you would 
have other varying scenarios as to losses, but right now, because 
the GNP is running considerably higher than expected, it has the 
opposite result. Now the fact is that the GNP in 1985 is 4.7 per 
cent higher than projected. That has a significant impact on the 
formula. 
 
If the hon. member doesn't understand that, he shouldn't be in the 
discussion because the basis to the established program financing 
is tied to the gross national product. If you can't understand the tie, 
then you won't understand the formula and you won't understand 
the discussion. 
 
But again, if you take the old projections, you will have a loss; if 
you take the actual, for example, in '85, you have a plus and the 
difference between the forecast of $109 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to just stress what has gone on in the 
House before, and I want to indicate a question on page 705 by my 
colleague, the member from Shaunavon: 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister in regards to this 
report of the Canadian Hospital Association, which we will 
be tabling after question period at our first opportunity, I will 
be asking the question again. 

 
This estimate, that is by the Canadian Hospital Association, this 
estimate is that $153 million will be cut out of the transfer of 
payments in total in the next five years. That's the Canadian 
Hospital Association. 
 
We have the provincial government in Manitoba indicating that 
there will be a cut-back adjustment of the formula of 313 million. 
We have a calculation here indicating that the total amount for 
Saskatchewan will be $213 million. 
 
We have the minister again standing up in the House here in 
question period, not only in estimates — in estimates he indicated 
that there'd be a $13 million loss — he stands up in question 
period and he says: 
 

Once again, let me repeat: my department are looking at the 
funding of the health care in Saskatchewan this year. We 
understand there may be a cut-back. There may be under the 
EPF a reduction, a reduction of $9 million. 

 
That's in health alone. Those are the statements that the Minister of 
Health has indicated. 
 

And what I'm saying to the public and I'm saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan: what is happening is that there is a massive 
cut-back in the health care and in post-secondary education by 
your federal counterparts, and that you here in Saskatchewan, both 
the Minister of Health, the Minister of Advanced Education, and 
the Minister of Finance, have been not prepared to stand up to 
make public and to take on the Mulroney government and to 
protect our health care and post-secondary education, because 
there is going to be a considerable loss of revenues by the 
adjustment of the formula. 
 
No amount of slippery manipulation by you, indicating that 
because the GNP goes up that you're going to get more than what 
you would have on last year's GNP, of course you will, but the fact 
is that the percentage amount has been decreased — GNP plus 7 
per cent has been reduced to GNP plus 5 per cent. And what 
you're doing to get is a reduction, and that comes out to 
somewhere around $213 million for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I say, that is a massive amount. 
 
And what you're doing here is . . . afraid to fight for Saskatchewan 
because what you're doing at the present time is going into an 
election and you don't want to ruffle any feathers because the 
federal Tories are one of the biggest detriments that you have, 
along with your fiscal mismanagement. And so let it be known . . . 
all I can say is that it's so bad, the underfunding and the direction 
of the federal government in respect to cut-backs, it's so 
astonishing to the people of Canada, that the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Judge Dickson, spoke out against 
the undercutting by governments of secondary education and 
health care. 
 
And he indicates, and there was some consternation when he 
spoke out, but let there be no mistake, Mr. Minister, "That lower 
payments for the provinces clear the hurdle." And it indicates that 
the legislation is in parliament, ". . . the slower rate of growth 
breaks a Conservative . . ." 
 
This is what it says in the EPF: 
 

. . . breaks a Conservative 1984 campaign promise to 
maintain health care and higher education funding levels. 
(This is what they're saying.) MPs said poor students will 
bear the brunt immediately, in the form of higher tuition 
charges, or more limited access to universities. 

 
This is the inevitable result. And all I can say, Mr. Minister, I'm 
disappointed that you would come to this House and attempt to 
mislead it, because we have in fact asked it, and we got the 
information from the Minister of Health, and you have tried to 
disguise that, but the people of Saskatchewan know, and certainly 
the health associations know. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, the people in the universities know 
that there is a decrease in the amount of funding, because if they 
look at the funding in education, in higher education, they'll know 
that the funds are getting increasingly difficult. And so I ask you: 
can you outlined whether or not you met with the federal 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2064 
 
 

counterparts, when you met with them, and would you be 
prepared to file the presentation to your federal counterparts in 
respect to their adjustments in the EPF formula? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Maybe I can help ease the hon. member's pain 
by asking him to look at page 6 of the Estimates for '86-87, and 
near the bottom of the page is, under the heading. "Receipts from 
other governments, established programs financing," the estimated 
'85-86 to the estimated '86-87 is a 5.56 per cent increase. So there 
are very much assumptions in terms of a growth scenario where 
the financing does in fact increase. 
 
If one assumes zero growth or negative growth in the gross 
national product, certainly you will have reductions. You should 
also keep in mind that the formula, as of February, through the 
efforts of some of the provincial Finance ministers, is now going 
to take into account inflation, which was not in the original 
formula. 
 
So having said that, you can talk about the fighting and the 
argument. I think that the Manitoba government did the fighting 
— the argument — did everything but commit hara-kiri on the 
steps of the legislature and there was no change. So the arguments 
very much can be mounted. 
 
I strongly suspect the hon. member, if he would forward over to us 
the projections in the study to which he referred, what the gross 
national product projections were, because they are very 
influential — they're very, very influential . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
I've told you seven times now tonight — I've told you seven times 
what the variables are and what the assumptions are which give 
you that particular figure. Now it's the seventh time I've repeated it 
for the hon. member. It's the seventh time that he hasn't made an 
effort to understand what I've said. I know you've got a fixation 
with seven, but to have me repeat the answer seven times, 
indicates that unfortunately you don't understand it. But I do 
believe that the economic models will vary by the studies based on 
what assumptions one makes for the gross national product, and as 
a result of changes in February, what assumptions one makes as to 
the annual inflation rate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, either you are not making any 
attempt to tell what the facts are, or you don't fully understand 
what the federal government has in mind. If you're unable to 
understand what the budget documents of Michael Wilson say, I 
would suggest you ask one of your officials, who I know are 
qualified and will be able to understand it, and then explain it to 
you. 
 
But let me read to you from Mr. Wilson's budget, Mr. Minister. 
Having heard you stand here and deny that there are cuts in the 
amounts of transfer payments, in EPF payments that would 
normally have come to Saskatchewan, you totally ignored the fact 
that Mr. Wilson has said in no uncertain terms to you, and you 
bowed and acquiesced in your usual way of this government — as 
you do with the federal government — and said, that's okay; we're 
not going to object; you have  

your politics and we have ours. We're going to look after each 
other. It doesn't matter what the people of Saskatchewan or the 
people of Canada are going to have to pay, but we're going to look 
after our politics. and that's why, Mr. Minister, you have stood in 
this House, and not been totally honest with the committee, 
contradicted what your Minister of Health has said on more than 
one occasion. Now either you're trying to undermine his 
credibility, or he made an honest mistake, or he did not given an 
honest answer here, or you're the one who's not doing it. I read to 
you, Mr. Minister, what Mr. Wilson had to say: 
 

As part of a broad-based strategy to reduce the deficit and 
stimulate economic growth, the federal government is 
proposing to limit the rate of growth of transfers to 
provincial governments in order to effect savings amounting 
to about $2 billion in 1990-91. 

 
Those are the budget documents. Some of this stuff has already 
been passed through the House of Commons, Mr. Minister, and 
you and your government never as much as made one single word 
of protest. You acquiesced at the expense of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer. 
 
The minister in Ottawa went on to say: 
 

The same principles of restraint will be applied to transfers to 
provinces as to other expenditures to spread the burden of 
expenditure reduction as broadly and fairly as possible. 

 
Without any doubt, and as clear as one possibly could make it, Mr. 
Wilson has said that the federal government is going to institute 
and continue to institute a system of transferring the tax load from 
Ottawa to the provinces, and the province, in this case, in turn has 
transferred it to the Saskatchewan taxpayer and property holders. 
 
I'm not making my own argument here; Mr. Wilson is making my 
argument for me. And either you have ignored these documents or 
you have not understood them, but it's clear that there has been a 
cut in the amount of transfer payments that the province should 
have been able to expect if the federal government had not chosen 
to change the formula and if you had not allowed them to do it. 
 
Now, what did Barbara McDougall say — another federal 
minister — when she was questioned recently? I quote. She said. 
 

The provinces will have to live with legislation trimming 
federal contributions to higher education and health 
programs by $6 billion over the next five years, junior 
finance minister Barbara McDougall said Monday. 

 
McDougall initially said the provinces . . . had "come to 
terms with it." 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, you obviously were one of those provinces 
that had come to terms with it and had agreed not to protest or 
object. And so the federal government, without the kind of 
pressures that it should have been  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2065 
 
 

getting if we had had a government in Saskatchewan prepared to 
stand up for Saskatchewan, went along on its merry way to 
proceed with these kinds of massive cuts. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that the federal Minister of 
Finance, that the junior Minster of Finance, Barbara McDougall, 
both have said that there will be cuts, how do you explain your 
so-called explanation that there are, in fact, going to be increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, again, I'm going to ask: has the hon. 
member got a copy of the Estimates 1986-87 in front of him? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I most certainly do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If he would please kindly move to page 6. I'm 
sorry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon . . . inaudible . . . Oh, I 
have given the hon. member the example before. I'd ask him if he 
would at least give me the courtesy of following along. 
 
He's pointing at his head right now. I hope nothing drastic happens 
as a result of that, but if you'd take a look at the Estimates, if you 
will go down near the bottom of the page, you will see under the 
title "Established Programs Financing", and you will see an 
increase of approximately 5.56 per cent. So that is a fact. There is 
an increase notwithstanding your argument that there is a decrease. 
Okay? So there is an increase. 
 
Secondly, keep in mind that many of the projections were based 
on a relatively — either zero growth in the GNP, a reduction in the 
GNP; some of the earlier ones basically a GNP of 0.5 per cent. In 
1985 that projection of a zero per cent or minus 2 per cent GNP 
was exceeded by 4.7 per cent. For 1986 the gross national product 
is predicted to be in the 3.5 per cent. That's about a 3 per cent 
higher projection than the estimates previously given. 
 
The formula is based on the gross national product, a three-year 
average, and it's a sliding average. It keeps moving forward every 
year. The end result, based on the projections that I've given you, 
would indicate a plus over the five years of $100-and-some 
million. If, on the other hand, there was a zero per cent gross 
national product, no-growth scenario, you would have losses, 
except for a change — and this is not in any of the studies you will 
have, but I ask you to accept it as perhaps a major factor in how 
the formula will be calculated in the future. 
 
As a result of negotiations in February of this year, the federal 
government has put an inflation floor, that that will not fall below 
the inflation for the year. That is a major benefit which was not in 
the old formula. One can envisage in some economic scenarios 
where that inflation floor may result in higher revenues than the 
new, the old, or any other formula, depending what the inflation 
rate may be. 
 
So I give you those factors and those components. You say that 
those don't exist and are not accurate. I'm giving the information 
that I have, and I suggest to you that one can develop the models 
quite properly and quite fairly. The information I've given you, 
based on current GNP  

forecast — and I give you that caution; that's the current GNP 
forecast — there would be an increase over the old formula of 
$109 million. That doesn't take into account, I might add, any 
inflation floor, because that was not taken into account in those 
projections. Those would result in some new calculations, and I 
suppose we could go through that exercise. It would take some 
time. 
 
But again, I simply lay out for the hon. member that you can take 
your economic assumptions, based on zero or less than zero in 
GNP, and it will lead you along a certain path. You take the other 
ones with the 1985-86, which I've now repeated for the seventh 
time, which are running considerably above projections — they 
mean higher revenues under established program financing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what $13 
million cut was the Minister of Health talking about in light of the 
argument that you're using? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I told you, that was based on the old 
projections of zero or, I believe, minus 0.2 per cent and 0.5 per 
cent. The projections have now come in on '85 which is 4.5 per 
cent GNP. That's 4.7 points ahead of the projections which was 
the basis for the other estimates. The estimate for '86 is now 3.5 
per cent; it may even be a little higher than that when it comes in, 
which is three points higher than that which was the basis for other 
calculations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, assuming and keeping all 
things constant, your GNP and other factors constant, how much 
would the province have gotten above what you're going to get, 
had the old formula stayed in place? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Under the old formula, it would have been 
$13 million more, but it's $11 million more based on the gross 
national product projections and the increase in the gross national 
product. So you're now looking at a difference right now of $2 
million as opposed to 13. So again, I come back to what I've 
indicated to the hon. member. Take your assumptions, take zero 
growth, and you will have a reduction. Now that doesn't take into 
account . . . And I caution the member as well that under the old 
formula there was not any inflation floor and under the new 
modifications . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Oh yes, it does. Sure it does. It certainly makes a difference. If 
you've got a gross national product of 2 per cent and inflation of 4 
per cent, you've got an inflation floor which wasn't in either the 
old formula or the original discussions on the new formula. So 
certain it can make a big difference. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it's taken a long time but we 
finally established the $13 million difference. I am really quite 
pleased that we have established that what the Minister of Health 
said in his estimates were correct. He clearly said there was going 
to be a loss of $13 million because of the change in the formula. 
Quite frankly, I never doubted his word. I doubted your responses 
today and after a long line of questioning we finally got you to 
admit, Mr. Minister, that indeed there is going to be a loss  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2066 
 
 

of $13 million. Now had you come clean the first time the 
question was asked, we could have been done with this about 20 
minutes after 8, and we would have been on to another item. 
 
We've accomplished what we wanted to accomplish, Mr. Minister. 
We've established the fact that just like your budget, through and 
through and through, so is some of the information that we're 
getting in the House somewhat questionable — $13 million the 
Minister of Health said. You have now confirmed it. There is 
nothing that the opposition can do about it except tell the 
Saskatchewan public that by your acquiescence and by your 
buddy-buddy approach with the federal government, you have 
allowed this to happen rather than standing up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they're going to lose $13 million this year and 
about $154 million by the time the fifth year is up. And the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer is going to have to pick up the bill. 
 
Now, to carry this budget of yours further, and its questionability, 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you some questions on another 
subject because in many ways it ties in — as soon as I can get the 
minister's attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government introduced yesterday or the day 
before, changes to the Saskatchewan income plan for senior 
citizens. Can I ask you, how much do you project will be the cost 
of the changes that you have introduced, which is going to be 
welcomed by senior citizens — and we don't question the changes 
— but can I ask you: how much is that change going to cost you 
this year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, again the hon. member wasn't listening. 
I've indicated with the GNP that the difference may be $2 million 
and not 13. 
 
Secondly, let me indicate again, because you were the minister 
that cost the people of Saskatchewan $200 million when you were 
in government, when you gave away — and I say gave away or 
sold out because I don't know what price this province has paid for 
your under-the-table deal on the constitution — but let me tell you 
what you did; let me tell you what you did. You gave up the 
revenue guarantee, which no longer applies, and it has lost the 
province $200 million in the last five years. Secondly, it will lose 
another $200 million. 
 
So with a stroke of the pen, with a stroke of the pen, you gave up 
$400 million. Having said that, you asked what the SIP . . . I think 
if the hon. member will take a look — and I know you've got 
yourself all caught up in a little knot about SIP — if you will take 
a look at the budget, we are setting aside some $5 million for 
start-up for the Saskatchewan pension plan, and that's in the 
budget. And in that we estimate that the SIP for this year could be 
in the range of 2 to $2.5 million, and we set aside 5 to get the 
pension plan up and started. 
 
So, you know, we did make some considerations. Certainly we 
were estimating costs, but we did set some funds aside. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I'm not asking about the 
pension fund; that's a different subvote altogether and  

a different issue. I'm asking you about the Saskatchewan income 
plan. You have said that in this year, which is not a full year now 
because the Bill is just before the House, hasn't been passed, and I 
doubt that you're going to make it retroactive — you are telling us 
that it will cost you, it will cost the treasury, $2.5 million in 
addition, or the increases will cost $2.5 million for this portion of 
the year. Can you tell the House how much the cost will be over 
the period of a full year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the advice I'm given is the first year 
annualized about $2.5 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well then will you answer my earlier 
question: how much is it going to cost you in this fiscal year, 
because it's not a full year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we have to make a decision as to the 
date that we're going to implement it. But you can look at roughly 
$200,000 a month. I'm sure that the hon. member won't expect me 
to give the date of the implementation of that. You can ask me, but 
I'm unable to give it to you because no decision has been made at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, there's been obviously 
no decision made in the same way as there hadn't been a decision 
made to have this Bill in the first place when you put together your 
budget initially. Surely you should be able to tell the senior 
citizens of this province you have a Bill in the House; you must 
have had it in cabinet. I'm sure the Minister of Urban Affairs didn't 
decide on his own to bring this Bill in. Therefore, in cabinet you 
must have decided when you are going to start making payments 
to senior citizens. 
 
And I will be expecting the Minister of Urban Affairs, in 
consideration of that Bill in committee, to be able to indicate when 
payments will begin. No government that knows anything about 
management or cares about management would run its affairs 
without knowing when it's going to put a program into place. 
 
Now I could understand if it was a brand-new program with many 
complicated regulations you have to draw up where there could 
have to be a delay. But when it comes to paying the increases in 
the SIP payments to senior citizens who need a supplement to their 
income, there is nothing complicated about it. You could start 
paying that the month after this Bill is through. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . and you're quite in your right to say 
you're not prepared to tell the senior citizens when they can expect 
to get those benefits because you may want to hold it off until you 
call your election in October, November, or maybe next year. And 
maybe they won't get any benefits at all this year. You simply 
have a cosmetic Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, as 
the Minister of Finance who controls the purse strings, when the 
pay-out for the SIP program will begin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I've indicated in my previous answer  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2067 
 
 

that no decision has been made as to when the pay-out will begin. 
I am prepared to advise the hon. member and the seniors that 
during the course of the NDP administration, they had a total 
increase in the Saskatchewan income plan of a total of $5. Five 
dollars, that is all that the Blakeney government saw fit to give the 
senior citizens in some seven years. 
 
We had a dramatic increase two years ago for seniors. I believe 
we'll have and do have a fair degree of credibility. The seniors 
know that we will respond to them, but no decision has been 
made. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well that's a very convoluted argument, 
Mr. Minister. It was the NDP government who instituted the 
Saskatchewan income plan in the first place. And I'm not quite 
sure what the level is. It's about $50, is it, at the present time? so 
therefore the NDP government of the day, before 1982, increased 
it from zero to $50, because that's where that program began. So 
don't talk about the $5. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm not going to pursue that because I think any 
senior citizen who is watching television tonight, and who will 
hear about your refusal to tell them when you are going to pay out 
the increases, will know the kind of games you are playing — the 
kind of games which I talked about when I spoke in second 
reading after the Minister of Urban Affairs. You had a Bill which 
was an afterthought. You took a poll, you found out your pension 
proposals were not winning you as much as you thought they 
would, and so you decided you had to do something. 
 
I want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, the following — as soon 
as the Minister of Health moves away and stops interrupting you. 
Mr. Minister, in 1985-86 you budgeted $9.5 million for the SIP 
program — 9.5 million in 1985-86. In your present budget you 
reduced that to $9.3 million over last year. Towards the end of the 
session you come in with an additional expenditure of $2.5 
million. 
 
Clearly that can lead to only one conclusion. Mr. Minister, you 
had no plans in your budget, when you put it together, to have this 
program in place. Am I correct in that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The reduction in that estimate was because of 
a reduction in the number of seniors eligible. Again we did 
certainly under the pension, we looked at some start-up costs and 
did set some moneys aside for that. 
 
I know the hon. member doesn't want to pursue it . . . Under the 
pension plan. I know the hon. member doesn't want to pursue it, 
but the increase to the seniors under your administration for 
Saskatchewan income plan was 70 cents a year. Seventy cents a 
year is the total amount that the Blakeney NDP gave under the 
Saskatchewan income plan increases for the seniors of this 
province. Now I'm sure you don't want to pursue that, but that is 
the fact, and the seniors know it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, how many subvotes do 
you have . . . (inaudible) . . . I mean, this has got to be the strangest 
budget that anybody anywhere in  

Canada has ever seen. 
 
I have here the estimates for the Department of Social Services. In 
this estimates, there's a subvote that says, Saskatchewan income 
plan — senior citizens' benefits, $9,350,000. Are you saying, Mr. 
Minister, that you put money in this subvote and then you also put 
money somewhere else? I mean, if that's the case, then I would 
suggest you examine your whole budget bureau process and also 
how you put together your estimates, because you're deliberately 
trying to mislead the people who will look at your own budget. 
 
Now are you saying that you didn't include in the Social Services 
estimates the money that will be required to pay for the increases 
in the SIP program? Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I indicated that when we developed the 
pension plan we did know that there would be additional 
administrative costs that we couldn't calculate. As we went 
through it, we set 5 aside. That could be very any one of a number 
of factors as we went through the development process. Certainly 
when we did the income plan of itself in that subvote, it was 
based, as I indicated, at 2 per cent decrease, primarily because of 
fewer seniors requiring income supplementation as a result of 
Canada Pension Plan. 
 
But I mean, I'm just going back to your initial argument of all of 
the so-called moneys hidden away, etc., whatever, not calculated. 
We knew that there would be some costs as we started up budget. 
We didn't know, quite frankly, exactly what they would be, and 
the costs developing the plan are still being arrived at, so we won't 
have a firm calculation of that for some time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, did you know when you were 
finalizing your budget that you were going to provide a $15 
increase a month for singles and a $30 increase a month for 
couples? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I've indicated to the hon. member, we took 
a look at SIP on the basis of what the actual use of the plan was at 
that point. Certainly we went through some modifications as we 
looked at how we would structure the pension plan and the needs. 
 
(2100) 
 
For example, a decision we had to make as we went through the 
pension plan development was whether we integrate right into the 
pension plan the question of seniors that have already retired and 
the adequacy of their income. We subsequently made the decision 
not to. 
 
So there were a lot of structural considerations and policy 
considerations that we made as the plan was implemented and 
developed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, I think senior citizens will be relieved 
that you did not incorporate SIP into the pension plan so they 
would have had to wait 20 years to get a pay-out. I mean, you're 
not going to fool anybody in saying that you can enter a pension 
plan in July and in August you're going to start getting a pay-out 
from the  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2068 
 
 

pension plan, Mr. Minister. Even you know that. And don't try to 
fool some people out there who know better than you do on this 
one. 
 
I'm gong to ask you one more question. Did you not know, when 
you finalized your budget and you authorized your officials to take 
the budget and put it to bed and get it printed, did you not know 
that you were going to have a $15 increase in SIP and a $30 
increase in SIP for singles and for couples? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We were still going through, and still are 
going through, some of the policy development of the pension. To 
take your argument that you can't have a pension plan one day and 
then start to receive some moneys the next, the fact is that under 
the Saskatchewan pension plan that is precisely what will happen 
on the 10-year transition of the minimum pension. To take into 
account those who do make a contribution and will not be able to 
generate adequate pension we will, in fact, subsidize those. So 
your argument is wrong again. 
 
What we did is we went through the budget review process; we 
looked at each of those items in their traditional base. But we 
made some policy decisions as we go through the pension plan 
development, and we also set moneys aside because we knew that 
there would be some costs. But we did not know exactly what 
those would be and we won't have a final tab on those for some 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, Mr. Minister, the only thing you 
didn't know is how bad the polls were. Having realized how bad 
they were, you had to make some concessions. Well really, I think 
if anything I have to say I'm somewhat disappointed. I really had 
higher expectations of this minister, Mr. Chairman, than what he 
has shown in this discussion. 
 
Here we have a budget which is supposed to be the blueprint for 
the fiscal expenditures and revenues of the province over this next 
fiscal year. In that budget, this Minister of Finance wasn't even 
able to calculate something as simple as a $15-a-month increase 
for singles in SIP, and a $30 increase for couples. And so he did 
not provide an increase or allow for an increase in these estimates, 
in his budget. 
 
Mr. Chairman, he's not prepared in the House to say when senior 
citizens will get the benefits. So this government has raised the 
expectations; they have put a Bill into the House; they're not 
prepared to tell senior citizens whether they're going to be able to 
get the increases in July or August or September. And heavens, 
they need those increases. 
 
Power rates and electrical rates have gone up by 40 per cent. 
These increases won't even match the increase of the power bill 
that senior citizens are facing. And the Minister of Urban Affairs 
sits and smiles, and he says, it's okay, we're going to play games 
with the senior citizens. The Minister of Finance didn't even put 
money in his budget to make those pay-outs. He's going to have to 
find that money from some other source. 
 
All the arguments we have made about your deficit being  

. . . statement and projection being misleading, I think you have 
once again confirmed. Time and time again, various ministers 
have confirmed that, and you have done it again. 
 
Now one of the expenditures you have made, Mr. Minister, in the 
last two years — and I suspect it's a pretty large expenditure — is 
dealing with the Local Government Finance Commission. I 
understand that it's funded by your department. At least that's what 
the Minister of Urban Affairs kindly told me when we were 
considering Urban Affairs estimates. 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what was the total cost of the 
workings of this commission to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
And in that I include total costs, and that is the conference that was 
held, public meetings that were held, and everything else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can't give you the total cost because the 
commission is still meeting, is still preparing reports, and still 
preparing the final report. I'll get you '85-86, the expenditures, and 
supply them to you. Or they can try and search them out now. 
 
We do have an official from the commission who we will ask to 
come down. There is a separate subvote for it and we will ask the 
individual to come down and get you the information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Rather than waiting for the official, let's 
proceed, and when we get to that subvote, I will try to remember. 
If I don't, you will, and I would like the cost of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, can I ask you this. The cost I know was very large, 
and you will know that too, I'm sure, although we don't have the 
full figure. Can you tell me why you, as the minister in charge and 
the minister to who the commission reports, wouldn't have made 
an argument in cabinet to let the Saskatchewan school trustees 
have representation on the new agency which is being established, 
in light of the fact that the commission firmly recommended that 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) have a 
representation on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Although we fund the commission we're not 
involved in the operations. One of the commission's — or its 
recommendations . . . I believe you debated the policy debate with 
the respective minister. And we are primarily the funding agency 
only. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 11 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could get 
something for me in terms of the Finance department.  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2069 
 
 

I don't expect you'll have it all with you here tonight. There's three 
items. One, the total of the advertising that was done by your 
department in the period January 1, 1985 to present; the same 
thing with consulting firms — any consulting firms — I don't 
know if you would have any or not in the department for that same 
time period; as well, legal, consulting legal firms that your 
department would have used in that time period. And I don't 
expect that you would have all that with you, but if you give me 
the commitment to get that to me within the next week, I'll just 
leave it at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You wanted January 1st. You want it on the 
annual year as opposed to the fiscal year? Because we will supply 
it to you, but we can get the other much more readily for you if 
you are prepared to take it on the fiscal year. Is that satisfactory, 
the fiscal year? Fair enough. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — May I ask along in the line of that 
questioning: can you provide me with the cost of the advertising 
that you have been doing?  And I assume it's the Department of 
Finance that has been doing the advertising on the pension plan. 
And even though it's not completed, I would like you to tell us 
what budget you have provided for the advertising costs of that 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I probably won't be able to get you the 
advertising costs, but I can give you what the advertising budget 
was for the pension plan. Because whether it's going to come in 
under or over I can't tell you, but I can certainly give you the 
advertising budget . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we'll have 
to get it and I'll supply it to you readily, but we don't have it handy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I had asked in my previous 
question I believe for the advertising in the department for that 
fiscal year. 
 
But I wanted to add to that, not just a global amount, but if you 
would give me the firms that did both the placement and 
production and break it down in that manner for me, along with 
the companies that were doing it for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly, I'm sure you want to know the firm 
that does such quality work and I'll be pleased to supply it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The item that we're on, Mr. Chairman, I 
think that interest on public debt — we're looking at a number 
estimated this year of $200.1 million in interest on debt. This 
magnificent sum of money that we're now paying out on the debt 
of the province — can the minister indicate in your first year of 
operation, 1982 — can you tell me what the interest on debt was at 
that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 43,300,000. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The interest on the debt was $43 million in 
your first year and that has now risen to $200 million — about a 
500 per cent increase in the amount of interest that we're paying to 
the eastern banks and trust companies and financing the debt of 
the province. 
 
I think that when we were talking about the problems  

with the management of the Devine government, I think this is the 
telling story. I think the interest rates have gone down 
considerably from what they were in 1982 in terms of percentage 
of interest. And what we have seen now is a 500 per cent increase 
in the amount of interest we're paying in the four years of the 
Devine government. And, Mr. Chairman, I think that is one of the 
reasons that the people in the province are having a very difficult 
time supporting the Conservative government that promised fiscal 
management and has run the deficit up to $2 billion and the 
interest we're now paying is over $200 million that we estimate — 
$200 million. 
 
And I say to you, that when we look at the departments, this is 
more than many of the line departments combined. The total 
budget of many of the line departments, and we are now paying 
that out in one item. That to the banks of the country — Royal and 
others — who will be making a great deal of money from the 
deficit of the province that I'll tell you has to be paid back by 
future generations. 
 
And I'll tell you, that is the main reason, I believe, why when you 
screw up your courage to call the next election, the Devine 
government will not be returned because of the magnificent deficit 
that you've run up and the 200 million that we are now paying out 
in interest on that debt, because of the mismanagement of your 
government. 
 
(2115) 
 
Items 1 and 2 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Municipal Financing Corporation 

Vote 151 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 151 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance 
Vote 175 

 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Vote 175 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance 
Vote 176 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, could the minister explain to 
the committee why there has been a reduction in the amount of 
sinking fund payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One of the issues that we had a sinking fund 
on has now matured so there's less of a payment. 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2070 
 
 

Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 176 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance 
Vote 177 

 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 177 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 

 
Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This payment pursuant to the . . . If I could 
get your attention, I have a question here. Item 6, payments 
pursuant to The Pioneer Trust Company Depositors Assistance 
Act — can the minister tell me what portion of that has been 
recollected? When we had the debate we talked about $20 million 
being paid out and then we intended to get some of that back as 
the procedure went ahead. What is the percentage? How did that 
work out? Seventy cents on a dollar or 50 cents on a dollar? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The estimate we have is in the range of 70 to 
71 cents. To date we've received about 42 cents. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Vote 11 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Resources Division 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Local Government Finance Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 52 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Could I introduce, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bryan 
Hebb, senior analyst, who will assist us on any questions on the 
finance commission. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, is this where you would 
have the information on the costs of the local government 
commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The fiscal year 1985-86, the total  

expenditure was $416,000 — $416,254. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. As I thought, it's a very large 
amount of money for the work of a commission whose 
recommendations you're not paying any attention to. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have one further question on the commission. 
Which organizations have pulled out of the commission because 
they have expressed frustration and are saying that they are not 
being paid attention? Which organizations are no longer 
participating because they've give up on your process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Both SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) indicated in January-February of 
'85-86 — I'm not sure which in which month — indicated they 
were not going to participate. We made the decision at that time 
that the commission had done so much work with . . . we might as 
well let them finish what reports they had, and rather than wind it 
up totally at that; and we advised those two organizations at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So the commission is now doing its work, 
will prepare recommendations without any further input from 
these organizations as official members of the organization. In 
other words, it's for all intents and purposes strictly a government 
commission now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — For all intents and purposes it's a commission 
that . . . the work has been completed. The work was virtually 
completed with those organizations anyway at the time, and they 
have been working on the reports virtually since the beginning of 
the new year. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 52 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Local Government Finance Commission 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 52 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 52 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Provincial Auditor 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Will the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, if I may introduce on my right, 
Mr. Willard Lutz, Provincial Auditor; and on my left Fred 
Wendel, assistant provincial auditor. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the function of the 
Provincial Auditor, I think, needs no explanation. It's a very 
important function — checks government  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2071 
 
 

expenditures to see whether they're done appropriately, and so on. 
And I see here, as has been the case with many regulatory, or 
many sort of people's agencies, agencies that look after the 
interests of the public purse, you have again a cut in staff. Can you 
tell me what kind of staff you have cut from 66 to 63 in this 
agency which, I might add, was understaffed before you made the 
cut? What staff have you cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Any reduction is being done by attrition, and 
the officials don't have the particular staff at this time. But they try 
and maintain . . . The advice they give is that they try and maintain 
the professional level. 
 
Certainly I agree with the hon. member that when we had restraint 
in government, it was one of the difficult decisions. But as we 
indicated in budget and other debates, a large number of 
departments and agencies saw a reduction in staffing, and there 
was across the board except in certain fields which we've debated 
numerous occasions. So it was one of the difficult decisions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, does the Provincial Auditor 
feel that the staff cut is the appropriate thing to do, and will it 
make the work of the auditor as effective as it would have been if 
the staff had not been cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it would make a difference generally of 
perhaps approximately a month in the audit work, and so that the 
work is still being done. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wonder whether you can 
indicate whether or not you support the ideas as indicated by the 
Provincial Auditor of recommending, or his proposal that 
recommended that all Crown agencies be required to table 
financial statements in the legislature. Has your government taken 
a position on that? 
 
(2130) 
 
And here I'm referring from his report, for the fiscal year ending 
March 31st, 1985. And I want to quote the recommendation that 
he made at the time: 
 

I recommend that legislation be enacted that would require 
all Crown agencies to table financial statements in the 
Legislative Assembly in order that members of the 
Legislative Assembly may have sufficient information to 
hold government fully accountable for all activities that the 
government has authorized to be conducted with public 
funds. 

 
Have you had an opportunity to review this recommendation, and 
will there be legislation forthcoming in this session to deal with 
this recommendation? Or do you take the view that it's not 
necessary for members of the Assembly to have this kind of 
information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Quite candidly I haven't reviewed the 
recommendation, and I haven't given it any consideration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I guess it leads me to the next question. But 
your party, prior to the 1982 election,  

talked a great deal about comprehensive auditing. And the 
member from Meadow Lake will remember that, and I'm sure the 
minister in charge will remember the arguments that you made 
dealing and extolling the virtues of comprehensive auditing. And 
now after four and one-half years your government still has not 
used it's power and mandate to do anything about it. Have you 
moved away from the position of supporting comprehensive 
auditing? 
 
And I suppose the former minister of finance was more on that 
kick than anyone. But it's interesting how parties such as yours in 
opposition will say one thing, and then when they get into 
government hide their head in the sand on that issue. 
 
But can you give the committee your governmental view on the 
issue of comprehensive auditing as opposed to what you were 
saying when you were the party in opposition. And maybe it will 
give us an indication of what you'll be saying on the issue when 
you're back in opposition in the near future. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Excuse me. I'd like to just call for order once 
again please. The level of noise, unfortunately, keeps going up and 
down; and let's try to keep it down more than up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will freely acknowledge that no one is 
without warts when it comes to some of the thoughts in 
opposition. I think that comprehensive audit still has a great deal 
of merit. I believe that it's also extremely costly to implement but 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the hon. member, I'm not 
sure, wants to get into that debate, who hasn't given any thought as 
to cost. But I believe that it conceptually has some merit, but the 
costs of implementing it are somewhat higher. I'm not sure that it 
would have the full support conceptually with perhaps those 
involved in audit within government itself. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to mention that there was a great 
deal made of comprehensive auditing by the former minister of 
Finance when he was the critic in opposition — the member for 
Kindersley. In fact, if my memory serves me well, he made a great 
deal and resigned as the chairman of the Public Accounts 
Committee at that time because he was so upset . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, they were so upset with the lack of 
movement by the government at that time. And I think to show the 
phoniness of the issue — now four and a half years later, still 
nothing done. I just wanted to put that on the record. 
 
But one other issue that we have had some concern about is the 
continued delay in the release of Public Accounts, and I suppose at 
no time was it more obvious than this year. And in asking the 
minister at the time, he clearly indicated that Public Accounts 
report was ready, but he wasn't going to table it until he got around 
to it, and I think it's being used in a political way to try to keep the 
government from being embarrassed. 
 
And I just say to you: with a new Minister of Finance, can we 
expect any better performance in that area, with you at the helm, 
than what we've had in the past, of great delays? I suppose maybe 
with your Liberal background  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2072 
 
 

you may have a little more openness about giving out information 
to the public than a radical right-wing government we presently 
have. And I suppose you, being in the left vanguard of the party 
that you represent, still being much to the right of centre, but 
maybe we can expect a little better in the future than what your 
radical right-wingers were doing with hiding that kind of 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well my recollection this year that there was 
the historical difference of opinion between the Provincial Auditor 
and others as to the accounting of the grain car corporation. 
Members opposite are familiar with that particular area of 
disagreement and that, I gather, resulted in some delay this time, 
as that was the reason for it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Not to delay it any 
further, but I just want to draw it to the attention of the minister a 
concern that has been expressed that the actions of your 
government, and that is the continuous cut-back in what is known 
as the watch-dog agencies on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And we find that not only has the auditor's budget 
been cut and staff reduced, we find that also in respect to the 
Ombudsman, with an increasing load, it has been cut. And we find 
also in respect to the Human Rights Commission; we also find that 
when you were in opposition you were screaming for freedom of 
information legislation — none of which has come to pass. 
 
And I think that it should be known that what you people do is say 
one thing in opposition and then do a different thing when you 
assume office. I want to say that I am tremendously concerned in 
light of the fiscal mismanagement of this government. And if you 
look at the auditor's report, and the length of them, and the number 
of concerns that he has expressed during your term in office, that I 
think that it is incumbent that we keep the auditor's office very, 
very strong. And rather than cutting back in staff and trying to 
curtail this watch-dog performance of watching the spending of 
this government — the reckless spending of this government, I 
think that the people should know what you are in fact doing. 
 
So I ask you in a general way: why have you throughout . . . As 
Minister of Finance, you would be aware of the cut-backs in the 
staff and budget in all of these watch-dog agencies. Is there any 
particular reason during the course of this year that you would 
attack those very agencies that the people of Saskatchewan need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I'd already indicated on a previous question 
that there was a reduction in many departments. And we indicated 
where those priorities were, and I indicated that's one of the 
difficult decisions. 
 
May I remind the hon. member, as it applies to the Provincial 
Auditor, that it was the previous administration that chose to make 
the Provincial Auditor a public servant no longer subject to 
appointment by the Legislative Assembly; that it was this 
government honouring a commitment made prior to the last 
election that again the Provincial Auditor would become a servant 
of the Legislative Assembly, not the government of the day; and  

we made that change reversing your policy of taking away that 
independence of the Provincial Auditor. So I suggest to you that 
that commitment was in fact made, and that commitment was 
honoured. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Let there be no doubt that there have been some 
cut-backs in respect to the budget that you presented, Mr. 
Minister, but I think it's clear that in some areas there were no 
cut-backs. If you look in the general administration of 
departments, there are very few cut-backs in respect to that. But 
more importantly, there are no cut-backs when it comes to the 
advertising campaign trying to get yourself elected. There is no 
curtailment there, I'll say. 
 
There was no curtailment when you came to appointing cabinet. 
Twenty-five cabinet ministers walked around this province — 
flew around the province, around the world, may I say, for three 
and a half years until the public rejected it. Priorities you talk 
about, Mr. Minister. You have priorities, as I said. The priority is 
to do those things at the taxpayers' expense, to try in an attempt to 
re-elect a corrupt and bankrupt party opposite. That's the priorities 
that you have. And the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
When you look at Legislative Secretaries that take on basically no 
responsibility, paying them $8,000 and additional expenses. This 
is a rip-off, and here you come to the auditor, which is checking 
the financial management of the province, and you know what 
your priority is? Let's muzzle that operation because we're 
embarrassed. Let's make it impossible for the public to know 
what's really going on. That's what has happened, Mr. Chairman. 
that's the truth of the matter. 
 
And I'll tell you, the public of Saskatchewan are on to you boys — 
are on to you. And I'll tell you, the extravagance and the priorities 
are not being accepted. And I'll tell you, when the next election 
comes, the people of Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to 
test your priorities. And I'll guarantee you that when we're 
re-elected as government, we will give to the auditor the priority 
of being the watch-dog on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
That's our commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, the public of Saskatchewan will well 
remember that it was an NDP administration that took away the 
independence of the Provincial Auditor, and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, the legislation was passed by your 
administration. And I still remain amazed, and I was in opposition 
at the time, how little public reaction there was to that move; so 
we will have the political debate on the hustings. 
 
Obviously they are not telling the hon. member what's happening 
to him in his riding, and certainly that type of attack I think 
indicates exactly what the surveys are showing. What the public 
are saying is they really don't like the NDP and really wouldn't 
want you to be government. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2073 
 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Department of Telephones 

Ordinary Expenditures — Vote 38 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you just tell me how many 
employees you have in the Department of Telephones at this 
point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have a total of 11 at the present time. We 
put communications in with Telephones. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Communications from what department, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Department of Justice, originally, and it 
got moved indirectly through Science and Tech, but it followed 
me. I've had the ministerial responsibility of that since 1982, so it's 
under my mandate. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Are you saying at this point then that you no 
longer have a communications department in Justice, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That's correct. We moved the secretariat. It is 
not a department. The secretariat has been moved over for 
administrative purposes, along with Telephones, to my 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — In your supplementaries, Mr. Minister, you had 
spent some 106,000 for communications there for last year. What 
was that expenditure for, and how come it was spent under 
Department of Telephones? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The communications policy secretariat, in 
addition to the communications, don't correlate it with the rural 
telephone exchanges which are, in reality, the only function that 
the old department of telephones or the existing Department of 
Telephones has. Communications policy deals with, for example, 
that 106 is the SCAN educational television hearings, that sort of 
thing. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — How come, Mr. Minister, it was moved into the 
Department of Telephones? What was the purpose of moving it 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It was, frankly, following me because I had 
had responsibility and some familiarity with it, and it was just ease 
of fit to put it there with telephones and move telephones under 
my mandate — no magic to it; it was just to, I gather, maintain 
that I had responsibility for the communications policy. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Was it not under Justice before? Why didn't you 
leave it under Justice? That would have still remained with the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I mean, we can debate which minister's 
responsible. It was under . . . As I say, I developed a fair degree of 
familiarity with communications. 
 

Communications is involved in the policy of such things like our 
CNCP applications; or our dispute with CNCP; the question of 
interconnect policy, generally; the question of rural television 
which is communications; the matter of the public hearings and 
what not; and a report which the hon. member has of the 
educational television SCAN. 
 
So all of those policy aspects, as I say, I assume it's simply 
because I have a familiarity with those when I was Justice minister 
and the policy secretariat was just moved over for administrative 
purposes. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 38 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Department of Telephones 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 38 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 38 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Vote 153 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 153 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank Mr. Doug 
Smith, the associate deputy minister of communications. I didn't 
get the opportunity to thank my Finance officials with the other 
items coming forward. I would like to enter it on the record, not 
only for their assistance to the committee, but the officials have 
worked extremely hard, very intensely, and very professionally in 
budget preparation and several of the new initiatives. And I'm 
very, very appreciative of their efforts. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 35 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have Jim Hutch, 
who is the president of the Saskatchewan Research Council on my 
right; just behind Mr. Hutch is Ron McGrath, the comptroller; and 
George MacKay, the vice-president of administration and finance 
is directly behind me. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome the 
Deputy Premier back. It's awfully nice for him to drop in at this 
time of the evening. Very, very pleasant to have you here. I expect 
that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in respect to the Saskatchewan 
Research Council, I see in the Estimates  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2074 
 
 

that the total expenditure, the grant to the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, were estimated in 1985-86 at $4,080,570, and that for the 
current year exactly the same amount. 
 
I just want to indicate that one of the complaints that we have in 
Canada, and certainly some of the research that has been done, 
indicates the commitment to research in Canada is considerably 
lower — only about 1.22 per cent of the gross national product — 
in comparison to some of the European countries: West Germany, 
which is 2.8 per cent of the gross national product; and Sweden, 
which is certainly very, very high in the expenditure. I wonder 
what is the justification of curtailing no expenditure increase here, 
Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that the research council will have 
expenses which will have built-in inflation. And so I'm wondering: 
does this really represent your government's commitment to the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and the work that it has been 
doing? Why haven't you increased the overall budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't say as I 
disagree with the member in terms of the importance of research. 
And in the society we live in today, there's no question that that's 
true. The money that he refers to is a $4 million expenditure this 
year, $4 million last year. In other words exactly the same amount 
of money being allocated this year to the Saskatchewan Research 
Council as was last year. 
 
I would say to him that if the member of the NDP is saying there 
should be a good deal more money spent in that, just this very 
evening he was talking for a good long time to the Minister of 
Finance about the problems of deficits and the kinds of revenue 
problems that we have. And what we have really said is that this is 
certainly a priority, but it must maintain in these kinds of time. 
And I would remind the hon. member . . . and I want to remind the 
hon. member, Mr. Chairman, that in some halcyon days when 
revenues and potash were right up there, when revenues were up 
there from all the various, various commodities in this province, 
that that member was a member of, did not put the priority on 
research, as he says they do now, sitting there in opposition. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That's tremendous commitment to research, that 
answer. I only repeat to you, I repeat to you that you have set your 
priorities. and I'll only repeat them and that is — self-serving 
advertising — there is no limit as to how much money you have to 
try to, in a vain attempt, in a losing cause of attempting to get 
re-elected. 
 
So you don't have a commitment. We look at the universities, the 
secondary education, and we find a dismal increase in respect to 
the universities and certainly a decay in the university structure 
and the research. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, the estimates do not show any 
figures in respect to the number of people that are employed with 
the Saskatchewan Research Council. I notice in the article that I 
have here — but it needs to be updated; this is in the latter part of 
1984 — it indicated that the Saskatchewan Research Council had 
about 187 employees. And I was wondering whether you could 
give me an update in respect to the number of employees with  

the research council. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the total is 219 people — 
219 full time, eight part time; president, one; two vice-presidents; 
scientists and engineers, 78; technologists, 89; financial services, 
8; support services, 37; and four on leave of absence at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Could you send over the executive staff of the 
research council — the executive staff? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Names, positions, and salaries. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes; names, positions, and salaries, so that we 
have an opportunity to review the disposition and the amount that 
is being paid for top researchers in the council. Could you send 
that over? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'll send it over just 
now. It's on its way over. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could also indicate . . . 
There was a period of time in respect to the research council that a 
number of people were laid off. It's not current, not this year, but I 
want to know whether . . . In the past there have been some 
lay-offs. Were there any lay-offs in respect to any of the 
employees during the currency of this year? In other words, are 
there likely to be any lay-offs of the staff that you mentioned — 
219 plus eight part-time? because a lot of the work that is being 
done is in respect to the oil industry, and I'm wondering whether 
there's any anticipated lay-offs or, in fact, lay-offs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There have been no lay-offs, Mr. 
Chairman, I'm informed, in the past 12 months, and there are none 
anticipated. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well that's good to hear. Mr. Minister, if I recall 
correctly, it was just over a year ago that the Saskatchewan 
Research Council took over the Saskatchewan Oil lab in the Ross 
Industrial Park here in Regina. In making that move, the cost of 
the lab was transferred from the Saskoil corporation to the SRC. 
At that time your government said the move was to provide 
research and technology to the private sector of the industry. 
 
So I ask you: what has this lab cost, provincially and federally, the 
taxpayers in the past year, the transfer of the lab from Saskoil? 
What has been the cost to the taxpayers? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 
question, he's asking, what did the transfer cost. Like the transfer, 
as you have indicated, came from Saskoil which at that time of 
transfer was a public entity and was transferred over to the 
Saskatchewan Research Council to become the petroleum division 
of the Saskatchewan Research Council, and the transfer was made 
for $1. It was a nominal fee because it was just . . . in terms of the 
taxpayers' cost, it was from one agency of government to another. 
So that's not a problem in terms of tax dollars spent. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2075 
 
 

I might say though, as it relates to the petroleum division, Mr. 
Chairman, we have increased our position by $700,000 in terms of 
contracts and so on that have come through the petroleum division 
and the activity there. And, well, I can just leave it at that, and if 
the member has further questions regarding that division, I'd be 
pleased to answer them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the SRC and the lab services and 
assistance to the oil industry in the past year, when did it take . . . I 
have the date, on June 1st, I guess, transferred from government to 
SRC. Can you indicate the amount of contract work that the lab 
did in respect to the private oil company, and what revenues were 
received as a result of the work that it did on behalf of the oil 
companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. In the past year since this petroleum 
division came under research council, in the past year, to answer 
the member's question, about $100,000 worth; and in the current 
year the contracts are now in place for the petroleum division of 
the Saskatchewan Research Council to do about $700,000 worth 
of work. So a significant increase, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I understand, Mr. Minister, that about 77 per cent 
of the cost of research done for the oil companies by the SRC at 
present is paid for essentially by taxpayers, and I get this from a 
release by one of the directors of SRC. I ask you, do you think that 
a somewhat larger amount could in fact be obtained from the 
industry, and is that the direction in which the SRC is going? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member's quite 
right in saying that 77 per cent; and we agree with him. I agree 
with you that it is high. In fact the business plan of the research 
council has moved that to a 50:50 ratio — by April 1st of '88 is the 
time frame on that. The contracts that I refer to earlier and that we 
operate under, are under a Canada-Saskatchewan agreement that's 
been in place for at least a couple of years, maybe longer. I don't 
have the exact date. I may dig that up for you if you're interested. 
But there's a Canada-Saskatchewan agreement. I agree with you 
that 77 per cent is high, and our business plan in fact is to reduce 
the ratio of what's paid for by taxpayers and what's paid for by 
industry itself. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us how much of the 
overall budget of the SRC is presently being devoted to research 
work involving oil and gas research? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It's approximately 22 per cent, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I notice one of the major projects that you're 
undertaking is in respect to the oil recovery — and that's the heavy 
oil — and I was wondering, is that being carried out in Regina, or 
is it in the Saskatoon division of the SRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In Regina, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It's our understanding that the petroleum research 
division of the SRC has invested in some basic new equipment 
and will be shortly constructing some  

more. I wonder if you can tell us the cost of the equipment 
recently acquired in the last year by the division, and also the cost 
involved in the emulsion treating unit pilot project? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have the exact 
costs right here, but I'm certainly willing to provide it to the 
member, and I'll send it over to the member at a future date. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect, Mr. Minister, can you tell us what 
scientific or research credentials are possessed by the current 
chairman of the Saskatchewan Research Council? What particular 
scientific or research credentials does he bring to the research 
council? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, if I understand the member 
properly, you're speaking of the chairman of the board, Mr. 
Birney? 
 
Gordon Birney, chairman, is a partner is Birney & Smith 
Chartered Accountants in Saskatoon. He brings a very important 
business perspective to the operation of the board that's proven 
essential in developing business plans. There's no question about 
it, and I would say to the hon. member, although he smiles from 
his seat, that it's extremely important to have that combination of a 
business experience with the scientific knowledge that exists at the 
research council. It's proven a very successful combination and 
will continue for some time, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I understand, and as you will know, the SRC 
developed a device to detect wall-creep in potash mines, which is 
of considerable importance to the safety and the efficiency of the 
mines . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Yes, talking about creeps, as I look across at this late hour of the 
night I see a number of them. 
 
But I understand that this device has been in fact perfected by the 
SRC, and I understand the SRC, in fact, is manufacturing them 
and have been selling them. I want to know whether or not you 
have given the opportunity to any private sector organizations to 
have the development now from here on in and the distribution. In 
other words, are you transferring the benefit of the research of the 
taxpayers to some private individual to make his gains, the 
Tory-styled, unearned but necessarily gains? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I'm informed that the 
council in fact is just now involved in negotiation — confidential 
negotiation — with a private sector firm in this province for us to 
sell the technology to them. So that negotiation is under way, and 
our goal, of course, would be to have that technology sold to the 
private sector. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — During the course of the year, has any of the 
research that has in fact been developed, similar to what we're 
talking about here, has any other developments by the SRC been, 
in fact, sold to the private and indeed has been completed? Are 
there any particular devices or research in fact that has been 
completed, that has been turned over to the private sector and in 
fact completed? If there is any, would you indicate what and  
  



 
June 17, 1986 

 

2076 
 
 

with whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I'm informed that the 
specific answer to that question is for the most part the research 
that is done in the council is done with front-end money coming 
from a client, mostly a private sector client. So the front-end 
money comes in, and then that private sector client will pay the 
research council for the technology which is developed by the 
research council. So for the most part that's the case. And if there 
is an example of one that's been developed without that front-end 
money, we can't think of it just now, but if there is one, I'll 
undertake to provide it to the member later as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well in respect to the total operating budget 
during the past year, the grant from the Saskatchewan Research 
. . . to the research council by the province was 4 million bucks — 
$4 million. Can you indicate what amount they obtained from the 
private sector? In other words, what was the total budget? I think a 
year previous to this, there was somewhere around, I believe $7 
million from the private sector, making something like $11 
million, if my statistics are correct. 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the total revenue of the 
research council is $15,147,400, of which $4,080,570 is from the 
provincial government. so about $11 million from other sources 
than the provincial government. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Saskatchewan Research Council 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 35 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to very quickly 
thank the three officials who have come from the research council 
in Saskatoon. And say thank you for allowing this one to come in 
a little earlier to the opposition tonight because they can get back 
now to Saskatoon and get on with some of the good work that they 
do up there. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I join with the minister to thank the officials. And 
I know for estimates it's a difficult time in spacing their time in 
getting them on, and I appreciate being able to co-operate with the 
minister in dealing with this. 
 
I only hope that their budget will increase when we form the 
government. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:21 p.m. 


