


















































June 24, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 24, 1986 
 
 

2249 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Hopfner from the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations presents the seventh report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has completed its consideration of the 
reports of the following Crown corporations since May 28, 
1986: Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 1984; 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 1985; Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications, 1985; Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, 1985; Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
1985; and Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 1985. 

 
Your committee has held six meetings since its last report to 
the legislature, and has an agenda consisting of the following 
Crown corporations’ annual reports for 1985 yet to be 
considered: Saskatchewan Government Printing, 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, Saskatchewan Expo ’86, Advanced 
Technology, Agricultural Credit Corporation, Agricultural 
Development Corporation, Crown Investment Corporation, 
Municipal Financing Corporation, the New Careers 
Corporation, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, Saskatchewan Development 
Fund, Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 
and the Saskatchewan Forest Products. 

 
On May 16, 1985, your committee agreed to review the 
annual report and financial statements of the Saskatchewan 
Crown Corporations Pension Funds. Though there is no 
legislative requirement for the tabling of the annual report 
and financial statements, the 1983 and 1984 documents have 
been tabled and therefore become automatically referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations for 
consideration pursuant to a motion adopted by this Assembly 
on March 18, 1986. 

 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Athabasca: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to the Assembly some special guests from West Germany. Dr. 
Carl-Ludwig Wagner is the Minister of  

Finance and chairman of the supervisory board of the Landsbank 
in the state of Rheinland-Pfalz, West Germany; Dr. Guenter 
Storch is the member of the board of managing directors; and Mr. 
Max Lurz, who is a director. 
 
I will be meeting with the gentlemen at approximately 3 o’clock, 
along with officials from the Department of Finance, Mr. Speaker. 
I ask all hon. members to welcome the special guests in the usual 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I take 
pleasure in welcoming to the Legislative Assembly 12 adults who 
are from the Cancer Patient Lodge in Regina in the riding of the 
Leader of the Opposition. He’s unable to be here today, and it’s 
my distinct honour to welcome these people to the Chamber. I 
know that you’ll enjoy the proceedings, and I look forward to 
meeting with you afterwards for drinks and a word about what 
you’ve seen here. 
 
I invite all members to join me in welcoming these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is addressed to 
the minister responsible for the Prince Albert pulp-mill. It deals 
with an issue we have raised a number of times in the Assembly, 
namely the sale of the P.A. pulp-mill and all the related assets to 
the Weyerhaeuser corporation whereby the company gets a 
sweetheart deal: 30 years to repay the $248 million debenture put 
up by the people of the province, and if there are any losses 
incurred in the first three years, they write down the debt owing, 
and even at that, no payments have to be made unless there’s more 
than 13 per cent profits made in the corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you promised the Assembly that you 
would table certain documents, and I quote to you from page 2209 
of Hansard where you say: 
 

. . . we’ll file the financial statements of PAPCO, and we’ll 
file as many documents as we can file as it relates to the 
Weyerhaeuser deal . . . 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, at this time, have you got those 
documents, and can you table them here in the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, I 
will be providing the financial statements of the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company from the period of time that the company became a 
wholly owned subsidiary and, might I say, a burden upon the 
public of Saskatchewan, and I will be tabling them after question 
period. I think the hon. member knows that I can’t table them 
during question period, but I will be tabling them  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2250 
 
 

after question period. 
 
And what they will show, Mr. Speaker, is the following: they will 
show a loss in the year 1981 of $11,931,731; a loss in the year 
1982 of $39,061.942; in 1983 a loss of $49,246,603; in 1984, a 
loss of $15,759,673; and in 1985, a loss of $51,649,102. Mr. 
Speaker, those losses, the total losses to the public of 
Saskatchewan on those annualized basis that I just have 
mentioned, those will be shown when we bring these statements 
forward, and I’m sure the hon. member will be very interested in 
seeing that. 
 
And for that hon. member from that New Democratic Party who 
would say, Mr. Speaker that anything — it would not matter what 
the terms of any agreement of any sale of their precious family of 
Crown corporations, it would not matter what the terms were for 
any sale or any deal that anyone might put together, to the NDP 
that will always be a sweetheart deal. They talk about sweetheart 
deals, but they don’t talk about the kinds of deals that they made 
when they purchased these things, when that party opposite was in 
government and purchased — borrowed $162 million to purchase 
70 per cent of the assets of Prince Albert Pulp company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you, and to all members of the 
House and to the public of Saskatchewan, that it was a bad deal at 
that time. They should not be sitting here now in a sanctimonious 
way and saying that it was a good deal. It was not a good deal, and 
the public of Saskatchewan will know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A supplement to the minister, and as the 
minister well knows, we will await to read the documents to see if 
they have any relevance to what the minister has said, and I have 
here the schedule B of the agreement of principles, dated March 
24th. 
 
By way of background, the members of the Assembly will well 
know that the minister, in talking about this agreement and this 
schedule B, indicated that the terms were 20 years. When we got 
the document it said 30 years. 
 
Now my question to the minister is if, with leave of the Assembly, 
you will table the documents now, because obviously we can 
decided when to table documents, and we will give you leave to 
table the documents so we can ask questions on this and other 
matters at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member well knows, and 
I have said that I will table these at the conclusion of question 
period, and they will be tabled. They’ll be tabled at the conclusion 
of question period today. 
 
The member opposite, once again, Mr. speaker — the member 
opposite wants to continue on the NDP line that they are against 
the building of a paper-mill in Saskatchewan. That’s what they’re 
saying. Because the only possible way that a pulp-mill in 
Saskatchewan can make any money or can become viable over the 
long-term is by integration with a paper-mill. Anyone  

who understands the forest industry knows that; everybody who 
understands. And many people in northern Saskatchewan 
understand the forest industry, and they know that the integration 
of that industry from sawmill to pulp-mill to paper-mill is the way 
in which you ensure viability over the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this deal is doing, ensuring that viability 
of the industry and of the jobs in that industry, and those people 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, are against that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, final supplement to the 
minister. I want to ask you, in the debate the other evening when 
we were talking about the documents that we wanted tabled, we 
had asked for schedule A and C which are either implied or 
referred to in schedule B, as well as the agreement. Do you have 
those very relevant parts to this major agreement ready to be 
tabled at the same time as the history of the pulp-mill, which is 
less relevant than the terms of the present agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I cannot believe my ears, Mr. Speaker. 
The member of the New Democratic Party says the history of the 
pulp-mill is not relevant to what we’re discussing here today. 
What I’ll say is relevant, Mr. Speaker, is the following: we would 
not be in this House discussing the pulp-mill; we would not be in 
this House in the position we are; no legislator in Saskatchewan 
would be in a position of discussing this pulp-mill; no legislator 
would be in a position of discussing the assets of this pulp-mill 
had your party not decided to purchase it, to add it to your famous 
family of Crown corporations, because of your penchant for 
owning everything and every asset in every industry that was 
possible. 
 
that was the direction you wanted to go — that, Mr. Speaker, is 
the direction they can continue to want to go. That was the 
direction of the past, and that is a party from the past, Mr. Speaker, 
and the people of Saskatchewan will know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 
in charge of the Prince Albert Pulp Company. In addition to the 
Prince Albert pulp-mill, the Saskatoon chemical plant, the Big 
River sawmill, the assets to be sold to Weyerhaeuser include the 
exclusive timber rights to millions of acres of Saskatchewan’s 
forests for a period of at least 30 years. Since the minister was 
unclear on the figures last week in the Assembly, can he tell the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers today exactly how many acres of forest 
land will be turned over to the Weyerhaeuser corporation under 
the terms of this sale, and is the figure approximately 7 million 
acres of prime forest land, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe I said in the debate, Mr. Speaker, 
and I don’t have the exact number, but it’s 7 million and some-odd 
acres of productive forest land. The member here . . . The member 
will suggest that there shouldn’t be a forest management 
agreement to go along with the licence to operate in a forest, 
which includes royalty payments to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It’s the same 
type of agreement that will be in place for Simpson Timber  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2251 
 
 

which has been a long-time operator at Hudson Bay; the same 
type of agreement that will be in place for MacMillan Bloedel; the 
same type of agreement in place for L & M, a much smaller 
operation in Glaslyn. The member knows that. But he’ll stand here 
and try to mislead the public of Saskatchewan as, oh, there’s this 
— to use their word again — some big give-away, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the forest management arrangements are, are 
just that — arrangements for the management of the forest. And 
that is extremely important to the public of Saskatchewan who 
own the forest; to the public of Saskatchewan who will be getting 
the benefits from the royalties which will be paid by the company, 
whether it be Weyerhaeuser Canada or Simpson Timber or 
MacMillan Bloedel or L & M Wood Products, for that matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. I 
most certainly am not trying to mislead this House in any way, 
shape, or form. But we’re dealing with $248 million of the 
taxpayers’ money that you are giving to Weyerhaeuser, and they 
are not putting up one cent. 
 
Is the minister aware that this means that Weyerhaeuser 
corporation will have exclusive rights to over 7 million acres of 
prime commercial forest area in this province — over 7 million 
acres of prime forest acres? Saskatchewan’s total commercial 
forest is about 35 million acres, or 55,000 square miles. This deal 
give Weyerhaeuser complete control over close to eight million 
acres of that, or approximately 11,000 square miles. 
 
Will you confirm that under this deal Weyerhaeuser corporation of 
Tacoma, Washington will have exclusive cutting rights and 
control over one-fifth of the commercial timber in Saskatchewan 
for a period of at least 30 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I will confirm is, 
as I said in my last answer, what I will confirm is that there will be 
forest management licence agreements for this company, for 
MacMillan Bloedel, for Simpson Timber, for everyone else who 
operates, including the Crown-owned Sask Forest Products. That 
will be the case, and that must be the case. If you’re going to 
manage the forest, you must have agreements to manage the 
forests — forest management agreements. Those agreements will 
be in place. 
 
One of the stated reasons, Mr. Speaker — even though the 
member from Shaunavon says that the history of the pulp-mill is 
not relevant, let me give him this little bit of history — one of the 
stated reasons of that government when they were in government, 
that group opposite, that small group, when they were in 
government, here’s what they said. They said, we will buy the 
remaining assets of the pulp-mill because we are going to 
rationalize the forest management agreements so that we can solve 
the many long-standing problems of forest management in 
Saskatchewan. And everybody in northern Saskatchewan knows 
that those were long-standing problems. 
 

We agreed with it in opposition. We agreed with that aspect, 
because they said forest management agreements need to be 
rationalized, and we agreed with that. There was not one shred of 
evidence when we took over government — not one shred of 
evidence that they attempted at all to do that, to rationalize those 
forest management agreements. And yet that member will stand 
here and talk about some large number of acres that are going to a 
corporation. Of course the proper acreage for the operation of an 
integrated facility must be under the control of the company that’s 
operating the integrated operation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 
Does this give Weyerhaeuser Canada complete control over 
approximately 8 million acres of Saskatchewan’s prime forest 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it gives Weyerhaeuser 
corporation a forest management lease arrangement which they 
will arrange, which they will negotiate with my colleague, the 
Minister of Parks and Resources, which they will negotiate, and 
they will control it only in the sense, the same sense that Simpson 
Timber controls their area in the east side, in what we call the 
Hudson Bay block. 
 
They’ll control it only in the same sense that MacMillan Bloedel 
will control their area. They’ll control it only in the same sense as 
L & M Wood Products will control this much smaller area that 
they deal with for their wood products operation at Glaslyn. 
They’ll control it only in the same sense that the Meadow Lake 
Sawmill Ltd., which will continue to be a Crown operation, will 
control the area in which their forest management lease 
arrangement is done. 
 
So the member is throwing a red herring in here, Mr. Speaker, 
which means absolutely nothing to the negotiations. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — can the minister give us any documents which 
make it clear that northern commercial fishermen, trappers, and 
others who depend on the forest for their income will not have 
their access to those 8 million acres of northern forest restricted? 
Can you point to, or table, any documents which guarantee that 
there will be no restrictions on access to commercial fishing areas 
or to trap lines, or any infringement upon treaty rights by 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in answer to 
almost exactly the same question, my colleague, the Minister of 
Parks and Resources, said that integrated resource management 
will be in place, and that includes access for hunters and fishermen 
and the kinds of deal that you’ve been talking about. Mr. Speaker, 
that integrated resource management situation will be in place . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The short answer, Mr. Speaker, is that my 
colleague, the Minister of Parks and Resources, answered that 
question yesterday.  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2252 
 
 

The member from Athabasca, although he received his answer 
yesterday, comes back with exactly the same question today. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 
Use of Executive Aircraft 

 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — Mr. Speaker, about a week ago, in 
responding to the annual ritual of defending the use of executive 
aircraft, I took notice of a couple of questions from the member 
from Shaunavon regarding the co-ordination of flights, and I’d 
like to provide him that information at this time. 
 
I think the first date that he was concerned about was June 27th 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — The first day under question, Mr. 
Speaker, was June 27th on which there were four flights from 
Saskatoon to Regina. And the information on those flights is that 
the first one at 9:30 brought a minister back from Saskatoon to 
Regina; a flight at 10:30 took an official to Saskatoon. In the 
afternoon there were two more flights; one at 1:25 returning at 
5:05 with two cabinet ministers, another flight in the afternoon that 
left at 11:40 a.m. with a minister and four officials and returned at 
5:30. 
 
The question of co-ordination on that particular day, the afternoon, 
of course it was impossible to put the two flights together because 
the one flight was at capacity with five passengers and the second 
one, of course, had to travel. The morning events, the cabinet 
minister had to return, and the official was on business and was 
not able to co-ordinate. 
 
The second date that was asked by the member from Shaunavon 
was February 7th, a flight from Maple Creek which brought a 
minister to Regina in the morning at 8:40, and a second flight in 
the afternoon at 2:25 that took a minister to Swift Current. And 
obviously those two flights and their duties would not allow them 
to be co-ordinated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are a couple of additional points that 
should be made. The members opposite made a great deal in 
asking the question about the fact that there had been 980 exec air 
flights in the fiscal year under review. It should be pointed out that 
the last year of the Blakeney administration there were 910 
executive air flights, which is roughly the same number, and that 
from a government that had admittedly lost touch with the people. 
So I think that that is justifiable. 
 
Mr. Premier, the second point that I think . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — The second point that should be 
made, and this is relevant to the question . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The members asked the question. 
The minister has the right to give the reply, and the member is 
giving that reply. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the 
question . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Now this is the last time I’m 
calling order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — The question was asked by the 
member from Shaunavon, and I think it will be interesting to the 
members of the Assembly that it was this particular member that 
chose to ask these questions. It demonstrates again very clearly the 
difference in which they say and what they do. 
 
In 1981-82 the member from Shaunavon authorized 58 flights on 
exec air, which is more than the previous Highways minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is he finished, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Access to Roads in Prince Albert Forest Area 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to get back to the 
important question that we were on before in respect to the major 
proposition of this government which the people of Saskatchewan 
are concerned with. And I want to direct a question to the Minister 
of Highways, and I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you file or point to 
a document which in fact will prevent Weyerhaeuser from setting 
up toll booths on highways or logging roads within the 7 million 
acres, the 8 million acres that they will now control? I ask you 
what will prevent them from restricting the access of the roads to 
the people of the North? Can you in fact table any documents 
which would assure the residents of northern Saskatchewan access 
to these roads will not be restricted in any way? If you have the 
documents, can you file them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the hon. member’s question I can assure the hon. member, and I 
can assure the general public of Saskatchewan, that there is no 
agreement that will allow any toll bridges or toll roads in this 
province. And as long as this administration is in power I can 
assure you that there never will be a toll road respecting 
Weyerhaeuser or any other corporation that invests in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further question, supplement to the minister. 
Can the minister confirm that PAPCO has road construction crews 
which today maintain about 1,000 miles of logging roads and 
other roads within the forest management area? And can you 
confirm, Mr. Minister, that following the sale the cost of 
maintaining these roadways will revert to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers through the Department of Highways? Your colleague, 
the Minister of Parks, was very evasive on this particular point 
yesterday, and I ask you: who will pay for the maintenance of 
these roads after the sale, or let’s say the give-away? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the hon. member’s question, certainly there  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2253 
 
 

will be a road maintenance agreement, and there will be an 
agreement that will cover a number of miles of road. But I want to 
inform the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the insinuation made by 
the hon. member here today, and the insinuations made yesterday, 
I believe it was, respecting 1,000 miles of road is very, very 
representative of the exaggeration, the overstatement and the 
misleading of the general public that these members opposite 
perpetrate in this legislature every day. In no way is there 1,000 
miles of roads. That is an absolute exaggeration, and it represents 
the misleading statements that those people make every day. 
 
Yes, certainly there will be a road maintenance agreement, but 
here today I am not going to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order! Will the member for 
Regina North West contain himself long enough to listen to what I 
have to say. The Assembly is just buzzing. There’s so much noise 
that the minister cannot be heard, and when the questioner is 
standing to ask his question, he cannot be heard. I’m asking for 
order on both sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, if I could finish responding, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, yes, if I may be permitted to 
finish my answer, there will be an agreement with the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation respecting roads, and I think that’s only 
fair and reasonable. Any other timber company that deals with the 
government has an agreement with the government, but I’m not 
about to release the details of that agreement. The agreement has 
not been signed as of yet, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think it fair that 
they even ask the questions. What these people want to know . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — What these people want to know, Mr. 
Speaker, is the results of a ball game before the ball game is even 
over. We are in the process of negotiating with the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation. Our negotiations have taken many, many hours, and 
we will continue to negotiate with these people. 
 
I am not about to provide the members today with information 
about an agreement that has not yet been signed, but I can give the 
members my greatest assurance — my greatest assurance — that 
the agreement that we will sign will be very, very similar to 
agreements that have been signed with PAPCO, MacMillan 
Bloedel, and many other timber corporations within the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to remind you of the 
comments of your colleague, the minister of Parks, yesterday in 
this Assembly. And he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . we’ve been taking a look at these roads as it relates to the 
Weyerhaeuser agreement, and as it relates to the current 
situation, and also as it (as it  

also) pertains to the current maintenance, and we think we’ve 
come up with something that’s satisfactory to all (of) the 
players in the game. 

 
Mr. Minister, what is this arrangement? What is this agreement? 
And what will it mean in respect to the maintenance and control of 
the roads of the 7 million acres that you’re assigning over to 
Weyerhaeuser? The minister, your colleague, has indicated you’ve 
come up with a satisfactory agreement. What are the terms of it, 
and will you file it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the minister in 
charge of Parks and Renewable Resources, did not say that there 
was an agreement. He said that we are in the final . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. You have asked a question. It’s 
impossible to hear the answer. I would ask for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The minister had said that we are very 
close to having an arrangement that is satisfactory to both parties, 
but the agreement has not been signed. Negotiations are still under 
way. And when that arrangement, when that agreement is signed, 
we’ll be more than happy to provide you with the information, and 
that would only be fair and reasonable. But at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think it fair to even ask what are the details of that 
agreement until the agreement has been signed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the questions put 
by members, items number 406 through 532 inclusive be 
converted to orders for return, debatable. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Creation of Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I shall at the 
conclusion of my remarks move a motion under Rule 16: 
 

That this Assembly congratulate the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its initiative in creating the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan and making Saskatchewan the first province 
with a pension plan to which all its residents can contribute. 

 
I am pleased that our government has again demonstrated its 
ability to respond with a piece of legislation and a program of this 
nature. We are again demonstrating our ability to provide a vehicle 
of protection and opportunity for the residents of Saskatchewan. 
This government places the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan 
as a priority, and this pension plan places that opportunity into 
action. 
 
I am glad to be able to speak to you about a piece of a  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2254 
 
 

landmark legislation. All of us have a common goal of 
guaranteeing an adequate retirement income for ourselves and for 
our families. As the throne speech and budget speech stated, our 
government is committed to offering additional retirement security 
to the people of Saskatchewan. In particular, the government has 
set the objective of offering additional protection to those 
members of society such as home-makers, small-business 
employees, part-time and self-employed workers who are making 
a valuable contribution to society but who have not been given an 
opportunity to adequately save for their retirement. 
 
Once again, Saskatchewan will be a national leader in the 
development of social programs that protect and enhance the 
security of the individual. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is an 
important milestone towards this government’s goal that all 
Saskatchewan residents will be able to retire with incomes above 
the poverty line. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is unique in this 
way. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is that kind of legislation. 
For the first time in Canada a government will be recognizing the 
contributions made by home-makers and acknowledging their 
right to a pension of their own. 
 
It establishes an opportunity for home-makers to be a part of a 
society — a society that begins to recognize the value of those 
women who choose for themselves the role of an exclusive 
home-maker will benefit by better environment for children and 
their families to grow up in. We as a government have chosen to 
recognize that contribution through a pension plan. The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan also will recognize and enable 
part-time workers, self-employed person sand small-business 
employees to establish pension savings plans for their retirement. 
Clearly this is a need for new pension opportunities when you 
consider that home-makers are not covered at all by the Canada 
Pension Plan and have no access to private pension plans. 
 
Even among those women who have chosen to enter the 
work-force, almost 64 per cent are unable to avail themselves of a 
private pension plan. And as a result of this, Saskatchewan 
home-makers who have chosen to raise families or who are in and 
out of the work-force had very few opportunities to save for 
retirement. The result of these inequities are all too predictable. As 
of 1984, more than half of those unattached single women aged 65 
and over were living below the poverty line. Further, women live 
longer than men on average and as a consequence, three-quarters 
of our single seniors are women. These inadequacies spread into 
the labour force because 55 per cent of working people are not 
covered by employee-sponsored pension plan. 
 
While the Canada Pension Plan covers the entire work force, 
contributions and benefits are based on an individual’s earnings, 
meaning low-income earners receive the lowest benefits. The 
maximum Canada Pension Plan retirement benefit is $486 per 
month. However, the average Canada pension benefit in 
Saskatchewan is $215 per month — only 44 per cent of the 
maximum benefit. As a result, federal support for seniors through 
old age security and the guaranteed income supplement amount 
for 15 per cent of total program expenditures by the federal 
government. 
 

Governments have been discussing pension reform for years. The 
federal government and the provinces have agreed on some 
important changes to the Canada Pension Plan. These changes are 
certainly worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, but no action has been taken to 
include home-makers in the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
In December, 1983, the report of the parliamentary task force on 
pension reform recommended that home-makers be covered by 
the Canada Pension Plan. All members of the task force endorsed 
the recommendation with the exemption of one NDP member of 
parliament. Other groups and individuals have indicated in 
principle, their support for home-makers’ pensions, including the 
National Action Committee on the Status of Women; the Canada 
Pension Plan advisory committee; the governments of Ontario, 
Quebec, and New Brunswick; the Hon. Jake Epp, Minister of 
Health and Welfare; and the Prime Minister of the country of 
Canada, Mr. Mulroney. 
 
Despite this widespread support for home-makers’ pension, the 
provincial and federal governments have not been able to arrive at 
an agreeable formula. Sometimes it takes one government with 
foresight and determination to get the ball rolling. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has decided it is time for 
Saskatchewan to again take the lead by introducing the first 
pension plan in Canada which embraces the contribution of 
home-makers. 
 
In the months to come we will be encouraging the federal 
government, through the government here in Saskatchewan and 
other provinces, to follow our lead to develop a national 
home-makers’ pension based on our model. 
 
I won’t go into detail about the technical aspects of the 
Saskatchewan pension plan; however, let me outlines a few of the 
most important points. The Saskatchewan pension plan will be a 
voluntary plan open to all residents of Saskatchewan between the 
ages of 18 and 65. In addition, approximately 450,000 people 
could be eligible to benefit from a government-matching 
contribution. The plan will allow Saskatchewan residents to 
supplement their contributions to the Canada Pension Plan with 
contributions to the new Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan will match contributions made 
by individuals with less than 25,800 in annual Canada Pension 
Plan insurable earnings and income from other sources. 
Participants eligible for the full government match of $300 per 
year will be entitled to a guaranteed minimum pension of $15 per 
month for each year the eligible participants contribute the 
matchable amount. For example, contributors who receive the 
maximum 300 government match each year who reach age 65 two 
years after the Saskatchewan pension begins operation, would 
receive a pension of $30 per month. Without the minimum 
pension province a benefit of only $11 per month would be paid. 
 
The government has also responded to the situation of 
Saskatchewan seniors who have already retired and cannot benefit 
from the Saskatchewan pension plan. The  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2255 
 
 

Minister of Social Services has announced increased payments for 
low-income seniors through the Saskatchewan income plan. 
 
Shortly after taking office, this government doubled the monthly 
Saskatchewan income plan payments for single seniors, and 
increased payments to senior couples by two-thirds. In the seven 
years previous to 1982, those payments had gone up only $5 a 
month, and I don’t believe that that was a very striking kind of a 
situation. We knew that that was not enough for seniors in need, 
and we responded with help for our seniors. 
 
Now we are acting again to move toward our objective that no one 
should have to retire in poverty in Saskatchewan — not those 
retirement women, I noted earlier, not those home-makers or 
part-time workers who have been left out of pension plans in the 
past; not the self-employed or the employees of small business. 
 
I am confident that the future generations will view the 
Saskatchewan pension plan as another milestone in Saskatchewan’ 
record of innovative social legislation, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move, seconded by the 
member from Battleford: 
 

That this Assembly congratulates the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its initiatives in creating the Saskatchewan 
pension plan and making Saskatchewan the first province 
with a pension plan to which all its residents can contribute. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature, 38 grade 3 and grade 4 students from the Pleasantdale 
Elementary School in Estevan, Saskatchewan. They are 
accompanied by teachers and chaperons and bus drivers. The 
teachers are Jane Moriarity and Michelle Ward; the chaperon is 
Doreen Rieger; and the bus driver is Rick Rohatyn. 
 
I would like all members of the legislature to welcome them in the 
normal way. I’ll be meeting with them at 3:30 for a picture, and I 
want to welcome them here, and I hope they have a safe trip home 
and a really nice summer. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Creation of Saskatchewan Pension Plan (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to join in speaking on the motion introduced by 
my colleague, the member from Morse, today. 
 
In my opinion, the Saskatchewan pension program is one of the 
most innovative pieces of social legislation ever looked at in the 
entire continent of North America, and I  

say that for a number of reasons. What we’ve seen happen over a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker, is certainly that many, many people 
have not found themselves at retirement in a position that they 
would like to be in at that time. They have not had the financial 
ability or the assets that could turn their retirement years into 
pleasant years. Certainly we see the ads on TV with people flying 
all over to exotic places, and we would all like to think that that’s 
what our retirement would be like and that that is the kind of 
lifestyle that we would be able to enjoy. 
 
(1445) 
 
The reality is something quite different, Mr. Speaker, and we 
know that well. The federal government undertook to do a green 
paper on pensions and pension reform in, I believe, 1980. And the 
findings of that green paper were very, very disappointing. What 
they showed was that many, many of our senior citizens live in 
poverty, and in spite of those kind of actions, governments prior to 
this have not made a concerted and conscious effort to address that 
poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to compound the problem, we find that if you target 
in on where the largest problem lies in pension in the elderly poor, 
we find that problem lies with women. And it lies with those 
people for no fault of their own, but because the historical 
development of our country has virtually dictated that women 
would not be out in the labour force; that they would not be wage 
earners, and as such they were reliant on their husband in a family 
situation to provide them in their elder years. 
 
Now in an example where, for example, there was some problem 
and the family was not able to amass pension assets, or they 
weren’t able to amass real property which at retirement they could 
sell and use as a pension plan, then that family . . . and because 
women generally tend to live longer than men, particularly those 
women went into their elder years in a very, very difficult state. 
 
Many of us will remember possibly our grandmothers and other 
elder women who not so long ago were cashing a pension cheque 
from the Government of Canada that was maybe $70, and 
eventually it did go up a bit. But even to this day, Mr. Speaker, if 
you have to live on old age security or Canada Pension Plan, you 
do not live well. 
 
What the Saskatchewan pension program does is to provide a 
vehicle whereby people, and primarily women, will be given an 
opportunity to develop a pension benefit for their later years. It 
does this in the best Saskatchewan tradition, a tradition of looking 
after yourself and building your own future and not particularly 
looking at someone for a hand-out. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension program allows that for a minimum, or 
a relatively small monthly contribution or an annual contribution, 
that in most cases can be matched by treasury dollars from the 
provincial government — that an individual can over time 
accumulate a fairly comfortable pension. 
 
I don’t think that anyone would argue that people will retire in the 
lap of luxury based on the Saskatchewan pension program. I’m 
not sure that that’s what the  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2256 
 
 

program ought to be designed to do, but certainly what it does is it 
provides an opportunity for our future elderly people to look after 
their retirement to a level where it will be reasonable. 
 
Certainly if over the course of a lifetime an individual is able to 
pay for their family home, and that should be a reasonable thing to 
expect in most cases, and if an individual is able to put away $25 a 
month and that is matched by $25 a month from the government, 
that would give that individual a pension at about age 65 of $1,000 
or a little better. So if they’re looking at meeting their daily needs, 
their food and shelter and the electricity bill, those types of 
standard everyday needs, they will be able to do that without a 
great deal of difficulty. Top that up with anything else that they 
may accumulate as a family or a family unit and, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
fairly clear that coming generations that will retire in a 
considerable degree of more luxury, or a considerably better 
situation than the previous generation of our province have 
enjoyed. 
 
In fact it’s been said, and the numbers show, that in the future no 
one in the province of Saskatchewan need retire below the poverty 
line, and that is a laudable goal. It’s a tremendous thing to think 
that in our province we are now at a point where we will be able to 
guarantee that people will be able to live in their retirement years 
above the poverty line. That has not been the case here. All too 
often families, even if they accumulated assets during their life, 
wanted — for example in an agricultural province like 
Saskatchewan — wanted to pass the farm to the next generation 
they sacrificed in their later years to help out their children in 
succeeding generations. Programs like the Saskatchewan pension 
program will ensure that they will still be able to do that, to 
maintain the family assets and the family way of life, but also to 
live in relative comfort and security in their declining years. 
 
As I’ve indicated, this is a very, very important program, 
particularly for Saskatchewan women. And if there is any doubt 
about that by members of this Assembly, I would encourage them 
to just take a walk up and down Main Street, Saskatchewan, and 
they will find that this program is incredibly well received, and 
particularly well received by farm women, we’re finding. 
 
The reason for that of course is that in the past, women on the 
farm, who work shoulder to shoulder with their husband, have 
been able to say, well now, as we approach our retirement, we’ll 
have the farm to sell, and that is our pension plan. With uncertain 
times in agriculture, these people are now able to say, we need 
something else. And whether it’s agriculture, small business, or 
any other area where there’s not a typically built-in pension plan, 
such as in teaching, for example, or government service or any of 
those areas where you’re an employee and part of your 
compensation package is the pension program, people out of those 
types of occupations now have a measure of security that they can 
buy into, and I believe that they’re certainly entitled to it. 
 
Now I know that there has been some criticism from the 
opposition about this program. And they’ve said, well why would 
you match dollar for dollar a pension for someone who may have 
a reasonable income? They may  

make 30 or $35,000 a year, but their wife is at home, and that wife 
can put money into this plan and be matched by government 
dollars. Well, I would suggest, why wouldn’t we? 
 
We match pensions for government employees, and they are 
among the best paid people in our society. We match pensions for 
teachers, and the teachers’ pension plan in Saskatchewan, I 
believe, is the most lucrative pension plan in Canada. It is a very, 
very attractive pension plan. I have a colleague who is a school 
teacher who would like me to explain it to him. I’d be happy to, 
because as someone with an education degree who has an interest 
in pensions, I believe firmly that any teacher can retire very, very 
comfortably by taking the pension opportunities that are available 
to them and developing them to the limit, because they are very 
attractive. 
 
And consequently, I believe that it’s only fair and reasonable in a 
caring and compassionate society that we should now take that 
next step to extend pension benefits, security in elder years, to 
people who have previously not had those benefits. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleague, the member from 
Morse, in commending the government for this very brace action 
and the show of initiative that they’ve taken to introduce the 
Saskatchewan pension program to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to 
the debate on this resolution. There obviously will be some people 
who will benefit from the government’s pension plan, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think it’s important to note that there will be many, 
many thousands of others who will never benefit at all. And that’s 
one of the points that the members opposite fail to recognize when 
they speak on this resolution and when they speak on this Bill. 
 
When you call any piece of legislation good social legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, you have to first of all consider how it benefits those who 
are most in need, while those who are most in need for a pension 
plan benefit nothing under this proposal, and that’s where its 
shortcoming are, to the largest degree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Morse said that the national home-makers’ 
pension plan ought to be modelled on this proposal which is here 
before us in this Chamber. I disagree with him. I would hope that a 
national pension plan, a home-makers’ pension plan, will do a 
better job than what this one will be to provide pensions for people 
who will not be provided pensions under the kind of thing that 
resolution speaks of. 
 
No one should have to retire in poverty in Saskatchewan. I agree 
with the member, and I forget which one it was who said that, but 
once again this Bill does not deal with that question. There still 
will be many people in Saskatchewan retiring in poverty unless 
steps are taken to provide a full pension program that covers 
everyone. 
 
There are people who are not retiring before the age of 65,  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2257 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, people between the ages of 60 and 65. Many of them 
indeed are women; in fact, most of them are women. Most of them 
are widows. Many of them, whether they are men or women, Mr. 
Speaker, are handicapped in one form or another or suffer from ill 
health. 
 
Those people are not addressed in this Bill, nor are they addressed 
by this resolution, and I think that that is indeed unfortunate and 
unnecessary. There could be a provision to provide some form of 
guaranteed income to a certain level — let’s say, the level of the 
OAS (old age security) and the GIS (guaranteed income 
supplement) — for these people between 60 and 65 who now have 
the only option, and that is to go and receive welfare. 
 
The New Democratic Party has a proposal, Mr. Speaker, to help 
those people. We have a proposal which would provide a 
guaranteed income to the level of at least a GIS and the OAS for 
those people between 60 and 65 who now have the only option, 
and that is to go and receive welfare. 
 
The New Democratic Party has a proposal, Mr. Speaker, to help 
those people. We have a proposal which would provide a 
guaranteed income to the level of at least a GIS and the OAS for 
those people between 60 and 65 who can no longer work for 
various reasons. I am sorry that the government has chosen to 
ignore those people in this proposal, in this budget, and in any 
kind of proposals that they have. 
 
Now at first glance no one can be against pensions; everybody’s in 
favour of pensions. I think we can agree to take that at its face 
value. And at first glance this government’s pension plan seems 
like a good idea. But when you look at some of the specifics in it, 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what you find. I think it’s been very well 
articulated in “Readers’ Viewpoints” in the Regina Leader-Post, 
dated on June 24th. I’m going to use the figures that are quoted 
there because I think that they are accurate. It talks about: 
 

. . . a women whose income is between zero and $9,133 and 
who has an employed husband willing to make contributions 
on her behalf. 

 
Well that particular women, Mr. Speaker, will benefit because the 
husband’s income will be able to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Well the members make light of this article written by Mrs. Palma 
Anderson, a noted person in this province, and they laugh. And 
they laugh, Mr. Speaker, because they know that what’s written 
here is right and correct. 
 
But any women with an income of up to $9,133 whose husband 
might happen to be the Premier or a cabinet minister or a politician 
and therefore can afford to make contributions — such a person 
will be able to benefit under the plan, and that’s fine and good. 
 
But a woman who earns up to $9,133 and is a single mother, or is 
alone, is living below the poverty line. 
 

Statistics Canada and the National Council of Welfare both 
estimate that approximately $9.700 a year affords a single 
person a mere poverty-level existence. A single-parent 
woman with one child requires approximately $12,800 to 
reach that poverty line. 

 
Even members opposite, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t stand up and in 
good conscience argue that anyone earning  

incomes of that level or less are going to be able to afford to 
contribute to this pension plan that the government has put in. 
They will continue to remain poor, and they will continue to retire 
poor. And that is one of the injustices that the approach of this 
type of government continues to perpetuate in society. 
 
But these people whose incomes only go up to that level or less 
will pay the subsidy or the matching amount that higher income 
people get from the public purse, because they will pay sales tax 
and they will pay income tax. They won’t be able to afford to 
make contributions to a pension plan. But their taxes will go 
towards the $300 that the wife of the wealthy family income 
situation will be able to get from the government. 
 
And I think that that’s unfair. I’m not going to vote against it, Mr. 
Speaker, because any kind of benefit of a pension plan, I think, is 
something worth considering. I’m pointing out that this 
government, in its approach, never, never considers the needs of 
people who are particularly in need. And once again they have 
proved that in this legislation. They take from low and 
middle-income people continuously so that they can benefit those 
who are more and better off. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now I’m going to quote another part of this article, Mr. Speaker. It 
goes on to say that: 
 

Only the most blindly optimistic would claim that a single 
woman earning less that 9,133 per year, living below the 
poverty line, could afford to contribute one cent to this plan. 
Just as they live, at best, a poverty-level existence before 
retirement, so after age 65 these women will no doubt 
continue to live below the poverty line. And this government 
once again has assured that to be the case. 

 
For those who do manage to contribute to the plan and 
thereby obtain a pension, the 600 to $1,000 a month the 
government estimates a home-maker contributing $300 per 
year for 30 years will obtain, may not represent a significant 
net gain in pension income, given that she will likely no 
longer be eligible for the guaranteed income supplement. 

 
So people now will contribute to this plan. They will lose their 
guaranteed income supplement. The federal government will once 
again be bailed out by the Saskatchewan taxpayer, as seems to be 
the approach of the government opposite, and the net gain will be 
negligible, if any at all. 
 
And so the member from The Battlefords described this as “an 
innovative social legislation” — I quote from what he said. Well 
because it does not address these very serious problems and the 
needs of a large number of people, I do not want anyone to 
mistake this for innovative social legislation. It is not in any way 
innovative. 
 
Now not only has this government inadequately dealt with the 
pension situation, but it has made sure that those  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2258 
 
 

people who are poor, remain poor. Example: people who are 
working on minimum wage, and many of them are single women 
with families — that is a large number of the minimum wage 
earners in this province — have had a 25 per cent in crease to the 
minimum wage in the last four years. 
 
Can the member from Maple Creek in any way argue that those 
people are going to be able to afford to contribute to a pension 
plan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they are. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, she says, yes, they are. Well that shows 
the kind of world she must come from, Mr. Speaker. She 
obviously lives in some kind of a fish bowl that doesn’t 
understand what the problems of lower income people in society 
are. And I, once again . . . It just clearly identifies the philosophy 
of this government and how insensitive they are to the concerns 
that people have. 
 
Another point, Mr. Speaker, is: there are voluntary plans of this 
nature in other parts of the world, and I wish that the government 
opposite had taken the time to study those plans. Because if you 
look at the experiences that exist in other places, you can learn 
something from them and make sure you don’t make the same 
mistakes here. But the experience of these voluntary plans in other 
places of the world where they exist has shown that very few 
people in fact take part in them. And people of low income, almost 
to a total amount, do not take part in them . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
Well the member from Morse talks about compulsory. It’s not a 
question of compulsory; it’s a question, Mr. Speaker, of making 
pensions available for everyone, not just a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
say a few words on this pension Bill. I thought the Bill was neatly 
summed up in an article by Leonard Schiffrin of the Toronto Star 
when he said with respect to the pension Bill, the Devine 
government had tried to reinvent the wheel and got it wrong. That 
about sums up this government’s effort with respect to a pension 
Bill. 
 
The pension Bill, in and by itself, Mr. Speaker — there are some 
problems with the Bill in and by itself, and I’m going to get to 
those in a moment. The most serious problem, however, is not 
what it does do, but what it doesn’t do. It does not provide a 
pension or a living allowance for older people, for those people 
who need it most. This pension plan is, both by logic and by 
experience with other similar pension plans, likely to be utilized 
by those who need the assistance least. 
 
The maximum income beyond which one cannot qualify is a 
person income. That is irrational when one thinks about it. A 
family income, such as is used for old age pension and for the 
guaranteed income supplement, would be a great deal more 
rational. It is possible for families, both men and women indeed, to 
arrange to have all of the income in the spouse’s hands and take  

advantage of this. 
 
Indeed in many cases, with the changes in The Income Tax Act 
now, the income will be in the hands of one spouse. With the new 
amendments to The Income Tax Act, a good deal of professional 
people, where one of the two marriage partners are professional, 
will have all of the income — the spouse will have none; the 
spouse will then qualify for this. And I think that’s wrong. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker . . .(inaudible interjection). . . The member from 
Melville will no doubt have a lot of illuminating comments to 
make on the Bill with respect to taxing back the benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another form of investment. It is an investment 
pure and simple. It is a specialized kind of investment intended to 
accomplish a specialized purpose, but it is an investment. It is a 
very good investment because your contributions — not only do 
you get the interest and so on that is earned on the income, but you 
get a similar amount from the government, plus the interest earned 
on that money. So this is a very good investment. 
 
That’s fine if this is being made available to people in their 
retirement years who haven’t sufficient income. That is not, I 
think, a wise social policy if the pension is being made available to 
spouses of high income earners who, as I say, are often 
professional people, sometimes business people. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that as a matter of social policy, this which 
is . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, the members no doubt are 
having difficulty following a relatively simple, logical statement. I 
don’t think the public will have as much trouble as members 
opposite will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there may well be women and spouses, I suppose, 
who have a legitimate need for this. There will no doubt be some 
spouses in lower income families who will make use of it who will 
use this as a savings vehicle. The most serious problem with this 
pension plan, as I say, is not what it does. It provides a pension 
scheme for a group of people, by and large home-makers, who 
don’t other wise have a pension scheme. There are, Mr. Speaker, 
large numbers of home-makers who live their final years in 
poverty. A pension scheme for home-makers is something that is 
needed. But, Mr. Speaker, this will not assist those who are 
neediest. 
 
There are two courses of action which would have been more 
rational. One, Mr. Speaker, would have been for the government 
to have pursued the federal government’s Canada Pension Plan 
and a broadening of that. There have been some efforts to provide 
a national scheme which would assist everyone. That hasn’t been 
done, and it has not proved to be an easy goal for those who have 
tried to accomplish it, but it would have been a great deal more 
rational. A provincial scheme which would have been of more 
assistance to lower income people might have met a more 
immediate need than this. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that this, I suspect, will be an investment, 
but will by and large be an investment  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2259 
 
 

vehicle for upper income people. It will no doubt meet some 
legitimate needs, will no doubt meet the needs of some 
home-makers who don’t otherwise have a pension and can’t get 
one and will need one; but I expect that it will be the subject of a 
good deal of abuse. By that I mean it will be purchased by people 
who simply see it as an investment. If they wouldn’t have put 
money into this, they would have put money into a registered 
retirement saving or any one of a number of other investment 
vehicles. As I say, I think the most serious shortcoming in this 
plan is that it considers personal income and not family income. 
 
Other schemes in this country which have been adopted, 
guaranteed income supplement and the Canada Pension Plan, to a 
lesser extent the Canada Pension Plan, but the guaranteed income 
supplement does deal with family income; so should this. If this 
had used as a ceiling a family income, a goodly number of the 
potential abuses would have been avoided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some other problems with this as well. 
There is very little in the way of restrictions on the government in 
terms of what they use to invest the funds. I think that is 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. There is no particular reason, given this 
government’s track record, why we would want to trust this 
government with pension schemes. There is the SaskPen which 
shows every indicia of being a vehicle to use pension schemes to 
assist, often, Conservative supporters in development projects. 
They’re not particularly good investments, Mr. Speaker, and the 
SaskPen investments are unfortunate in that they are not the 
normal type of conservative investments that pension schemes are 
usually invested in. 
 
I was interested to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Harwood Hotel in 
Moose Jaw was one of the investments of SaskPen. I gathered that 
from the discussion the other evening. If that’s the kind of thing 
that SaskPen is investing pension funds in, then all I can say is that 
this ought to have some very tight restrictions on it to keep this 
government out of pension funds. Pension funds should not be 
viewed as a source of risk capital for friends of the Conservative 
government. Pension funds should be invested in conservative 
investments which will give the fund some income and very little 
risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are any number of incidents where this 
government has mismanaged funds available to it. I suppose one 
might mention as a fact that the government came into the office 
with a balanced budget — with a series of 11 balanced budgets. 
This government . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well I’m going to get to the teachers’ superannuation in a minute. 
The member from Wadena will no doubt be waiting with bated 
breath. 
 
The government came into office with a balanced budget; now has 
a $2 billion deficit which shows every sign of running away with 
it. The government as well chopped up another success story in 
terms of management with Pioneer Trust. 
 
Teachers’ superannuation fund — the member from Wadena was 
expressing interest in the teachers’  

superannuation fund. Teachers’ superannuation . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
member his time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was going to 
be with great pleasure that I was going to speak on the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, but the pleasure has gone out of my 
speech when I’ve heard the members opposite tell me that my 
wife doesn’t deserve a pension plan. And I’m sure there are other 
women out there like my wife who take exception to the fact that 
the NDP are trying to deny them a pension plan. 
 
They were the government for 11 years and they denied them a 
pension plan. They wouldn’t do anything. Now they criticize what 
we’ve done and they say, oh, it’s not good enough. It’s third rate; 
it’s fourth rate. Well it is a lot better than the nothing that they did 
in 11 years, and I can tell you it’s a lot better than the nothing the 
CCF did in the other 20 years they were in government. 
Thirty-one years of rhetoric and no action, and now when we do 
something for women, they’re trying to tell me that my wife 
doesn’t deserve a pension plan. 
 
(1515) 
 
That reminds me of Sir John A. MacDonald, the first Prime 
Minister of this country, who had a propensity to drink a little. 
And once while speaking, he felt a bit ill, so he had to go behind 
the platform and vomit. And when he came back, he thought this 
might be a bit embarrassing, so he being a man of his wit indicated 
that, he apologized, but he had thought of those grits and that’s 
how they made him feel. 
 
Well what I heard from the members opposite here reminded me 
of that story, and that’s how they made me feel when they told me 
and my wife, and all the women in my constituency, that they are 
not entitled to a pension plan because their husbands may have an 
income over $25,000 a year. What they’re saying is that every 
wife of every CN railroader in Melville — there being 510 of 
them — that none of those wives are entitled to a pension, that 
only their husbands are entitled to a pension. Well then I know 
how Sir John A. felt, and I feel the same way today when I hear 
that kind of information in this Assembly. 
 
In addition the Leader of the Opposition, the man who wouldn’t 
recognize women’s rights in the constitution of Canada when he 
negotiated it, had the audacity to say the same thing, that his wife 
doesn’t serve a pension. Now I don’t know why . . . Did he 
include his daughter as well? Well it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that he has more respect for his family of Crown corporations than 
he does for his own family. And those are the kind of things that 
scare me about the thought of that party opposite ever becoming 
government again. 
 
To go into the details of our plan, you have to look at the 
eligibility that everyone over the age of 18 is eligible, except if 
you are already on old age security or collecting from the 
Saskatchewan pension plan. And what the members opposite 
don’t understand is that we are trying to encourage some degree of 
saving. And while this plan  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2260 
 
 

will be aimed primarily at women — I don’t apologize — it will 
be primarily conservative women who will take up this plan and 
save a little money, because it’s conservative-thinking women 
who look ahead, who save up a little bit of money, even if it’s not 
$25 a month, but they will put away 5 or a little bit to take care 
themselves. 
 
But the socialist women that they say they represent, and 
fortunately aren’t many of them, and it’s been suggested that they 
won’t let the women of their party represent themselves. They 
want to speak for them and deny them a pension. Maybe they 
don’t have to deny the socialist women a pension because their 
attitude will be: oh well, the government will take care of me; all 
those hard-saving, conservative women will save money, earn 
income, and they will take care of me; so why should I save? — 
just have the government give me some money when I retire. That 
is their attitude. It’s not an attitude of building. And while men and 
women have been building this country, we are now encouraging 
women to join in in building the country, in working and in 
saving, and we recognize the value of taking care of children. 
 
My wife is a mother, and initially when she gave up teaching to 
stay home with our children, to tutor two boys, two very special 
students — and she did teach special education, and she’s doing it 
again; she now has two students — our sons. Initially, the attitude 
of the member’s opposite — and they were the government then 
— had instilled even in the women of our neighbourhood an 
attitude that there was no value to taking carte of children, there 
was no value in teaching these people, these two sons of mine, 
into becoming valuable citizens. 
 
So other women would say, well, how can you stay home? You’re 
not working. What a farce for anyone to say that my wife is not 
working. It has to be the greatest insult to mothers that exist. And, 
therefore, my wife has come to learn that when somebody says, 
what do you do? she says, I’m a mother, and I tell you, that is the 
oldest profession. You may think that you want to set up 
co-operatives of what you call the oldest profession, but I’m 
telling you that being a mother is the oldest profession, and there is 
no doubt or dispute about that whatsoever. 
 
And what thanks does a mother get for practising her profession? 
Well first of all she gets no pay, and now you insist that she gets 
no pension plan. That is the supreme insult. And the people of my 
constituency, the mothers of constituency, the lower-income 
earners of my constituency will be very, very pleased about this 
plan. 
 
And as a matter of fact, I’ve been in my constituency, and I’ve had 
nothing but good comments from not only mothers, but fathers — 
fathers saying that I will help put money into my wife’s pension 
plan because I think this is a good thing. So this is a plan that will 
benefit the people who need it the most. 
 
I want to give you some examples, Mr. Speaker, of how our 
population and our income figures break down in this province 
and who will benefit. First of all, if you divide the income of the 
population into quarters, one-quarter of the population has an 
income of under $4,000, another  

quarter has an income of under $13,000. So half of all the people 
— that’s population, not people working, but population of 
working age — have incomes under $13,000. One-quarter of 
incomes are between $13,000 and $26,000, and the top 25 per cent 
earn more than $26,000 per year. But when you break that down 
by sex, you find that in the bottom quarter of income, the zero to 
4,000, women make up 70 per cent of the bottom quarter; and in 
the next quarter, the 4,000 to 13,000, women make up 60 per cent. 
And so the bottom half of income of population has a great 
preponderance of women in the bottom half, in the bottom two 
quadrants of the income of our population. 
 
When you look at them, this is in direct contradiction of what the 
former minister of Finance, the member for Regina North East, 
knows about Saskatchewan. And when he says the rich will 
benefit, the top 25 per cent of income earners in this province will 
receive, from the provincial government under the Saskatchewan 
pension plan, zero dollars, and zero per cent of them will benefit. 
So the top 25 per cent theoretically, the richest people in 
Saskatchewan, will benefit to the extent of zero. The bottom 50 
per cent, by income, will receive 70 per cent of the benefits of the 
Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that is providing a pension 
plan for people who need it most; for mothers, for grandmothers, 
for low-income earners, for farmers; for people employed in small 
business, where they cannot control their wages, where their 
employers cannot arbitrarily increase prices so as to increase 
wages. This bottom 50 per cent of the income bracket will get 70 
per cent of the benefit. 
 
And then the Leader of the Opposition and the members opposite 
say, well there might be a few high-income men whose wives will 
be able to save and develop their own pension plan. And as a 
cabinet minister it’s no secret — I read my income in the 
Leader-Post from time to time — it is $63,013 per annum. So 
therefore I am a high-income earner. 
 
However, it seems to me that a woman like my wife, who is a 
professional mother, who receives no pay for her long days, who 
receives no overtime and no benefits whatsoever, and in addition 
who performs a service to society by educating and training two 
sons that one day will be income earners and not a drain on the 
society, that she should be entitled to a pension plan. In addition, 
because of our single-income family, we pay approximately 
$1,000 a year . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I conclude 
my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an amendment 
to this main motion. I want to, first of all, Mr. Speaker, discuss the 
pension plan that’s before us, and also I would like to give a few 
personal views that I have of my own regarding pension plans in 
the province. 
 
But I think that one should be very cautious when you see a 
pension plan put forward by the Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan. I think that one would  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2261 
 
 

only have to take a look at the mishandling of the pension funds 
that they are in charge of right now . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
I’ve hit a sore spot over there. I will get down to the handling of 
the teachers’ superannuation fund. But I want to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to the members who are chattering from 
their seat over there, that I think that one has to be very careful 
when you put your pension funds in the hand of this government. 
 
Let’s just take a look at the teachers’ fund, the superannuation 
fund for the teachers, who always had 7 per cent of their funds put 
into the superannuation fund and anything over that was also 
added — and it was also added by the Conservative government 
for the first three years. But now we take a look at the fourth and 
fifth years of this administration and we see that $30 million of the 
teachers’ superannuation fund, or the $30 million that is over the 7 
per cent, has now been put into general revenue to retire the type 
of a debt that this government has accumulated over the last five 
years, or the last four years and some months — a deficit, I might 
add, of over $2 billion in operating debt. That $30 million that 
they took out of the teachers’ superannuation fund that was over 
the 7 per cent and added to general revenue, I think, is 
mishandling of that fund and should not have taken place. 
 
I also want to touch a little bit on how the government handles 
funds. When we take a look at the Pioneer Trust affair, Mr. 
Speaker, and the letter that was written by the minister of Finance 
at that time who is in charge of the pension funds in this province, 
at that time the ill-fated letter that was written by the then minister 
of Finance, the hon. member from Kindersley, indicating in 
writing his support and then a few weeks later reneging on that 
commitment to Pioneer Trust — and you see what has now 
happened. 
 
We can also take a look at the flat tax that has been put on and that 
hits pensioners in this province. The member from Regina 
Lakeview feels that this is unfair that I should suggest that. But let 
me give him a little example of what this does to a person who is 
paying into a pension fund and where their funds are coming from. 
You say that you want everybody to get into this pension plan, or 
you want mainly women to get into it. I’m going to discuss this a 
little later, because I feel that a pension plan — we should have a 
pension plan in this province for everyone, and I think it’s high 
time. I’m speaking personally when I get to that, and I will allude 
to what I’m going to say. 
 
But let’s take an individual who is paying into a pension plan and 
who is earning $30,000 a year and your government, Mr. Member 
from Regina Lakeview, adds that flat tax. So before you have any 
deductions, if he’s making $30,000 a year, you take the flat tax off 
of the $30,000 right off the bat which could be going into a 
pension fund. Then you go down the line and you take off all the 
deductions and you end up with a net income of $20,000; then you 
take the normal tax off. So can you trust the Minister of Finance 
who will put on a tax on your complete earnings and then take off 
your deductions and tax you again. And that’s the double taxation. 
But I think, and I’m speaking from my personal opinion, that I 
think that everybody in this province should have a pension  

plan. 
 
(1530) 
 
I don’t know, I think it may cost a lot of money, and it may be a 
lot of bureaucracy. But I think that anybody that goes out in the 
busy and is sawing logs, or if anybody is working on a farm and 
picking rocks, or if an individual is working in a cafe or wherever 
they work — if they’re a teacher, or if they’re a bank manager, or 
if they’re a bank clerk, I think that they should all have to pay into 
a pension plan, and that pension plan, I feel, Mr. Speaker, should 
be portable. 
 
I think that if a teacher wants to teach for five years and then 
decides that they want to go and work in a bank, or if they want to 
go and work for Sask Forest Products for a couple of years, I think 
they should be able to take that pension with them. Now you’re 
implementing a pension program that’s going to be geared at the 
farm wives and the mothers in the province, and I think that’s 
good. But there are a lot of mothers who work in cafes, who work 
in Sask Forest Products, who work all over. I think if you had a 
portable pension plan, Mr. Speaker, that the teacher who has 
taught for 10 years and wants to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . If 
the member from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, wants to get into this 
debate, then he will have his opportunity. But if he wants to 
continue to chatter from his seat, then I can’t get my point across. 
But I’m saying that if a teacher wants to teach for 10 years and 
then wants to go out and work on a farm or in the bush or 
wherever it be for another five years, I think they should be able to 
take that pension plan with them. It becomes portable, and it 
should apply to everybody in the province. I don’t care if you’re 
picking rocks on a farm for two months and then you’re going to 
go and do something else for three months, and you could take 
that pension and it would be portable. And I think that it would 
eliminate a lot of the burn-outs that we have in the professions. 
 
And the member from Meadow Lake knows that, teaching for 25, 
30 years, if he was able to go out and become a conservation 
officer for five years and take that pension with him, if it was 
completely portable, and then he could go back to his own 
profession. Or if you were a doctor or a farmer, or if you were a 
carpenter, if you were a plumber, whatever the case may be, I 
think we should take a look at a pension plan that covers 
everybody in the province and a pension plan that is portable, Mr. 
Speaker. And I say that in all sincerity. 
 
I know that it would probably cost a lot of money. There may be a 
large bureaucracy involved, but I think that down the road when 
you take a look at the individuals who become 60 years of age and 
65 years of age, the percentage of those individuals, men and 
women who do not have a pension plan, I think we have to work 
on that; we have to solve that problem. And maybe the only way 
that we can solve that is by not implementing a program that 
covers one segment of society, but I think we should take a look at 
a program that is completely portable to everybody that works in 
this province. And I think that that would make a lot of sense. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2262 
 
 

If the member from Weyburn, who is a doctor by trade — I don’t 
know what kind of a doctor he is, but I believe that he is a 
veterinarian — but if he would quit chattering from his seat, I 
think he’s starting to burn out already. If he had a portable pension 
plan, maybe he could go out and work in the busy for a couple of 
years and, you know, get your body back in shape. And when you 
have a healthy body, you have a healthy mind. So maybe . . . Or 
you could go out and commercial fish for a few months, and let 
me tell you, you’d have a strong back. 
 
I think that, Mr. Speaker, we should take a serious look, and I 
would ask this government not to isolate one segment of society 
but take a look at a pension plan that would be totally portable and 
cover everybody. Down the road, 20, 30 years, let me tell you, it 
would pay off. The initial money that it would cost now, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Well I’m quite happy to join this debate today, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’m quite saddened by some of the comments 
that members of the NDP opposition have made. 
 
I believe it was the member for Regina Centre who stood up and 
said, well he thought the plan was a good one except it shouldn’t 
apply in a case where a woman was married. If she’s married, 
she’s part of a family, and the family should be the part that pays 
the pension. He wants to make women a chattel. He wants to 
make them a slave. He wants to make them under the ownership 
of their husband. He wants to make them a part of the husband’s 
income, not a person in their own right. He wants to take us back 
40 years in history, Mr. Speaker. And I’m quite upset about that, 
and I’m sure most of the women listening today are as well. And if 
you don’t believe that, go back and check the records. 
 
Some of the members from the opposition are sitting here making 
very, very snide comments from their seats about mothers — 
about professional mothers. The member for Quill Lakes yells 
from his seat, when the member for Melville was speaking, who’s 
a professional mother? The moose bellowed again, what’s a 
professional mother? It’s one of the oldest and most honoured 
professions there is in this world, Mr. Speaker — absolutely. I am 
really upset with that. I’m proud of the fact that we have moved 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to recognize women in society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — The NDP for the last 11 years that they were in 
power had rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. They spoke about women and 
the rights of women, individuality. How many women did they 
ever elect? None. How many women did they have in their 
cabinet? None. What did they ever do for women as far as pension 
plans are concerned? Nothing. 
 
But they talked a lot, Mr. Speaker. They talked a lot and they’re 
still talking. As a matter of fact, I’ve heard NDPism likened to that 
of a religion, and their hymn is: too little too late for too few. Well, 
Mr. speaker, 450,000 people in Saskatchewan will be eligible for 
this pension plan. And  

the members of the opposition sit there and say: too little, too late, 
too few; and if you’re married, you shouldn’t qualify; and Lord 
help you if you should happen to be married to a man who 
happens to make a few dollars. 
 
They want to try to tie women into being chattel again, and I 
disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. When they’re talking about how 
many dollars it’s going to cost, and they say someone can’t afford 
to do this; someone can’t afford this exorbitant pension plan. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, $25 a month may be a bit difficult for some people to 
come up with. You’re allowed to contribute 15 or 20. 
 
If you put 50 cents a day away for your pension for your old age, 
Mr. Speaker, the price of a lousy cup of coffee every day, you’re 
going to be able to reap the benefits 30 years later of up to $1,000 
a month. And they say that doesn’t make sense. They say the 
average person can’t afford it. I disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. If 
you take a look at the cost of a bottle of whisky — $25, let’s say 
— if the members of the opposition would give up just one bottle 
a month, they’d be able to supply themselves in their old age as 
well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, pension funds have been a real contentious issue 
in this House. When we took office in 1982 we came upon $3.7 
billion in unfunded liability and pension funds that the NDP 
government, when they were in power, had siphoned off from 
teachers, from the public of Saskatchewan who had put their 
money into those pension funds in good faith. And now we’re 
sitting with a $3.7 billion unfunded liability. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is how they balanced their budgets, on the back of 
pension plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk about providing for the people of 
Saskatchewan who can least provide for themselves, let’s take a 
look at the seniors. Let’s take a look at this group of people the 
NDP tell us that they’re so concerned about. They were so 
concerned about them that under the Saskatchewan income plan 
they increased it by $5 in seven years, Mr. Speaker — a whole $5. 
Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker? Can you imagine how happy 
those people were to get that extra $5? I imagine you can, Mr. 
Speaker. It was an insult to those people. We took office and we 
doubled the Saskatchewan income plan. And just previously this 
year we increased it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Conservative government, a Conservative 
government that’s supposed to be, according to the NDP, 
hard-hearted, vicious, cruel, uncaring. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
record speaks for itself. Who was unkind? Who was uncaring? 
Who was cruel? Who did nothing but talk? The NDP. They’d 
throw a little bit of a hand-out every once in a while — $5. Big, 
hairy deal — five bucks. And they stand there in their 
sanctimonious way and say, we’re the guys that look after the 
seniors; we’re the guys who look after the underprivileged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes, as the member from Melville said, it 
makes me ill just to listen to them — too little, too late, doom and 
gloom; nothing but empty rhetoric, again and again and again. 
And whenever, Mr. Speaker, someone comes up with a plan — 
someone comes up with an innovative idea like the Saskatchewan 
pension  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2263 
 
 

plan — the members opposite try to run it down instead of 
providing constructive criticism and trying to help with it in trying 
to make it happen, and in hopes of maybe in future years making it 
better. Everything can stand improvement, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
saying that the Saskatchewan pension plan is 100 per cent, but it’s 
100 per cent better than what we’ve got. We had nothing under the 
NDP. Now you have a Saskatchewan pension plan of which 
450,000 Saskatchewan people are eligible to participate in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s quite good. If you take a look at the 
group of people that we are trying to reach with this plan, 
home-makers, ordinary people, people who are working, 
self-employed; people who don’t have access to the regular 
pension plans that RCMP officers have, that teachers have, that 
government employees have — common, ordinary people, Mr. 
Speaker, who are just trying to make a living and often have a 
rough time trying to provide for their future security. Many of 
them put money into their homes; many of them put money into 
their cars, their accessories for their house. Some of us try to buy 
farms and try to provide for our declining years by having a bit of 
a nest egg built up. But as it was pointed out, those things tend to 
change in value. Times can change, the economy can change. 
We’re trying, Mr. Speaker. This will be one more way that some 
of us common, ordinary people can provide for our future years 
and not — I repeat — not be a drain on future generations. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is something that the NDP could never 
understand. They would mortgage their children’s futures from 
now until doomsday if they thought it would win them a vote, Mr. 
Speaker. They went out and bought potash mines, Mr. Speaker, 
and uranium mines. Do you know what $600 million for the 
uranium mine that we have in the North could do for this 
Saskatchewan pension plan if we had it right now? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t have to be sitting here arguing about it. 
Instead of buying that potash mine . . . pardon me, or that uranium 
mine, they could have set up a Saskatchewan pension plan and 
used those dollars for that if they’re so wild and so interested 
about a pension plan. 
 
But oh no, Mr. Speaker. They were more interested in their family 
of Crown corporations, ever increasing, ever getting larger, taking 
over more and more, Mr. Speaker. And they left the common, 
ordinary family to fend for himself, and then made people feel 
better with empty rhetoric and $5 handouts once in a while, and 
promises of gas rebates to farmers which they promptly took off 
after the election was over. That is the type of government we saw 
for 11 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s compare that to the record of the province of Saskatchewan 
under the Conservative government. If you look at our programs 
that we’ve brought in in tough economic times for small business, 
Mr. Speaker, and farmers, many of whom will be eligible for the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, we will show you, Mr. Speaker, that 
when we say we’re going to do something, we do it and we come 
through with it. 
 

Eight per cent money for young farmers, Mr. Speaker, will help 
people get onto the farm. If they can access this Saskatchewan 
pension plan, Mr. Speaker, in future years, they will be able to 
retire from that farm in dignity and in some comfort no matter 
what happens in the farm economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at some of the programs that we 
have for small business — 8 per cent operating money for our 
small businesses — many of those small businesses, Mr. Speaker, 
are having difficult times, difficult times. And none of those small 
businesses have the access to a pension plan that teachers have, 
that RCMP officers have, that government employees have in 
general. Those small businesses will be able to access this plan. 
Employees in many of those small businesses will be able to 
access this plan. 
 
A lot of those small businesses, Mr. Speaker, are having it tough, 
as I’ve said earlier. But with our 8 per cent money they’ll be able 
to keep more staff on, perhaps create a little bit of a raise in their 
wages of the staff, and the staff will have access to a pension plan 
now, Mr. Speaker. And that pension plan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On the 
conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving an amendment in the 
following, which I will read: 
 

That all the words following the word “Assembly” be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 
regrets that the Saskatchewan pension plan proposed by the 
government will be of little practical benefit to those most in 
need of the improved old age security. 

 
(1545) 
 
So we want to draw to the attention some of the pitfalls in respect 
to the pension. One of the things that this government promised 
when it assumed office is that it would have consultation with the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, with the women groups 
across this province, they’re indicating that there has not in fact 
been consultation. 
 
And in fact they’re pretending to be so concerned about the 
women of Saskatchewan. And you know what they did when they 
entered office? We had in place a dental program which would 
help to take care of the teeth of young people, young children. And 
do you know what they did? They cut back on the improvements 
to the dental program. It’s such an ironic thing that Tories would 
have the audacity to stand up and pretend that they are social 
conscience, that they are in fact originators of social programs. 
 
And when it comes to looking at benefits to the women — and if 
you listen to what the women are indicating, one of the aspects 
that they have been pushing for for some time is equal pay for 
work of equal value. And this government has not addressed that, 
but I’ll tell you that in Manitoba  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2264 
 
 

under New Democratic Party government that issue has been 
addressed. 
 
I look at what’s happening in respect to the women in respect to 
government here in Saskatchewan. And while we were 
government we had a number of people, women that were deputy 
minister level; and I’ll tell you, they don’t have a single woman 
that is a deputy minister throughout their government. I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan will find it very, very hard 
to believe that Tories are in fact working towards social programs, 
when with the callousness that they have used in respect to the 
dental program. 
 
And to raise the issue that New Democrats are not socially minded 
is a farce, and none of the public will believe it. Only in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba did we have a family income 
program to help the lower paid people of Saskatchewan with 
families. We provided a family income program, the only two, and 
under New Democratic governments. No other Tory government 
in Canada instituted a family income program — only New 
Democrats. And in respect to dental programs, they reduced the 
expansion of the dental program. 
 
And when you look at this here particular proposal, Mr. Speaker, 
you will find that those on very low incomes, from zero to $9,133, 
those women — if they are a single parent, for instance, maybe 
with a child — I’ll tell you that they are not able to be able to put 
aside a contribution to a pension. It will be next to impossible 
because they’re below the poverty line, and there is no provision 
where people to participate in this pension, who are in fact earning 
below the poverty line. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, you know what — this is another 
headline seeker; this is a pretence that they’re going to do 
something for the women of Saskatchewan. There is no sincerity 
in their proposal because, if there was sincerity, they would have 
consultation, and they didn’t have any; if they in fact believed that 
people on the lower end of the scale, those below the poverty line, 
if they believed and wanted to help them prepare for a pension . . . 
And I’ll tell you, they’d have to modify the pension from what 
they’re proposing, because let there be no mistake: 
 

For a woman whose only source of income is the 9,133 or 
less that she earns, the plan is useless. 

 
This is what a group of women say who have analysed the plan.  
 
And they stand and they shake and they say, oh yes, it’s 
wonderful. Why didn’t you in fact . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us it’s Palma Anderson. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well that’s right, it is. It is Palma Anderson. And 
what they’re saying is Palma Anderson has no right to put forward 
an analysis of their pension plan. 
 
I’ll ask you, why don’t you come into this legislature and why 
aren’t you in fact standing up and indicating all of the groups, all 
of the groups . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
Assembly that the time under rule 16 has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the 
Assembly to move down the order paper to government orders 
now, immediately following the rule of 16 debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — May I have leave to introduce a group of 
students, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure to 
day to introduce a group of students. I do this on behalf of the 
Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker. The students are from Redvers 
Elementary School, Redvers, of course, in the Deputy Premier’s 
constituency. They are grade 6 students. They are numbered 28 in 
numbers of course. 
 
I’m going to be able to meet with the group — I want them to 
understand that — to make sure that they have an opportunity to 
have some refreshments, to make sure they get their pictures 
taken. And I will be meeting with them on behalf of their member 
who unfortunately is busy with other business today and couldn’t 
be here to introduce them. 
 
So I trust that they’ve had a good tour, and I would imagine that 
they are visiting other parts of the city as well. I’m going to look 
forward to meeting you and sharing what information I can with 
you and answer any questions you may have. So I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming the students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill 48 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and govern its activities and to provide 

for an appeal board with respect to certain assessment matters 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to ask the minister to please 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, beside me Mr. Dave 
Innes, deputy minister of Urban Affairs. And then also assisting us 
today will be Mr. Keith Schneider, assistant deputy minister of 
Urban Affairs; Mr. Dave Robinson, assistant executive director, 
Saskatchewan Assessment Authority; Mr. John Edwards, assistant 
director of municipal finance branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
remarks, and a number of questions which I will want to ask the 
minister with respect to this Bill. I think, obviously, it is one of the 
pieces of legislation before us that has received a considerable 
amount of attention from the various sectors of the public and, I 
think, concern that  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2265 
 
 

has been very legitimate and well founded. 
 
I want to say that I think this legislation can best be described as 
legislation which is typical of the countless boondoggles that have 
resulted from the kind of mismanagement that we’ve seen from 
this government and with its lack of any sense of direction. It’s a 
boondoggle of the highest order. 
 
Now the minister presented the Bill, made his second remarks 
without any due consideration for the interests of certain groups in 
this province, and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association 
is one of them. And I notice in the press recently that now he’s 
saying it’s not carved in stone. 
 
I want to simply say that, had this government and the minister 
taken the time to consult with the Saskatchewan school trustees, to 
consult with people like the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, the 
difficulties which the minister faces and has faced for the last 
number of days, he would not have had to face. And it’s really 
typical of a government which really will do anything that thinks it 
can get away with, and then when it gets caught, might react 
depending on the political strength of those who object. And that 
point, I think, has to be made and underlined when we consider 
this legislation. 
 
And I simply want to say that there is no government that can 
govern properly simply by responding to polls or by delaying and 
covering up by studies of other studies, as we’ve seen it with so 
many situations here like the bingo inquiry, which is one of them, 
and other such kinds of things that have happened. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the government has spent over $500,000 on a 
Local Government Finance Commission — over $500,000. That’s 
half a million dollars on the Local Government Finance 
Commission. And now, before that high profile commission is 
even given the opportunity to present its final report, which it is 
indicating it is supposed to provide by the end of this month — 
that’s when it’s due — we see the minister come rushing in with a 
legislation which is flawed. And now wonder it’s flawed. After 
having set up the mechanism to discuss and deliberate and consult, 
they pay no attention to the results of that consultation. In fact they 
don’t even wait for the final recommendation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, has said the 
commission is a waste of money because they’ve said the 
government does not intend to pay any attention. And they’re 
right. The evidence is here. And so those associations, as far as I 
know, have pulled out of the Local Government Finance 
commission operation because of their disappointment. 
 
Almost everyone who is involved has been critical of this Bill 
establishing the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency 
which the government opposite has pretended to be an 
independent agency. And I will refer to a clause in a moment or 
two which I think clearly indicates it has no intention to have it 
become an independent agency. 
 

And I simply say to the minister that had you, Mr. Minister, 
followed the appropriate process, and had you been honest in your 
pretensions of consultations, there is no doubt that everyone could 
have been satisfied. As it is, your motives, I have to say, or 
certainly the motives of your government, are questionable. 
 
I have here an editorial which is from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
which refers to this Bill. And it says in the editorial, and I think 
quite accurately that: 
 

The creation of this new agency was recommended by the 
provincially appointed Local Government Finance 
Commission which had an interim report and which was 
going to have a final report at the end of this month. 

 
And it said: 
 

The new structure totally ignores education. 
 
Now Education spends about half of the property tax dollars in 
Saskatchewan — half of the property tax dollars. One would have 
thought that it would have only made sense by any reasonable 
people considering such a proposition that Education would have 
a role to play in the assessment management agency. 
 
(1600) 
 
The other thing about this Bill, Mr. Chairman, is that it’s saying to 
municipalities, some of whom may choose not to belong to 
SUMA or may choose not to belong to SARM because they are 
voluntary association, it’s saying to them they are automatically 
excluded and that they will have no say in the assessment of 
property in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another sector that’s left out — and I point this out to the minister, 
and I hope that he is aware of it already — is the city of Regina 
and Saskatoon which, if I am correct, have about two-thirds of the 
total assessment in the province, but they may not necessarily have 
any input into the commission. And both the councils in Regina 
and the council in Saskatoon — and I know at the council meeting 
yesterday in Saskatoon this was discussed at great length — and 
the mayor of Saskatoon, Mr. Cliff Wright, have said that that is a 
flaw. As a matter of fact, Mayor Cliff Wright has said in no 
uncertain terms that what is happening is that there is a politicizing 
of the assessment process by this government. 
 
The editorial concludes with the following comment: 
 

Some additional thought should go into this initiative. One 
thing that might be revealed is that it is far from certain such 
an addition to the assessment process in Saskatchewan is 
either necessary or desirable. 

 
The government acted in haste, Mr. Chairman, obviously, and 
many have recognized that it has acted in haste. 
 
I suggest to the minister that with all of the shortcomings that are 
inherent in this Bill, probably the best thing that the government 
could have done is what it has done with  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2266 
 
 

two or three other pieces of legislation, and that is simply pull it 
and let the government finance commission make its final report, 
have the appropriate and sincere and real consultations, and then 
come forward with a Bill that made appropriate sense. 
 
The interim report of the commission, Mr, Chairman, said that 
there should be . . . school divisions have one representative on a 
seven-member board of directors. And I simply have to ask: when 
this was considered in cabinet, where was the Minister of 
Education — where was the Minister of Education? Not a word 
was she saying about the lack of representation for school trustees 
on the assessment management agency. Not a word did she say in 
second reading, and this is the minister of the Crown whose role it 
is to speak for education — not a word. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Consultation again. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, yes, they talk of consultation, but the 
fact of the matter is that the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association were not consulted about the draft of the Bill. They 
did not receive a copy of the Bill. It was quite a number of days 
when I contacted the SSTA when they had not yet received a copy 
of the Bill; in fact I took it upon myself to send it to them. And it 
was simply an attempt by the government, with the acquiescence 
of the Minister of Education, to slide it through and make sure that 
it was gone by before anybody could do something about it. 
 
Fortunately enough, that didn’t happen. It was not allowed to slide 
by. And so school trustees — I have a whole file of letters that 
they have written — have made it clear that they were concerned. 
And I would only hope that the minister has now reconsidered and 
that some changes will be made that are meaningful changes with 
regard to the representation by those people who represent 50 per 
cent of the property tax dollar in Saskatchewan when it comes to 
expenditure. 
 
I have an amendment, Mr. Chairman, which I am quite prepared 
to propose under the appropriate clause, which will change that. 
It’s an amendment that would amend section 6 of the printed Bill 
in which it would provide for the representation of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, which is what the 
recommendation of the commission was, and I will table that 
amendment if the page would come forward, please. 
 
Obviously there will need to be subsequent amendments to it, 
dealing with all the other clauses and sections of the Bill, and I 
have them too. If they’re necessary, we can provide them. If the 
government is not prepared to do its work, we’re prepared to do it 
for them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now I want to make a comment before I go on to some specific 
questions — a comment about the so-called independence of this 
assessment management agency. In section 8, I believe it is, Mr. 
Chairman, it says the following; it deals under the section of 
conflict of interest. Section 8 reads: 
 

Notwithstanding The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, where a member of the Legislative Assembly is 
appointed as a member of  

the board, he is not, by reason only of the appointment or of 
any payment made to him pursuant to subsection 6(9), 
required to vacate his seat and is not disqualified from sitting 
or voting in the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Now I ask: if it is supposed to be an independent agency, why is 
there a provision in this Bill for the appointment of a member of 
this Legislative Assembly, who would obviously be a member of 
the government? It puts a lie to the claim that it is intended to be 
an independent agency. 
 
I also have an amendment to that section 8, Mr. Chairman, which I 
will table a copy of and move later, in which it removes section 
8(1), which makes reference to the appointment of a member of 
the Legislative Assembly, because if it is to be an independent 
agency, it should truly be an independent agency. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in concluding I simply have to say that this has 
probably been a piece of legislation that’s seen more stumbling 
and bumbling around than any other besides the “Wire-haeuser” 
Bill which we are considering here in committee and hopefully 
later today. Have I mispronounced it? Weyerhaeuser. Well it’s a 
bit of a haywire deal. It’s a bit of a haywire deal, so I think calling 
it a “Wire-haeuser” Bill is probably quite appropriate. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I ask you: why did you not, when you 
introduced this legislation, consider it important enough to include 
in the Bill representation by the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
has made a number of comments that I should respond to. I think 
at the outset of our consideration of this particular piece of 
legislation, first of all I’m pleased that this legislature will be, I 
trust, enacting a Bill to establish an independent assessment 
management agency in the province. 
 
This is something that the Local government Finance Commission 
has recommended, and of course the Local Government Finance 
Commission has had input from many, many people and 
organizations around the province. As well, the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association (SUMA) and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities (SARM) are very supportive 
of the concept of an independent assessment management agency 
being established. 
 
And I believe this is likely something that should have been done 
some time ago. It was not. And I’m pleased that our government is 
able to move this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I should indicate that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association was consulted as much as two to three months ago 
concerning the nature of the Bill; the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities was, as well; and they, of course, are 
representative of the vast majority of municipal councils which 
exist here in the province. For example, the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association represents 99 per cent of urban 
councils here in the province. So there was  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2267 
 
 

substantial consultation through the Local Government Finance 
Commission process, and there was substantial consultation with 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and, as well, 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 
 
My understanding is the Minister of Education some time ago was 
in discussion with the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association concerning this particular issue. It was not 
raised at that particular point in time as being a concern of the 
trustees and was not brought forward to us until such time as the 
Bill in fact was tabled. And I myself have had considerable 
discussion with the president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association; I understand the Minister of Education has, and we 
will be bringing forward House amendments to accommodate the 
membership of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association on 
this particular agency on its board. 
 
As it pertains to the Saskatoon situation, as I indicated, our 
discussions have been with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association that represents 99 per cent of the 
municipal councils in our province. They have some disagreement 
with the Saskatoon city council. Nevertheless, we have listed to 
the concerns of all parties, and it is our opinion that the way the 
Bill is presently written, which would require the urban 
municipalities association to consult with the larger cities prior to 
appointment of a member, that that in fact will give the larger 
cities the opportunity to be involved and consulted. 
 
Thirdly, as it relates to the conflict of interest provision, it was felt 
appropriate to have this particular section, section 8, included in 
the proposed legislation because it might very well be from time to 
time that there may be a member of the Legislative Assembly, 
who would have substantial and considerable expertise in the area 
of assessment, and that it would be appropriate to appoint that 
particular individual. As well, it might be that either the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association or the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities may want to 
appoint one of their members, who also happens to be a member 
of the Legislative Assembly, to represent their particular 
organization. 
 
Well that is highly unlikely. It was felt that both options should be 
included as potential options. I don’t anticipate that it is likely that 
an appointment would be made concerning a member of the 
Legislative Assembly, but it was felt that this would not be an 
unreasonable thing to include. 
 
So as far as it relates to the independence of the agency, of course 
there will be five people appointed by organizations that have 
nothing to do with the provincial government in the sense of being 
run by the provincial government — two from the urban 
municipalities side, two from the rural municipalities side, one 
from the trustees side — and so of course the independence of the 
agency would be assured by such a dominant majority on the 
board. And of course the chairman would only be appointed after 
consultation. 
 
So I think that the concerns of the member opposite have  

been adequately addressed. I’m pleased that the Bill is before the 
Assembly, and I hope in very short and due course that we will be 
able to have an independent assessment agency here in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, obviously the work that the 
opposition did and that Saskatchewan school trustees did has been 
effective. I fear to think of what would have been the case if the 
Bill had been not spoken about and delayed for two or three days 
so that people out there who are concerned would not have had an 
opportunity to react. You got caught, basically; you got caught 
trying to snow somebody, and now you have to do something 
about it. But since there will be amendments — I’ve already 
indicated to the House the ones I have tabled — that we’re 
prepared . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, we’ve tabled them. 
We were prepared to move those amendments and we still are. 
 
You didn’t address the question, Mr. Minister, and I’ll rephrase it 
somewhat to make it simpler. Why was the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association not consulted on the draft of this Bill before 
tabling in the House? Obviously it should not have been 
considered to be a controversial issue. It’s not a tax measure where 
you have to not tell people ahead of time what the tax provision is 
going to be so that they can’t make money on it, or lose money on 
it, or whatever. Why was the school trustees association not 
consulted with the draft of the Bill, as is the normal process? I’m 
sure you do it with all your other legislation, as any other minister 
does on these kind of Bills. What was the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I indicated to the member that the 
Minister of Education had been in discussion with the president of 
the trustees association some time ago and had raised the matter at 
that time. My understanding is that concerns were not expressed at 
that particular point in time; nothing was forthcoming after those 
discussions. As a consequence, it was felt appropriate to carry on 
with the membership that had been proposed in the original draft 
of the Bill. 
 
(1615) 
 
And of course I think one can understand that municipalities have 
been much more involved in the matter of assessment than trustees 
have been in the past, and I can give good examples of the 
functions that municipalities have pertaining to assessment, which 
school boards do not have. And I think that explains the matter. 
 
Nevertheless, as I indicated, the trustees did press their point. I did 
meet with the chairman of the trustees association; I understand 
the Minister of Education did . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — When? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Just very recently. And I indicated before that 
the Minister of Education, if you had been listening, had in fact 
discussed the matter a long time back with the president, and the 
matter was not raised after that. 
 
So, as I indicated, we will be bringing forth House  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2268 
 
 

amendments to accommodate membership of the trustees 
association on the agency. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Once again, we will support . . . I’ve had a 
chance now to look at the amendments, and we will support them 
because they were our amendments, initially, and the issues which 
we have raised. 
 
If the Minister of Education, Mr. Minister, had consulted with the 
school trustees association — I don’t accept what you say, but had 
she — then obviously the Minister of Education has very little 
influence in your cabinet. Because if she truly had consulted with 
the school trustees, the school trustees would have told her in no 
uncertain terms: here is the recommendation, the interim 
recommendation of the Local Government Finance Commission 
respecting property management in Saskatchewan. And any 
minister of Education doing his or her job would have dug in at 
the cabinet table and said: over my dead body; you’re not going to 
leave out school trustee representation from the management 
agency. 
 
Something went wrong, and that’s the point that’s been made. I’m 
not going to pursue it; I think the point has been well established. 
Once again, the method of the operation of your government, that 
is what’s at question here. You will try anything if you think you 
can get away with it. Well you didn’t get away with it, and so now 
you’ve got to make some amendments, and we’re glad that you’re 
making them. If you hadn’t have made them, ours were ready and 
we would have made them. 
 
I resent to some degree, on the part of school trustees and as an 
educator, your insinuation — although you do not specifically say 
it — that somehow school trustees have a less important role to 
play than people in municipalities. I always thought all local 
government people were important. They spend 50 per cent, 
approximately, of property tax dollars. They are relying more and 
more, under your administration, on property taxes to pay for 
education. Surely they should have a voice on as important a 
function as assessment if you’re going to have an assessment 
agency that is independent and run as you have proposed it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another question and it also has some 
concern; it has concern among all local government organizations. 
The question is this: it was recommended in this report — which 
obviously you do not pay any attention to — and in the 
discussions that you had with SUMA and SARM and SSTA prior 
to the discussion on any Bill, but the discussions on this report, all 
of those organizations said, we would like to appoint people who 
we choose to appoint, not necessarily always elected mayors or 
councillors or aldermen or trustees. I believe that still to be their 
position, and that’s where the mayor of Saskatoon refers to as 
potentially politicizing this body. 
 
I am not suggesting that councillors or mayors or school trustees 
cannot do an extremely adequate job, but that’s for them to decide, 
whether they may not have wanted to appoint one person who 
may have particular expertise in the whole question of assessment. 
Maybe it’s an administrator that’s well-known in one of our local 
governments or school divisions. Maybe it’s somebody from the 
public, but it should be their choice and not the  

government choice. Why did you chose, Mr. Minister, not to give 
them that right to appoint the person of their choice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We wanted the majority of the membership 
of the board to be people that were elected by individuals at the 
local level — people elected by individuals who live in rural 
municipalities, people elected by individuals who live in urban 
municipalities, people elected to sit as a trustee on a local board. 
 
We felt that if this assessment management agency was going to 
be sensitive to and represent the real concerns of individuals at the 
local level, then in fact we should have local elected officials. Yes, 
we could have had bureaucrats sit on the board, and I’m sure that 
there are very, very competent people in local bureaucracies, as 
there are in the provincial bureaucracy, but we felt that, at the 
outset of the establishment of this agency, it would be very, very 
important for this particular agency to be directed, not by people 
who work in a bureaucracy, but to be directed by people who, in 
one sense, are very accountable to people at the local level who 
have been elected by individuals at that particular local level. We 
felt — we still feel — that that is the appropriate way for this 
particular agency to be governed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, as I indicated, I am not going 
to pursue this at length since we have resolved, I think, some of 
the major issues here. 
 
I simply say that . . . I should pause. Up in the gallery is Mr. Jake 
Volk and a couple of other members of the SSTA, who I do not 
know personally. I know that he represents the school trustees 
here, and I would like to extend my welcome and everybody 
else’s. I know that he and the SSTA will be pleased about the 
changes that are being proposed here. 
 
Just a comment on your comment, Mr. Minister. That is that you 
thought, the government thought, Big Brother government 
thought, that you had to do it a certain way. School trustees, rural 
councillors, urban councillors, had a different idea. They really 
sincerely believe in an independent assessment agency. Somehow 
you decided what you thought was more important than what they 
thought. We could debate that for the afternoon and probably 
accomplish nothing. I just simply want to say that I don’t agree 
with that process, and any government of which we in this caucus 
would be a part of certainly would not have part of that kind of a 
process. 
 
I want to ask you some specific questions. Funding arrangements. 
I understand that in the first year the funding of this agency will be 
done by the provincial government where there’s a $5.5 million 
budget. I may be wrong on the figure; you can correct me. What 
are the funding arrangements for the years after? Is there a 50-50 
sharing? Can you outline that to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I want to make a number of comments 
in response to the criticisms that have come from the member 
opposite. First of all, he indicated that we paid no attention to the 
report of the Local Government Finance Commission. That is 
simple nonsense. This Bill is here because the Local Government  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2269 
 
 

Finance Commission has made the recommendation that there be 
an independent assessment agency, and that in fact is their final 
recommendation. They will not be bringing in another 
recommendation with regards to the assessment matters in the 
province. They have recommended that there be an assessment 
agency, and that is in fact what we have been responding to. 
 
Then he suggests that somehow we are imposing something upon 
local governments. I would remind the member opposite that 
when your party was in power, there never was an opportunity for 
anybody at any level of local government to be involved in 
directing assessment. Assessment was something which you held 
close to the heart of the provincial government, and you weren’t 
willing to give it up to people at the local level. And there are 
those who argue, and perhaps quite rightly, that in fact assessment 
was politically directed under the former NDP administration. 
 
Well what we are doing by setting up an independent assessment 
agency, and by permitting councillors from rural municipalities 
and councillors from urban municipalities and a representative 
from the trustees association to be involved in directing the 
assessment agency, is to ensure that that kind of potential for 
politicization that was there before is no longer there today. and 
that is exactly why we have moved in the direction that we have. 
 
Third, the member opposite suggested that somehow, in the past, 
trustees had been on the same level as others were when it came to 
assessment matters, and he knows that is simply not the case. The 
Local Government Finance Commission, I think, recognized that 
because they recommended one trustee, and they recommended 
four people from SUMA and SARM. So there is a substantial 
difference. 
 
The member opposite knows full well that, for example in the four 
large cities, where assessment has been a function of the local 
municipalities, that school boards have had nothing to do with 
assessment in the past. He knows that. He knows that school 
boards do not hear appeals on assessment issues. He knows that 
school boards cannot grant tax abatements or reductions. Those 
have always been in the purview of local municipal councils, and 
consequently councils have been much more actively involved in 
the issue of assessment than school boards have been in the past. 
 
So I think that he needs to recognize that there is a significant 
difference between the function of local councils on the one hand 
and local school boards on the other hand, and it’s important to 
make that particular point. 
 
As it pertains to the financing of the independent agency, the 
government will carry on its particular commitment, as it has been 
in the past, over to the new, independent agency. Any additional 
dollars which the agency may want to spend over and above the 
amount that is coming from the provincial government — that 
those incremental dollars would be cost-shared, 50 per cent of 
those new dollars coming from the provincial government and 50 
per cent of those new dollars coming from SUMA and  

coming from SARM, coming from those local municipalities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m looking at 
this interim report. It says here: Property Assessment in 
Saskatchewan: interim report of the local government finance 
committee. Now if that’s not an interim report, I’m not sure how 
clear you have to make it. 
 
I also want to point out that the school trustees, if I am correct, 
have been traditionally a member of — I’m not sure exactly of the 
right title, but a council or an advisory council on assessment? I 
think that’s correct. This Bill was even proposing to eliminate their 
function in that. But that is no longer a problem if the 
amendments, which you and I both have proposed, proceed. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you very briefly outline, besides the fact that 
there are . . . it’s now going to have different types of people on 
the board, can you outline for me what this assessment agency will 
be able to do — not who the people are going to be involved, but 
what the assessment agency will be able to do which the former 
system was not able to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the new agency will be able to make 
independent assessment decisions, driven by and governed by 
priorities of local government, which previously was not able to be 
done. I mean, that’s the fundamental difference between this Act, 
what has been proposed today, and what has been the case in the 
past. 
 
So there is a . . . It’s a difference in governments; that’s essentially 
what this Bill is talking about. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, its functions will not change 
at all. You’re solving none of the assessment difficulties that have 
been around us for quite some time, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the number of these things that 
previously would have been done by the minister will now be 
done by the agency. There are some new things, for example, on 
page 8, section 12: 
 

(h) undertake research and studies into valuation practices 
and procedures and shifts in taxation; 

 
(g) consult as it considers advisable with municipal councils 
(and so on). 

 
I think it’s fair to say that the general kinds of things that were 
done previously by the assessment authority will continue to be 
done in the future. I mean, obviously when you’re talking about 
assessment, you’re not going to have any radical departures or 
additions or changes in the future in terms of functions or things 
that are actually done as it pertains to assessment. Those kinds of 
activities would naturally continue on into the future. 
 
What is substantially different here, of course, is that now those 
activities will be driven and motivated by the local level rather 
than under the umbrella and the authority of the provincial 
government or an individual minister. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2270 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — With respect to the appointment of 
representatives by SUMA, SSTA now, and SARM, what’s the 
process? Will these associations actually appoint or name their 
two people on their, Mr. Minister, or is there some selection 
process which you will employ, or whoever is the next minister? 
Are the two people who these associations name, the people who 
actually will be appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final question. In other words, you will not 
be saying, give me four name, I will pick two; you will take the 
two? I want that on the record. I’m not pursuing it for any 
particular reason other than I think it’s . . . This has been raised 
with me, and I think it’s important we get that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, well, we are concerned that when you 
establish an independent agency and that you ask SUMA and 
SARM and the trustees to put forward their representatives on that 
agency, obviously it shouldn’t be the provincial government who 
is deciding who the trustees are or who the councillors are. And so 
we concur that those particular people whose names are put 
forward will be the ones that will be appointed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s an amendment to clause 2, which 
reads as follows: 
 

Section 2 of the printed Bill. Amend section 2 of the printed 
Bill: 

 
(a) by relettering clauses (g) to (o) as clauses (h) to (p) 
respectively; 

 
(b) by adding the following clause after clause (f): “board of 
education” “(g) ‘board of education’ means a board of 
education within the meaning of The Education Act”; 

 
(c) by relettering clauses (p) and (q) as clauses (r) and (s) 
respectively; and 

 
(d) by adding the following clause after relettered clause (p): 
“SSTA” “(q) ‘SSTA’ means the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees’ Association”. 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 6. There are amendments. Number 
one: 
 

To amend section 6 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by relettering clause (1)(d) as clause (e); 
 

(b) by striking out clause (1)(c) and substituting the 
following: 
“(c) one person nominated by SSTA who is a member of a 
board of education; 
(d) one person nominated by the minister, after consultation 
with SARM and SUMA; and”; 

 
(c) by renumbering subclause (4)(c)(iii) as subclause (iv); 

 
(d) by striking out “and” after subclause (4)(c)(ii); 

 
(e) by adding the following subclause after subclause 
(4)(c)(ii): 
“(iii) appointed pursuant to clause (1)(c), on the earlier of: 
(A) the day specified for the termination by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council on the recommendation, in writing, of 
SSTA; and (B) the day on which he ceases to be a member 
of a board of education”; and 

 
(f) by striking out “clause (1)(c) or (d)” in the first line of 
renumbered subclause (4)(c)(iv) and substituting “clause 
(1)(d)or (e)”. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I just want to say that, Mr. Chairman, my 
amendment is now included with respect to these provisions in 
these amendments so I don’t find it necessary to move it. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There is an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 

Amend section 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out “SARM and SUMA” in the second line of 
subsection (1) and substituting “SARM, SUMA and SSTA”; 

 
(b) by striking out “SARM or SUMA” in the first line of 
subsection (2) and substituting “SARM, SUMA or SSTA”; 

 
(c) by striking out “(a) or (b), SARM or SUMA” in the third 
line of subsection (3) and substituting “(a), (b) or (c), SARM, 
SUMA or SSTA”; 

 
(d) by striking out “SARM or SUMA” in the first line of 
subsection (4) and substituting “SARM, SUMA or SSTA”; 

 
(e) by striking out “(a) or (b)” in the last two lines of 
subsection (4) and substituting “(a), (b) or (c)”; 

 
(f) by striking out “(a) or (b)” in the second line of subsection 
(5) and substituting “(a), (b) or (c)”; 

 
(g) by striking out “SARM or SUMA” in the third line of 
subsection (5) and substituting “SARM, SUMA or SSTA”; 

 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2271 
 
 

(h) by striking out “SARM or SUMA” in the first line of 
subsection (6) and substituting “SARM, SUMA or SSTA”. 

 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 
Amend section 8 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by adding “or board of education” after “municipality” in 
the second line of subsection (2); and 

 
(b) by adding “or board of education, as the case may be” 
after “municipality” in the last line of subsection (2). 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think we’re on “Conflict of Interest,” 
section 8. Mr. Minister, in your amendments does it deal with the 
question of the appointment of a member of the Legislative 
Assembly, or not? You do not deal with that one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, that is remaining in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I indicated that I have 
some concern about that. I think if it’s truly an independent 
agency, then I do not know why the government should be able to 
appoint a member of its caucus to the board of this assessment 
agency. I’m not questioning the abilities of anyone who might be 
appointed; that’s not the issue here. The issue here is the question 
of independence or a facade, and I’m worried that what we have 
here is a facade. 
 
I indicated in my initial remarks that I thought it was important we 
deal with that question, and I tabled a copy of an amendment. If 
it’s in order, Mr. Chairman — you’ll have to indicate to me 
whether it is; I think it is — I would like to move an amendment to 
section 8 of the printed Bill. It’s an amendment which I move by 
myself and seconded by my colleague, the member from Regina 
Centre: 
 

Amend section 8 of the printed Bill by striking out 
subsection (1) and renumbering subsection (2) as section 8. 

 
Essentially what that does is removes the provision for the 
appointment of a member of this Legislative Assembly. It could 
be a Legislative Secretary, but I will pass this in first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the 
precedent for permitting a member of the Legislative Assembly to 
sit on an independent agency such as this was in fact established 
by the former government when they set up the Wakamow Valley 
Authority. And I understand that The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Act, if that’s the correct title, does in fact permit the appointing of 
a member of the Legislative Assembly to sit on that particular 
agency, which one would of course deem to be  

a fairly independent agency. 
 
So I think the precedent for what we are doing has already been 
established. It was established by the former government. It’s not 
something that I disagree with. I think it’s an appropriate kind of a 
provision in legislation. I would have thought that the member 
opposite would have been aware of that before he moved his 
amendment. 
 
I just offer that comment to him, and I would urge all members of 
the Assembly to defeat the amendment. I think that the Bill as it is 
worded is appropriate and is in keeping with traditions in fact that 
were even established by the former government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think you can 
make the analogy between the Wakamow Valley Authority and 
the independent assessment management agency of 
Saskatchewan. The government has made big about their total 
commitment to the independent agency. 
 
What the minister is saying, there is no precedent. That is not a 
precedent. Development of a recreation area or a park area or a 
land set aside for green areas, where both the municipal 
governments and the provincial government are spending money 
on its development, has got now parallel to the establishment of an 
independent assessment management agency. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, and I say to those private members back 
there who are not in the cabinet and therefore are not privileged to 
all that information which their cabinet never shares with the, 
please consider what your cabinet is doing here. They are saying 
they want to be able to have a watch-dog over this agency, which 
is supposedly independent, and they’re prepared to appoint one of 
their own to sit on it. 
 
That puts into question the whole idea of an independent 
assessment management agency. We object to it. We have an 
amendment, which we propose to delete that provision in the Bill. 
The members back on the government side of the House may 
chose to vote against the amendment; that’s a choice they will 
make. We will be asking that it be done on division because we 
want to make it very clear and for the record where we stand on 
this and point out to the public where the government stands. 
 
I think it’s quite a legitimate amendment. I would hope the 
minister might reconsider and urge his members to vote for the 
amendment. I’m surprised he didn’t have the amendment here 
along with all the other amendments, because I think it’s as 
important as the other ones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would simply respond 
in concluding debate on this amendment, that if this amendment 
were passed, in fact, you would be tying the hand of SUMA, tying 
the hand of SARM, or tying the hand of trustees if they happen to 
have a member of their particular local council, who happen to 
have expertise in the area of assessment, who also happen to run to 
become an MLA, and that particular organization wanted that 
individual to represent them on that particular board. It could be a 
member of the opposition. It could be an  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2272 
 
 

independent member of the Assembly. It could be a member of 
the government caucus. It would make no difference. So in 
essence what you have done is you have said, those particular 
local councils shouldn’t have that option if they want to have it. 
 
But secondly, as I indicated, the precedent has been established by 
your particular government. There you have a local body out 
there, an authority of a particular type, and you said it was all right 
for an MLA to sit there. Now you’re saying it’s not all right. Not 
only is it not all right, but in fact the local councils shouldn’t have 
the opportunity if they want to. We disagree with that, and so we 
would naturally be voting against the amendment. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t let that by. The 
minister talks about tying hands — tying the hands of local 
municipalities. I simply say to him: he’s already tied their hands. 
The minister has tied the hands and the government has tied the 
hands of local municipalities when they said you can’t appoint 
who you want. We’re going to tell you who you can appoint. 
That’s what they’re saying. 
 
What this provision does, Mr. Chairman, in spite of the grand 
words of the minister, is allows the government to appoint as their 
representative maybe the member from Morse. Now that may not 
happen because after the next election, I’m not sure whether he’ll 
be here or not, that’s for his constituency to decide, but it allows 
the government to appoint one of their caucus to this agency. 
 
What the mayor of Saskatoon, Cliff Wright has said, that the 
government is really only politicizing the operation, I think is 
right, and the minister, by refusing to allow this amendment to be 
put into the Bill, I think is confirming what Cliff Wright said and 
what we are saying. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 12 has an amendment which reads as 
follows: 
 

Amend section 12 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by adding “boards of education,” after “councils,” in the 
second line of clause (1)(g); and 

 
(b) by adding “or The Education Act” after “Act” in the 
second line of clause (1)(k). 

 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 19 has an amendment which 

 reads: 
 

Amend section 19 of the printed Bill by striking out “SARM 
and SUMA” in the last line of subsection (2) and substituting 
“SARM, SUMA and SSTA”. 

 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 20 has an amendment which reads: 
 

Amend section 20 of the printed Bill by striking out “SARM 
and SUMA” in the second line of subsection (1) and 
substituting “SARM, SUMA and SSTA”. 

 
Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just one question — because they’re 
consequential I don’t have any — Mr. Minister, have you had 
your officials check to see whether amendments are not necessary 
here because of amendments which we have just considered under 
the previous Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, there are no House amendments that are 
necessary in this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 (No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, there are some . . . We have 
discussed in this House before some of the implications that are 
not seen in the Bill itself. Can you tell me, what considerations did 
you make of the effect of your proposals here on rural 
communities and small businesses in rural communities? Was 
there some kind of feasibility or economic impact study that was 
done by your government in order that you might fully appreciate 
and understand the implications on many businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the store hours issue is a complex issue, 
but I think it’s fair to say that a consensus of people believe that 
the decision that the government is proposing is the appropriate 
decision, that being to give local councils the authority to 
determine what the store  
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2273 
 
 

hours should be in their individual local area. It might very well be 
that some councils may not change their by-law at all; it may be 
that other councils will want to change their by-law. But I think 
the issue at heart here is: who should be the one who decides? 
Should it be the provincial government that establishes a 
regulation for the entire province? 
 
All of the information and comment that we had been receiving 
suggested just the opposite. The Saskatchewan chamber of 
commerce, which represents businesses from across the province, 
said that you should in fact give the decision to the local councils. 
The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, which 
represents municipalities from around the province, said: give that 
decision to the local municipal councils; let them make the 
decision. The Minister of Tourism and Small Business travelled 
the province for a good portion of this year and met with large 
numbers of business people, and they said: let that particular 
regulation pertaining to store hours be determined at the local level 
rather than the provincial government always trying to regulate 
and control everything. 
 
Now I know that that is the position of the members opposite even 
though many organizations and many individuals have said, allow 
the municipal councils the right to determine what the need for 
store hours opening should be in their particular jurisdiction. Even 
though many organizations and individuals have said that, the 
NDP stand virtually alone in opposing that particular position. 
They would want the provincial government, as I understand it, to 
regulate store hours. 
 
So as I indicated, we have had significant consultation with large 
numbers of people and organizations around the province. And I 
think the reviews in the various newspapers and comments on 
radio and television from various spokesmen would indicate that 
the changes being proposed by the provincial government are in 
order and they are well supported around the province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, there are others who have had 
another point of view on this thing, and you well know that, but 
you didn’t answer my question. Can you tell me what studies your 
government or officials of your government have made on 
economic impact on small-business places in rural Saskatchewan 
and small-business family operations in big urbans? Did you do 
those kind of studies? And if you did, what were they, and can I 
have access to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the small-business people that we talked 
to, that the minister over there talked to, said to us, they said: 
de-regulate; give it to the local councils. They didn’t say, spend 
taxpayers’ money on another study. They don’t want taxpayers’ 
money spent on another study. They want a decision made by a 
strong government that understands what the needs in 
Saskatchewan are, and they want the decision made, and that’s 
exactly what this government has done. They want the local 
municipal councils to be able to make the decision. 
 
When I met with the chamber of commerce, they didn’t say, spend 
the taxpayers’ money on another study. They  

said, have the courage to make the decision on store hours that 
should be made, and that’s to give it to the local municipal 
councils, and that’s exactly what we have done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, many local municipal councils have 
expressed concern about your legislation, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who? Name one. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well go to the city of Weyburn and you’ll 
find one, for example, to pick out a city that is well-known, as are 
all communities in Saskatchewan. But there are also others who 
have expressed concern because they are afraid of what the 
implications are, not only from the point of view of the kind of 
pressures that are now going to develop and the bidding war that 
will develop, but also because of the implications on 
family-operated business, small-business places. 
 
We accept the fact, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that there is a 
need and a demand for some extension of late night shopping. We 
have never argued against that. We argued against your negligence 
in looking after the interests of small-business places, family 
business operations, and people who are going to be working in 
these places of business. 
 
You have just confirmed our greatest fears. You took no time t all 
to consider these implications. And the nature of your Bill . . . 
Here we have a Bill that comes in late in the session — It’s not 
even printed in the normal kind of a Bill; you might as well have 
run it on a Gestetner; that’s what it looks like — which shows the 
kind of haste in which you brought it in after your caucus 
obviously struggled and fought and clawed at each other because 
they know that it has got certain implications which you failed to 
recognize. 
 
I know the member from Saskatoon knows about those problems. 
She has a lot of small-business people in her constituency, and she 
spends a lot of time with them, as I do in mine. So we appreciate 
those problems. Even the member for Sutherland should be 
concerned. And that’s the point that I’m making. 
 
All I want to know is did you do some studies on economic 
impact? You’ve told me you haven’t, so there’s no sense asking 
for those studies because you don’t have them. 
 
As I indicated earlier, I will be moving an amendment to the Bill, 
to section 4, and when we get to that section, I will then move it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I will move the amendment 
and then I will make some comments on it. But I am moving an 
amendment which has been prepared for me by the law clerk. It’s 
section 4 of the printed Bill: 
 
  



 
June 24, 1986 

 

2274 
 
 

Amend clause 121(3)(b) of the Act, as being enacted by 
clause 4(3)(b) of the printed Bill, by striking out “six” in the 
third line and substituting “two”. 

 
And if you will accept this, I will explain what I am attempting to 
do. 
 
(2200) 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, I explained in second reading what our 
concerns were here, and I’ve referred to them again just now — 
that the Bill is brought in in a very broad sense without appropriate 
consultation. The minister talks about consultations; we know 
there haven’t been any. He is reacting to some pressures from the 
big multinationals, the large chains, the SuperValus of this world 
and so on, at the expense of small-business people. 
 
Their store hours . . . If you would consider the amendment, Mr. 
Minister, you could extend it by one day, which the city of Regina 
agreed last night in consultation with their business community — 
to extend it by one day. That’s really what the concern and the 
request has been there — extend it by one day. Let the 
municipalities decide whether they want to stay with the present 
system or have two — I’m not taking away any right from the 
municipalities; they want that right and they should have it — 
instead of going the full six. 
 
If you go the two, you could always extend it another year, another 
session. If you go the six, you’ve jumped over the edge of the cliff 
and there’s no return. And that’s why, by going the way you have, 
you’re creating a potential problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I would make two or three 
short comments. First of all, that the amendment that the member 
opposite is proposing flies directly in the face of all of the 
recommendations that have been received by this government. 
They fly in the face of the comments of the mayor from Moose 
Jaw. They fly in the face of the comments from people in North 
Battleford. They fly in the face of the comments of the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce. They fly in the face of the 
comments of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
 
What they tell us is that the NDP do not trust local councils to be 
able to make appropriate decisions in their particular jurisdictions. 
And what it tells us fundamentally is that the NDP want to be the 
ones who control and regulate people’s lives. That is not the 
philosophy that we adopt. 
 
In the previous Bill we established an independent assessment 
agency to give people at the local level the authority to determine 
their affairs. Now we are doing the same thing with regards to 
store hours. We are giving local councils the authority to 
determine their own affairs. That should have been done a long 
time ago in this province, and I’m pleased that that is the direction 
that our Progressive Conservative government is moving. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded  

division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Tchorzewski Engel 
Koskie Lusney 
Shillington  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Birkbeck McLeod 
Lane Katzman 
Schmidt Myers 
Dirks Embury 
Klein Currie 
Martens Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Muirhead McLaren 
Johnson Young 
Weiman Rybchuk 
Caswell Domotor 
Meagher Muller 
Glauser Gerich 
Petersen Swenson 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


