


















































May 15, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 15, 1986 
 
 

1331 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In continuation of our 
estimates for Environment, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you 
several other questions related to several incidents that have 
happened in our province. 
 
Last year in May, a transport truck, moving electrical 
transformers on Highway 16 stopped at a highway weigh 
station near Clavet just east of Saskatoon. The transformers 
were leaking liquid containing more than twice the legal limit 
of PCBs and an estimated 45 litres had been spilled. I would 
like to know, Mr. Minister, what became of the wooden flatbed 
truck which was soaked in the PCB-containing oil. Is it in 
storage somewhere, or has it been destroyed safely, or cleaned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, it was wrapped in plastic 
and sent back to Ontario. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, what about the spillage along the 
highway? What was done about that? Were charges laid against 
anyone, for example Totran trucking of Ontario, as a result of 
the incident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, there was so little of it 
spilt over the length of highway that it could not be traced. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Was there an investigation into that incident? Was 
the report filed, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Yew: — If in fact there has been an investigation and a 
report filed, I’d like to have a report of that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — We will undertake to provide the 
member with a copy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in the first week of last 
year the minister for the Environment, the former minister, 
issued orders to the Sask Power Corporation not to transport 
PCBs anywhere in the province without first obtaining 
government approval. I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, 
and I didn’t - maybe one of my colleagues asked it, I don’t 
know - but I want to know it from you if that order is still in 
effect, and if so how many times has SPC asked to transport 
PCBs in the province, and if authorization has been given by 
your department. Can you provide that information? 
 

Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the SPC was required to 
request permission for those, for the transportation, up until 
such a time as they had filed with Environment a plan and a 
policy dealing with the transportation of PCBs, which they did. 
And that policy was approved September of last year. So up 
until September there’s, my officials tells me, a stack of 
approvals given on the transportation of PCBs/ 
 
If you want the actual number, we would have to take some 
time to count them up, I guess. But the important point is that 
Sask Power has now filed and has had approved the 
transportation policy for the movement of PCBs. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, does your department have a list of 
the locations in this province where toxic wastes are stored, and 
how many locations are there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, we have for PCBs, but 
when you say for all toxic wastes, no, we do not. 
 
And, of course, I get back to the discussion this afternoon when 
we were talking about the regulations that we were putting 
together with the co-operation of the municipalities. One of the 
reasons for those regulations is so that ourselves and 
municipalities can get a handle on the location of hazardous 
wastes and how they’re being stored, and so we could have a 
better handle on that. Now that information has never been 
available in Saskatchewan. We’re trying to get a handle on it 
now. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Why is it, Mr. Minister, that that information or a 
policy to ensure that you have a handle on this is not in fact 
sought after and some regulation or other enacted by your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well as I had indicated, Mr. Chairman, 
to the member opposite, that information has never been 
available. And it is something that the department and our 
government has been trying to put together now for four years. 
 
Step one was of course some cataloguing and identifying all 
land fills in the province of Saskatchewan, which has now been 
done. Because quite frankly land fills have been used as 
dumping sites for any number of substances. So that step has 
been done. 
 
As we discussed before, the other step that we are now taking is 
in those regulations that we’re working out with the 
municipalities. So it’s an area in which the information has not 
been available before and we’re trying to get a handle on it 
now. It’s something, as I mentioned this afternoon, is an 
ongoing process. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I was going to ask you, Mr. Minister, how many 
of these sites were located within cities, towns, villages, etc. I 
was concerned because some of these chemicals can become 
very dangerous. And I wanted to know specifically which toxic 
wastes sites are located close to populated areas. But you 
haven’t got that information. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1332 
 
 

And the other question I want to ask is: what are you doing to 
clean up and maintain those hazardous storage sites? But you 
have no firm policy to deal with that, and I can only conclude 
that that again is a part of your mixed-up priorities. 
 
When it comes to environmental concerns, etc., some of my 
colleagues have pointed out some rather unfortunate incidences 
to concur with some of the points I’ve raised. And certainly my 
conclusions are, Mr. Minister, you have no firm commitment 
towards our environment. 
 
I don’t know if you want to dispute that. Fine, Mr. Minister, 
you can. But the facts will show for themselves. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know what your personal attitude 
is towards the news that PPM Canada Inc. would set up a PCB 
detoxifying plant in Regina — especially in the light of the fact 
that PCBs can cause nerve, liver, and brain disorders, and have 
also been linked to cancer. Mr. Minister, PCBs would have to 
be transferred through the city to get to such a plant. Does that 
bother you in any way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well a number of comments, Mr. 
Chairman, on that particular plant. The first comment is that the 
oil that is being treated is very lightly contaminated. But 
secondly, and more importantly, is that since its inception in 
June of 1984, there have been about three-quarters of a million 
litres of oil treated, which is now back in use with SPC and is 
not now contaminated. And without this plant in place, there 
would be three-quarters of a million litres of contaminated oil 
around in the province of Saskatchewan. So the plant is doing 
an excellent job, is cleaning up a good quantity of lightly 
contaminated oil so that it can be reused safely in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And without this plant, this oil, lightly 
contaminated, would still be in storage throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, as one minister that is in charge of 
Environment, the cabinet minister responsible for Environment, 
I’d like to ask you an issue related to the North, an issue that is 
also of very high concern to southern residents, as well. It 
involves our northern environment. 
 
I would like to know, personally, Mr. Minister, where you stand 
on spraying of our forests in northern Saskatchewan with 
chemicals such as Roundup, 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, and Velpar. What 
is your position and what is the position of your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, we’re only aware of the 
use, or the requested use of Roundup on the spraying in the 
forests. As I indicated to the member this afternoon, or 
yesterday, we have indicated that we will not allow the use of 
Roundup being sprayed on the forest until we know what 
components are in Roundup. So I think the short answer to you, 
and I know it’s difficult to hear because of your colleagues 
speaking from their seats, but the short answer, Mr. Chairman, 
is that we . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The minister is having 
difficulty making himself heard in the House. Will  

everybody please be somewhat quieter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — The short answer is that for the time 
being and until we know what is in that product, we will not 
allow it to be sprayed in the forests. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, you have not indicated publicly or 
otherwise your position on it. To this point in time I have yet 
. . . The people of Saskatchewan and people in the North who 
are going to be directly affected have not heard what your 
official position is, what the government’s official position is. 
You can state to me personally what your position is, but that 
still leaves the whole, entire question up in the air as far as 
spraying of hazardous chemicals such as the ones I’ve 
mentioned. You know, that policy has got to be cleared up one 
way or another. 
 
A task force study was completed and done, and 
recommendations were provided, but to date we have yet to 
hear from your government on the issue. And so, Mr. Minister, 
I want to ask you . . . A good many Northerners and as well 
people from the South, and a lot of organization, think it makes 
more sense, Mr. Minister, to manually thin our forests rather 
than use herbicides. And that is the position of the New 
Democratic Party, by the way. I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
where do you, as the Minister of Environment, stand on the 
issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just indicated to 
the member opposite that we weren’t allowing the use of 
Roundup in the forests until we knew from the manufacturer 
much more about the product. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, won’t you recognize the fact 
of the high rate of unemployment in the North, the 95 to 99 per 
cent rates of unemployment, the high welfare dependency rates, 
etc., the high rates of suicide, alcoholism, family breakdowns, 
etc.? Won’t you recognize that fact and establish a policy 
whereby you can use . . . establish a policy whereby it’s labour 
intensive rather than gong to selectively, probably, providing an 
opportunity here for a chemical manufacturing firm that will 
probably make millions, or thousands at least, in the very near 
. . . possibly make thousands and thousands of dollars using or 
selling to this province herbicides that will be required. 
 
You know, on the overall it makes more sense to use labour, 
local labour, rather than spraying our forests with very harmful 
herbicides. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, don’t you agree that 
we should have some labour-intensive programs and policies in 
place to help alleviate the hardships confronted by people up 
North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated previously 
to the member our policy vis-a-vis the chemical Roundup, if he 
wishes to discuss forestry policy I suggest he wait until the next 
set of estimates. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I didn’t hear the response 
you gave. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I said, Mr. Chairman, again, that I’ve 
made it perfectly clear to the member opposite what our policy 
is vis-a-vis the use of Roundup. And if he  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1333 
 
 

 wishes to discuss the forestry policy, he should wait till the 
next set of estimates. 
 
Mr. Yew: — You make things very difficult and very hard for 
the general public of the province to understand what your 
policy is, Mr. Minister, because you keep shifting, you know, 
very serious issues. Questions that are coming from the 
opposition, you have a tendency to shuffle them over to another 
department. When the going gets tough, Mr. Minister, you seem 
to shuffle the response to a very serious issue or question to 
another department. 
 
I can’t accept that, Mr. Minister. There’s a lot of people 
viewing the proceedings of the legislature to find information, 
to get information as to what your policies are. But with regards 
to the information and the shuffling and the lack of answers that 
we’re getting, Mr. Minister, it’s certainly going to have a very 
drastic effect on you and your government when the Premier 
gets the nerve to call an election either on the 24th or the 27th 
of May. 
 
Mr. Minister, I read in the papers the other day of a newly 
formed organization that’s called the Land Users’ Association, 
which is organized for the Rafferty dam project. 
 
This organization is made up, Mr. Minister — and I’m sure 
you’re aware, but for the record I’ll state to you who they are — 
by ranchers, leaseholders, community pasture patrons, 
Mainprize Regional Park and Lutheran Bible Camp users. All 
these organizations and all the people involved in the 
organizations, etc., are living upstream from the proposed 
Rafferty dam — approximately 50 members at that point in 
time of the press statement, Mr. Minister. 
 
I wonder, I would like to know, Mr. Minister, from you, what 
the latest status is with regards to your involvement with that 
group who are very concerned about the proposal. What is the 
position, what is the latest status with regards to . . . Have you 
had any communications with that group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Because they haven’t contacted me. 
 
Mr. Yew: — There is a group there, Mr. Minister, that are 
genuinely concerned about the possible implications of that 
project. You’re a member that’s responsible for Environment. 
Wouldn’t you say, wouldn’t you admit, that it’s your 
responsibility to go in there and find out or send some of your 
officials to find out what is the issue? 
 
I have projects in the North similar to the one in Estevan. I look 
at the Nipawin dam project, for example, and I can see the 
people living downstream — the people in Cumberland House, 
the people in Sturgeon Landing, who live downstream from the 
major hydro project — who are somewhat left in the dark with 
regards to the project. There is no one single environmental 
advisory committee set up which involves the people in that 
area. Those people are directly affected by that project. Many  

of them have lost their means of livelihood because of that 
project. 
 
But to this point in time, Mr. Minister, they have not been 
consulted, involved. There has been no participation by the 
public, by the people directly affected. Mr. Minister, I’m just 
completely bewildered by your arrogance. Why can’t you 
involve the people at the local level? Why is there no 
consultation between your government and the people at the 
local level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I take it that the member 
is talking about the Rafferty dam, and the public participation in 
that project. We have gone over that several times. I suggest he 
refer to page 1294 in Hansard and he’ll get the answer I gave 
him yesterday. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you: have you 
ever been in the northern administration district personally to 
meet with the local people directly affected by many of the 
major projects — the five-year projects that your government 
has come up with all of a sudden, to discuss with them possible 
implications? My colleague and I raised a couple of good 
examples, but I wanted to know from you, Mr. Minister: have 
you made an attempt to meet with the people yourself? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been to the North 
several times in the past number of years. I would like some 
more specifics from the member opposite; which projects is he 
referring to? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well there’s major announcements made, Mr. 
Minister — the Cigar Lake project for example. Then we talked 
just a while ago about the major spill in Lake Athabasca. We’ve 
got the problems related to the Wollaston Lake residents. 
We’ve got the project, the major hydro project at Nipawin; the 
residents I’ve mentioned to you, which are constituents of mine 
in Cumberland; and the Sturgeon Landing; the communities 
affected. 
 
Since you became Minister of the Environment, I want to ask 
you again: have you been in those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, he’s mentioned a 
number of projects, some of which are completed, some of 
which are not. I’ve asked him to be more specific. I think in a 
general way if you wish a statement from us, we are a 
government known for our consultation, unlike the previous 
government. So I see no problem in consultation, because that’s 
our trade mark. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Have you been up North at all, Mr. Minister, 
since you’ve become Minister of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No. 
 
Mr. Yew: — That just indicates to me then, Mr. Minister, how 
much regard you have for environmental issues up North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1334 
 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister 
a few questions. I listened with interest to the arrogance of the 
minister in the last half hour since we’ve been started here. And 
I can hardly believe the answers that are coming across to the 
member for Cumberland. Just complete arrogance when it 
comes to dealing with problems of the North, to the point when 
he’s asked questions about whether or not you’ve toured the 
area to understand the people’s problems, you just simply 
refuse to give an answer as if it’s none of the concerns of the 
member in the opposition. And I suppose that’s fair to carry on 
in that manner when you have a massive majority that you 
people do. I suppose that’s fair to carry on in that way. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say that justice in the 
system is always done, and eventually these people will have to 
call an election. They’re in their fifth year, struggling along, one 
controversy after another, whether at the federal level with 
people resigning because of influence . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The hon. member well knows 
that he is straying from the topic, getting into federal politics, 
etc., etc. Please stick to estimates on the environment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your ruling. 
But I want to say that the minister’s arrogance is indicative of 
the kind of members we have opposite, who, with their massive 
majority, refuse to answer questions over and over again. 
 
And I want to ask the minister under subvote 1, can you tell me 
how many personal staff do you have in your office? How 
many executive assistants or special advisers do you have 
employed in your office at the present time? If you have a list of 
them and their salary, I would appreciate if you would give it to 
me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, it’s hard to keep up with 
the members opposite. If they’re in or out of the House. That 
information was supplied to your colleague yesterday from 
Cumberland. If you look on his desk, he probably has the sheet. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I just indicate, Mr. Minister, that 
my colleague, if he has the information and if you’re indicating 
he does have it . . . We don’t have it over on this side of the 
House. And I would appreciate if you would send it to us. This 
may be like other ministers who have indicated they have sent 
information when in fact they haven’t. And if you do have that 
information, I’d appreciate your copying it and send it over as 
opposed to being arrogant about the whole issue. Just send it to 
us, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, if you would look on 
page 1291 of Hansard: 
 

Mr. Yew: My first question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: 
can you tell me how many personal staff you have as 
Minister of the Environment and their names and their 
salaries at present? 

 
Myself: 

Mr. Chairman, I have them here. I’ll send a copy over to 
the member. 

 
Which I did at the time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Your member is right behind you. Ask 
him. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The question was asked, but there was no 
answer given. And if you have that information, I would 
appreciate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, there’s nothing 
in there. There’s no answer to the question in there. 
 
He says that he would send it across and we haven’t got it. And 
I would appreciate if you would give us the information at this 
time. 
 
And while you’re at it, I would like a list of your 
out-of-province trips that you took in the past year and the 
people who went with you and the cost of those trips. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, just to pursue this 
question of whether or not they got the information, I would 
refer the member again to page 1291 and 1292. I’ll repeat again 
what are on those pages: 
 

Mr. Yew: My first question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: can 
you tell me how many personal staff you have as Minister of 
the Environment and their names and their salaries at 
present? 

 
Myself in reply: 
 

. . . Mr. Chairman, I have them here. I’ll send a copy over 
to the member. 

 
Mr. Yew: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I note, 
Mr. Minister, that you have . . . 

 
And he goes on to talk about what’s on the list. So if you turn 
around and ask your member over there where the list is, I’m 
sure he has it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to ask the minister again if he 
would send me the list of his employees who work as executive 
assistants. I mean, you don’t have to sent it, obviously. It’s 
traditional that you would. And while you’re at it, I wonder if 
you would give me the list of your out-of-province trips, the 
destinations of those trips, and who went with you, and the cost 
that was involved for each of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, there were no trips out 
of province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister could indicate, 
on your staff, the upper levels of staff in the department, can 
you indicate the salaries of the top executive officers in your 
department — the deputy minister, associate deputy, and the 
people in the upper echelons of the department. 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1335 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I will provide the 
member with the copy. I hope I have enough witnesses today. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, can you indicate whether or 
not you have a Legislative Secretary, or secretaries, who they 
are, and whether or not they took any out-of-province trips in 
the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No, Chairman, I do not have a 
Legislative Secretary. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
ask the minister on item 9 — grants to organizations and 
persons concerned with environmental matters — why you 
have earmarked only $40,000 for that particular area when in 
fact we keep taking about . . . We have, on the opposition side 
of the House, pressured for more local involvement in terms of 
major environmental concerns. 
 
Now $40,000, in my estimation and in the estimation of many 
other organizations in this province, $40,000 does not go very, 
very far, Mr. Minister. I would like to know why you have not 
put any, you know, significant amount in that category to make 
some provision so that we can have public involvement, public 
input, public consultation, and let the people know, let 
themselves become involved in issues that relate to possible 
environmental implications and potential dangers that pose a 
threat on our environment by major developments. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of 
Environment . . . Well I don’t know if speaking up will do 
much good if members continue to speak from their seats. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 
department is not funding any more or any less groups than they 
have. The department has - and we have taken the policy 
decision to support, and you’d find them in different places in 
the blue book - more project-specific groups. By that I mean we 
would . . . To give you a few examples, the ecological reserves 
advisory committee is funded, but not through this subvote; the 
Poplar River bilateral committee is funded but not through this 
subvote; the Water Appeal Board is funded but not through this 
particular subvote. What is included in this subvote is the 
Canadian Council of . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — The Canadian Council of Resource and 
Environment Ministers is included in this subvote. The 
environmental advisory council is in this subvote, and as well, 
some miscellaneous grants, small ones for $6,000, are in this 
one. 

But generally the department is more project-specific in their 
funding. The examples I gave you, the toxic chemical 
management program was funded, for instance, for $130,000. 
But those are more specific to a certain project or a certain area 
in environment, and so they’re not included in this particular 
subvote. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re aware of the 
organization referred to as the herbicide moratorium committee 
which entails a large, a fairly large group of people concerned 
with environmental issues. I’m sure you’re aware of the name 
George Smith, a community resident of Pinehouse and a 
member of this organization. Those people are directly involved 
with the herbicide issue. It’s just a local group, you know, 
concerned with the possible spraying of their forests. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you encouraged any support financially 
towards that group? It’s a local group that have a genuine 
concern and a legitimate one at that. Have you as the Minister 
of Environment approached them and provided some support, 
encouragement —  financially or otherwise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No, Mr. Chairman, it hasn’t been the 
practice of the department either now or for a good many years, 
as a matter of fact, to fund those groups. Special interest groups, 
or lobby groups, and/or protest groups have not been funded 
through the Department of Environment. And they have not 
been in the past, and they are not now. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Items 10 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 9 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 

 
Item 1 agree to. 
 
Vote 9 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to thank my 
officials for their work the last couple of days, and throughout 
the year. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would thank the minister’s 
officials and wish them well. 
 
I will be going through the information that I’ve managed to get 
from you, Mr. Minister, in terms of the response, the replies and 
the answers — some of the answers that you’ve been able to 
omit — to us as the official opposition of the legislature. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1336 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — The item of business before the House are 
estimates for Parks and Renewable Resources. Before we begin 
I would ask the minister to please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to 
my right is John Law, the deputy minister of the department. 
Immediately behind me is Doug Cressman, assistant deputy 
minister of programs. Behind Mr. Law is Lyle Lensen, assistant 
deputy minister, support service. To the right over here is Mae 
Boa, director of management services. And on my left, to my 
side here, is Ross MacLennan, executive director of operations. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Thank you. The item of business now is 
item 1. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I was only assuming that the minister was 
going to make an opening statement, but if he’s not, then we 
will get right into the department. If we can get some 
co-operation here tonight, Mr. Minister, I think that we 
probably can get through this, with your patience, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I want to start off . . . I have a number of questions, Mr. 
Minister, that I want to ask you regarding your department. And 
I want to start off by making a few comments on the budget for 
Parks and Renewable Resources. I see that there is a cut, not 
only in the operating budget of Parks and Renewable 
Resources, but I see that there is what I would consider a fairly 
massive cut in the Parks and Renewable Resources for capital 
expenditures. It’s not a great cut in operating expenses, but I see 
there is a lot of positions that have disappeared. 
 
In your capital I see a $5 million cut in capital expenditures in 
Parks and Renewable Resources. And, Mr. Minister, I’m just 
wondering, when I see the news clippings and hear the reports 
coming out of your announcement yesterday of the creation of 
five new provincial parks in Saskatchewan — and later on I will 
get to the parks — but when you make these large 
announcements and I see under your capital a $5 million cut in 
your budget, I just wonder really what your priorities are in 
Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
I also see that under staff cuts it would appear to me that there’s 
almost 50 staff cuts in the department in this last year. I’m 
aware of where some of the cuts are. I know some of them are 
up in my constituency. But when I take a look at this, it looks to 
me like there is close to 50 positions that have been eliminated, 
and a $5 million drop in capital expenditures. So, Mr. Minister, 
before you answer that I wonder if you would provide for me, 
and you can do this in writing, the trips in-province and 
out-of-province for your department, and your staff; and if you 
could provide me and do that in writing, I don’t need that 
verbally but in writing, the wages of your personal staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, I’d be 
pleased to co-operate by providing a list of my personal staff, 
the position they occupy and the salary. In light of the line of 
questioning the member of Shaunavon 

directed to my colleague, the Minister of the Environment, I 
will provide nine copies so that every member of the opposition 
has a copy, and we don’t need to do it nine times. So if the page 
would like to come forward I’ll provide each member with a 
copy of that information. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know. I’ve asked a 
number of questions to the minister. I asked him to provide me 
with a copy of the trips in and out of the province, the staff, and 
their wages. I thought we were going to have some co-operation 
here tonight, and I didn’t really want to get into this kind of 
start going through estimates. Most certainly if you hand me 
one copy, I am capable, Mr. Minister — I’ve been in this 
legislature since 1975 — of providing my colleagues with a 
copy. When I ask for a copy I most certainly didn’t ask for nine 
copies. And you know when you get into this childish type of 
start to your estimates, then when you ask for one copy you 
give me nine copies, I think that that’s the way you operate, and 
that’s why you’re $2 billion in debt. And that’s why you’re 
going to lose the next election as soon as you call it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister a 
number of questions about the operating budget and the capital 
budget and all he did was get up and give me nine copies and 
sat down. I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you were going 
to comment on the capital and the rest of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry if the 
member feels slighted. In no way would I impugn on his 
reputation as a member in this House. He has served with 
honour and distinction, and I can say that sincerely. And the 
member knows I mean it from conversations we’ve had in the 
past. 
 
But what I would point out, Mr. Chairman, is that not five 
minutes before I got up I saw the member from Shaunavon 
complaining that the Minister of the Environment had sent over 
a copy of his staff and they didn’t like it because they said they 
wanted it over and over again. So I was just making sure 
everybody had . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will 
continue with the questioning. I only sat down . . . I thought 
maybe you wanted to comment on the massive cut, what I 
consider is a massive cut of $5 million to your capital budget 
and the staff positions that have disappeared. Before I go into 
the questioning of the department, I wonder if you would . . . 
Did you want to comment on that? If not, then I will continue 
on with my questioning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you hon. member for the 
opportunity to comment upon that. I hadn’t meant to cut it off 
and leave it only with personal staff. 
 
But in regards to capital, what has happened is with the  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1337 
 
 

creation of the property management corporation, the portion 
which we would have spent ordinarily in the department on 
capital and handled internally has been subscribed to that 
particular body, and that body will be responsible over all 
throughout government for handling capital projects. So that 
portion of my budget which ordinarily would have shown here 
in our report has gone to the property management corporation. 
 
In terms of reduction in staff there has been reassignment 
within the department. If you check the regions . . . For 
example, the hon. member could check the regional staff 
complements and notice Meadow Lake, for instance, has gone 
down considerably in complement over last year. What has 
happened is we have taken positions and moved them 
elsewhere. There is no reduction overall. There has been a 
reshuffling of where the positions show up. Those positions that 
look like they’ve been cut have in fact been transferred to 
fire-fighting services which is handled under a different 
auspice. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, the staff, the positions that 
we see that are not here, are you saying they’re still within your 
department but have been transferred over to another agency 
and do not show up on the estimates? And also, Mr. Minister, of 
the $5 million in capital reduction in your budget, is there $5 
million or more that is in the property management corporation 
now for Parks and Renewable Resources? Could you give me 
the amount that’s in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe there were two parts to your 
question. The first one, let’s deal with it, the capital projects. 
We finished some of the projects that had been ongoing. The 
balance which we are putting into the property management 
corporation is $3,974,500 — $3,974,500 would go into the 
property management corporation. The other projects we 
finished up to the $5 million level. 
 
And in terms of staff, you’ll find the difference — if you check 
the blue book you’ll find the difference in staff person-years in 
dollars, in subvote 05. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, you say that there is $4 
million that has gone into the new corporation. And the way I 
read it now, and I may be reading this wrong, it looks to me like 
there’s $1 million reduction in capital expenditures for Parks 
and Renewable Resources. I haven’t got that subvote right in 
front of me on the staff and the positions. 
 
But I now want to turn to the questioning of your department. 
And first of all I want to start off with the fisheries branch. And 
I want to first of all ask you if the fish transportation subsidy 
that has been in place for a number of years, I want to ask you, 
Mr. Minister, if that fish transportation subsidy is in place and if 
it will continue throughout the up-coming commercial fishery. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes sir, the subsidy remains in place. It 
is now administered by the Freshwater Fish Marking 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Why do you let the Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation in Winnipeg handle the fish  

transportation subsidy? Could you explain to me, Mr.  
Minister, why you have chosen to do this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I am informed that the savings 
administratively by allowing that procedure to take place 
through that particular vehicle and mechanism are about 
$100,000 a year to the department. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — So it would be the administration costs, the 
main reason for transfer to Winnipeg? 
 
Mr. Minister . . . And I want to thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
keeping that transportation subsidy in place. It’s always been a 
concern of the fishermen, as it’s always been a yearly program. 
And fishermen continually are concerned that that 
transportation subsidy would be taken away. And most 
certainly, it’s an important part of the commercial fishery in 
Saskatchewan. And I thank you for continuing that program. 
 
I want to now turn to the rearing ponds that you had started. 
And I just wonder if you could explain how many rearing ponds 
we have in the province now, and just how successful have they 
been? I know the Delaronde Lake one, two years ago, proved to 
be successful. But I also know that there has been some new 
ones that are in place. I think Craig Lake has a rearing pond. 
And I was just wondering how many rearing ponds that you 
have, and how successful they have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’m 
advised that four this year. The overall total, we can find out. 
We’ll check that information and we’ll send it over to you as 
soon as we have it. But for this year, in terms of the success — 
yes, they have been very successful. Probably the best example 
is at Delaronde Lake. It is called Shore Lake — the name of the 
particular breeding pond. And that’s an example of one that’s 
been particularly successful. And we’ve had good comments on 
them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But, Mr. Minister, I know the rearing 
ponds, especially the one at Delaronde Lake was successful in 
the years gone by. I wonder if the department has any more 
rearing ponds that they are planning to open up, or is there any 
plans in place to continue with that program and expand it into 
the northern part of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The immediate projects are Meadow 
Lake and Codette. I do have some information on fisheries in 
general, in front of me. It’s in three parts: fish stocking, fish 
enhancement, and commercial fish conservation strategy. I’ll 
have a copy made of this, and send this across to you for your 
information. And anything I don’t have in specifics at the 
moment, we’re undertaking to find, and you’ll have them 
probably by tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — One short question on the rearing ponds 
before we leave: is there any transferring fish from the rearing 
ponds to other lakes, or is it just to the adjacent lakes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The normal procedure has been that the 
rearing pond rears for the lake to which it is adjacent and they 
go into that lake only. The new facility at Meadow Lake will be 
for other lakes. That’s the only  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1338 
 
 

one at the moment. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Where is this new facility in Meadow 
Lake, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The facility you inquired about is 
adjacent to the town. It’s on the east edge of Meadow Lake, and 
it’s adjacent to the existing water system. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And, Mr. Minister, that hatchery in 
Meadow Lake will not be supplying fish only to the adjacent 
lake, but will be supplying fish to other lakes in the region. Is 
this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: That is the intention. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you tell me how much money has 
been spent on that new hatchery? And I’m assuming we’re 
dealing with the hatchery now, not a rearing pond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It is a complex of rearing ponds, and 
the value is $250,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And could you tell me what species of fish, 
what types of fish will be hatched in that hatchery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Wall-eye. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Straight wall-eye? There will be no other 
species in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That’s correct, wall-eye, straight 
wall-eye. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Once again, Mr. Minister, here we go. We 
take a look at estimates for Parks and Renewable Resources. 
We take a look at . . . I’m just going to get the page here so I 
don’t make any mistakes on this. On the regional offices, up 
until last year we always had a regional office in Buffalo 
Narrows. Now we have the regional office from Buffalo 
Narrows which has moved south to Meadow Lake. 
 
Now all the fish hatcheries that are going to supply wall-eyes 
. . . and that is the main source of sport fishing and commercial 
fishing in northern Saskatchewan. And the hatchery — where 
we have all the lakes up in northern Saskatchewan, so where do 
you put the hatchery? You put it in Meadow Lake. 
 
Now we’ve got our regional office gone from Buffalo Narrows, 
and it’s down in Meadow Lake. We’ve got the staff who . . . the 
head of the resources in Buffalo Narrows now lives in Meadow 
Lake. And Buffalo Narrows is the main hub of the fisheries. 
That’s where the main fishery takes place in that area. Or you 
could take any of them towns. Pinehouse is another major 
contributor to the commercial fishery and sport fishery. 
 
But yet everything is moving to Meadow Lake. I tell you, if this 
government gets another four years, they may as well move 
northern Saskatchewan down to Meadow Lake, because that’s 
exactly what’s taking place on the west side. There just seems 
to be no end to it. You take the money out of the north-west part 
of the province, north of Meadow Lake, and you bring it all in 
to Meadow Lake.  

Now I just don’t see, I don’t see the fairness in this, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
We now have a director of fisheries. And lo and behold, where 
is the director of fisheries located? He’s located in Meadow 
Lake. 
 
(2015) 
 
And I just say that this is going to come back to haunt this 
government. You continually take and you put everything into 
Meadow Lake. You build up their streets, you do everything. 
They get extra money. The member from Moosomin doesn’t 
get extra money for his community, but Meadow Lake sure gets 
it. And I tell you, you’ve just totally left northern Saskatchewan 
out and everything has gone to Meadow Lake. 
 
The latest move you’ve done you’ve attacked the secretaries 
that were working for Parks and Renewable Resources. We had 
permanent staff, permanent secretaries at La Loche, at 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Green Lake. And what your department has 
done now, you have taken them permanent positions out of 
there, women who have lived, were raised in La Loche and 
Green lake and Ile-a-la-Crosse - you’ve taken their positions 
away and you’ve made them temporary. It’s another move to 
destroy northern Saskatchewan. And I, just for the life of me, I 
don’t see why that you continually move everything out of the 
North and the North-west and locate it either in Prince Albert or 
in Meadow Lake. 
 
And this I tell you, Mr. Minister, is going to come back to haunt 
this government — the way you’re operating. And I just say 
that when the citizens of Meadow Lake have to make a decision 
as to whether they want a member in there who’s going to 
represent them fairly or a member that brings everything into 
Meadow Lake and forgets about the Loon Lakes and the 
Goodsoils, there’s gong to be a change in that constituency also. 
 
But I, for the life of me . . . You’ve got a rearing pond in Big 
River. Why did you go to Meadow Lake? And I just want to 
say, Mr. Minister, are you saying that you’ve got all the fresh 
water that you need for that hatchery out of Meadow Lake — 
the lake itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
alluded to quite a number of issues in the context of that one 
short speech which he delivered, so I will endeavour to reply to 
several of the points he made. 
 
If I may start with a general comment on fish enhancement: the 
greatest need for fish enhancement as identified by the fish 
biologists in the department has been in lakes which have been 
somewhat south of the area to which the hon. member 
originally referred. Now, as we are catching up on those lakes 
in the central zone, we are moving further north. For instance, 
the engineering is being done now on Codette. We do have a 
plan for another rearing area at Buffalo Narrows, two for La 
Ronge, and one in McBride Lake. 
 
So I think it’s unfair to say that the North is being ignored. In 
fact, of our budget this year, almost $22.5 million is being spent 
on northern programs. So I think it’s very  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1339 
 
 

unfair for the member to somehow try and impress upon the 
House that the North is being ignored. It most certainly is not 
being ignored. Not only is this department doing its part, but the 
entire government is cognizant of the problems facing northern 
Saskatchewan, and we’re attempting in four short years to come 
to grips with those particular problems. 
 
Now I could get partisan or blatantly political and say the 
member has served that area for a number of years; he served it 
under an NDP government when they were in power. And, you 
know, there’s not much point in crying to me and saying, well 
for all kinds of years we haven’t had programs and things done 
in the North, when he sat on the government benches as a 
representative of a government which should have been looking 
after the North and looking after his particular seat. 
 
I think this minister and this department has done as much or 
more for the North in terms of what we’re doing through Parks 
and Renewable Resources as was ever done before by any 
minister or any other government as regards this department’s 
programs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The hon. member referred to the member from Moosomin and 
he made some comment about his constituency. I would like to 
point out to you, Mr. Chairman, that the member for Moosomin 
has identical problems in his seat. He would like to see rearing 
ponds and fish hatcheries as well to enhance the sports fishing 
down in his part of the world. But we’ve not identified his 
constituency or his area as being of prime concern or the 
biggest problem that we face. We’ve said the problems are 
further north, in the hon. member’s own constituency of 
Athabasca, and in the surrounding areas, and that’s where we’re 
spending most of our money. 
 
He also made some comment to cutting clerical positions in the 
Meadow Lake region and taking people out of the area. Well, 
you know, Mr. Chairman, what we had was three permanent 
clerk typist 2 positions in La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Green 
Lake district offices, which really were part-time positions. So 
we were paying people full-time wages to do a part-time job. 
There wasn’t enough work in these offices to merit keeping the 
positions there. 
 
It is important to note the positions have not been cut; rather, 
they have been transferred to other areas where they are 
necessary. The incumbents had a number of options; they could 
transfer with the position; they could accept part-time clerical 
positions, which is what the position was worth in each area, 
available in the present office; they could apply for other 
positions in the region as they came up; or they could take a 
leave of absence and place their names on the re-employment 
list. 
 
And it is important to note that before any decisions were made, 
Mr. Chairman, this was all discussed with the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) rep in Prince 
Albert. And the people involved have elected to resolve the 
problems themselves, and they’ve accept various positions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I will try that question again, Mr.  

Minister. Are you getting the water for your rearing ponds out 
of Meadow Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Partially, and partially from the local 
river system. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I ask you, Mr. Minister, when you are 
dealing with the fish hatchery . . . and I want to just . . . I could 
go into a long speech here when you ask me about when we 
were in government and what we accomplished in northern 
Saskatchewan under the NDP government. If you want, I could 
go on. But I’ll tell you, I would start speaking now and I 
wouldn’t be through till 10 o’clock. Because if I was going to 
. . . I’ll tell you, everything that’s happened in northern 
Saskatchewan — right from the schools to the roads, to the 
hospitals, to the sewer and water, to the telephones, to the 
power lines — was all done when I was a member under the 
NDP government. I’m not going to go into that. 
 
But I . . . and the member . . . when I was discussing the fish 
hatcheries and things that were going to Meadow Lake rather 
than the member for Moosomin, I just want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that the major fish hatchery in this province is at Fort 
Qu’Appelle. And I tell you, it’s a lot closer to Moosomin and to 
the member from Moosomin’s constituency — the fish hatchery 
that’s been here available to him ever since a fish hatchery’s 
been in this province — but that has not taken place in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when you . . . and I just want to get this one down here, 
Mr. Minister. Is it not true that when you’re dealing with a fish 
hatchery that you need a good supply of clean, fresh water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d just like to remind the hon. member, 
your government started the fish hatchery at Fort Qu’Appelle. If 
you don’t like it, you should have told them at the time. You 
know, you’re just a wee bit late after the fact, crying to me the 
fact that we’ve got a fish hatchery at Fort Qu’Appelle that you 
guys started up. In any event, hon. member, the fish hatchery 
serves the entire province, not just the constituency of the 
member from Moosomin or any of the other southern 
constituencies, but indeed all of the areas of Saskatchewan. And 
we’re quite happy to say we’re providing a high-quality product 
that we’re able to disseminate all over the province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I’m having trouble, Mr. Chairman, in 
getting the minister to answer the question. And I tell you, when 
I ask the minister the question — is it not true that you need an 
ample supply of fresh water to operate a fish hatchery? — and 
the answer I get, that I am opposed to the fish hatchery that’s 
been out at Fort Qu’Appelle for all these years . . . I never 
mentioned that. I support the fish hatchery out there, and under 
the NDP government, we expanded it. Just before we lost 
government, we’ve expanded it. And you ask your officials, and 
they’ll confirm that. 
 
But when I asked you the question about the fresh water, and 
you get up and start talking about me being opposed to the fish 
hatchery, Mr. Chairman, at Fort Qu’Appelle, well we built it 
and we expanded it, so why would I be  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1340 
 
 

opposed to it? You totally misconstrued the question. The 
question was: is it not true that you need a sufficient supply of 
fresh water in order to operate a fish hatchery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, and we have it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
get from your officials the depth of the water and the type of 
water that you’re getting out of Meadow Lake, the depth of that 
lake on an average. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that these rearing ponds 
don’t take a tremendous amount of water, given the current 
state-of-the-art technology. And besides, it’s taken from the 
river, not the lake. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well now, here we go. First you get up and 
tell me that you’re getting part of it from Meadow Lake. Then 
you tell me you’re getting part of it from the river. And I 
wonder, I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you know where the river 
runs into and runs out of. It runs into Meadow Lake or out of 
Meadow Lake. It’s the same chain of water. 
 
And I can tell you, you don’t see any beaches on Meadow Lake, 
and you don’t see the member from Meadow Lake taking his 
family out there to swim in Meadow Lake. And you ask him 
why he doesn’t? You just ask him: have you ever had your 
family out there swimming? I tell you, you don’t have anybody 
swimming in Meadow Lake. You need good, fresh, clean water. 
 
And why have you got the treatment plant in Meadow Lake? 
You got it there because that water that’s coming out of 
Meadow Lake needs to be treated. 
 
And I say, I say, Mr. Minister, that that fish hatchery — and I’m 
going to get off of this - should never have been put in Meadow 
Lake. It’s in the wrong place. It’s not even in a region where 
you need a fish hatchery, because you’ve got the Delaronde 
Lake one to supply Meadow Lake, within 40 miles. So why 
would you want to put it in Meadow Lake? 
 
And I want to now turn . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but if the 
member from Meadow Lake wants to get up and get into this 
debate, whether we’re talking about a hatchery or a rearing 
pond, well fine. A rearing pond to me is where you put the . . . 
you raise the fish, you let them into an adjacent lake. A fish 
hatchery is were you raise fish and you take them out and you 
take them to other lakes. 
 
But I want to say that that is a hatchery; it’s a minifish hatchery. 
You’ve got one at Delaronde Lake. I don’t know why you 
didn’t take one up into the northern area where we have literally 
thousands of lakes. We have many big lakes where we have 
both the commercial fishery and a sports fishery. And we need 
that fish, we need fish to be planted in those lakes. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, that that was a wrong decision to put it 
into Meadow Lake. And I can tell you, it most certainly is a 
project that I don’t think was ever announced because I’ve 
never heard of it before. I think it’s something new that you 
didn’t really want to make it public because it’s not where it 
should have gone. It’s just  

too many positions being cut out of north-west Saskatchewan 
and being transferred into the Meadow Lake area. 
 
And I tell you that the citizens up in my constituency have 
always supported Meadow Lake. And you can go into Meadow 
Lake on any day you want, and you’re gong to see my 
constituents from northern Saskatchewan who are in there 
supporting the residents, the business community of Meadow 
Lake. And that’s the kind of thanks that they get, by taking our 
positions out and transferring them into Meadow Lake. So 
we’re the losers up there. 
 
(2030) 
 
I want to say that when you talk about the three secretarial jobs 
that you have cancelled, the permanent jobs, the permanent 
positions have been cancelled. They have been made part-time, 
and they’ve been told, well they can transfer to the private 
sector or wherever they want to go. That’s pretty well telling 
them that you’ve lost your job. And I tell you, the three families 
that we’re discussing here right now have lost a lot of money 
and a lot of security that they had. And they thought that they 
had that security because it was a permanent position. And I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider that decision to take those 
positions out. 
 
And I also wonder at the remark that you made, that there really 
wasn’t enough work for them, that they weren’t pulling their 
weight, as to say, as you had to take the position out. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you to reconsider those three positions and leave 
them as permanent, and then I’ll get you to respond to that, then 
I will move to another area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, I’m not really sure where you’d 
like to begin. Let’s begin with the positions that you talked 
about being transferred. In fact, one woman who was involved 
in this was very happy to transfer to Meadow Lake because her 
husband was working in Meadow Lake. And that suited her . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, she was happy to go. Her 
husband was there and she was happy to join her husband. 
Maybe you don’t think that’s a good situation and she should 
have been happy to stay and fight to keep a full-time job where 
there was only a part-time job warranted many miles away from 
her husband. The woman in question seemed quite happy to 
transfer, to be with her husband, to a different position. 
 
Let’s get back to this Meadow Lake situation for a second here. 
We’re not talking about a hatchery; we’re talking about a 
rearing pond. And I think there’s been some confusion between 
Meadow Lake, the lake — the body of water — and Meadow 
Lake, the town. And when I said it was at Meadow Lake, I 
meant at Meadow Lake adjacent to the town, on the river, 
where there is an adequate and high-quality supply of water 
available. 
 
And it is simply fiction to say that we have been ignoring fish 
enhancement projects in the North, in northern Saskatchewan. 
Indeed, we’re putting 10 million whitefish fry — they’re 
already in; they’ve been successfully stocked — three 
north-western Saskatchewan lakes up in your very area. So I’d 
just like you to remember that,  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1341 
 
 

that we have in fact been stocking that area and we will 
continue to stock that area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can see that you’re 
not prepared to make the positions permanent. And if one 
woman wanted to transfer to Meadow Lake, I’ll tell you, there’s 
a lot of other citizens up in that area that would gladly take the 
job if you would have left it as a permanent position. 
 
You also talked about Meadow Lake being a rearing pond. Well 
then I say a rearing pond is, and you indicated before, was 
where you allow the fish to go out into the adjacent lake. But 
you said, well, you know, I shouldn’t complain because Parks 
and Renewable Resources have planted 10 million whitefish up 
in my area. 
 
Well let me tell you, when we were in power, from Fort 
Qu’Appelle we planted 13 million in one lake at one time. So 
this is nothing new. We were doing that before; only, we were 
doing it on a larger scale. You know, and you just go back and 
your officials know. they can inform you as to when we put the 
13 million whitefish in one lake, and they’ll tell you what lake it 
was. 
 
I now want to turn, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to a study 
that was carried out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m not 
going to ask the question twice. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to a study that was carried out 
by your department on the black duck population that we have 
in Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan especially, a 
problem that I see and the fishermen see as a major problem. 
And I wonder if you could indicate what your findings were on 
that study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if I could ask the hon. 
member for some clarification. Was that a cormorant study that 
was done at Doré Lake? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well wherever you took it in northern 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know how many lakes that you took the 
study on. But you call them cormorants? But in northern 
Saskatchewan they’re referred to as the black duck. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I do remember this now — it comes 
back to me — and it was called the black duck study. Actually 
it refers to cormorants, which, as we know, are very fond of 
fish. And the study is ongoing and should be complete by the 
end of the year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know that you were 
taking the study and you indicated to me in writing that the 
study was complete and you were just compiling the 
information. It was a study done by, I believe, a biologist out of 
your department. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, and ask your department 
officials to expand that study of the black ducks because, not 
only are they becoming severe in the Buffalo Narrows area, but 
for the first time last summer fishermen — and I’ve seen them 
myself — fishermen told me for the first time ever they have 
seen them in the Cree Lake country. So they’ve now migrated 
as faro north as Cree Lake, where fishermen say they have 
never been  

before. 
 
I want to say, as a commercial fisherman — and with my time 
in this House here and the best season gone by, I don’t get a 
chance to do it much — but the black duck population is 
increasing. It’s just unbelievable. There’s literally millions of 
them on all the lakes up in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And if one wants to go in to a large flock of black ducks, and 
you go in there quite fast and they start to fly, you’ll see the 
pelicans and sea gulls will be in there with them, and literally 
thousands of them in a flock. And there’ll be whitefish — and 
they’ll be about four to five inches long these fingerlings — 
whitefish, pickerel, tullibe, every species of fish. 
 
And I know that in your letter you indicated that they were 
feeding mainly on mullets. Well I’ll just tell you, Mr. Minister, 
that the commercial fishermen — and I’ve seen it myself — 
that they are not feeding on just mullets. And if that black duck 
population isn’t controlled, we’re going to end up with the same 
problem as they have out on the east coast where they have now 
had to put a bounty on the black ducks there, or the cormorants 
that you’re talking about. And they literally have put a bounty 
on them, and I believe it’s in the province of Nova Scotia. 
 
I think that you’ll have to take a serious look at going out and 
limiting the production of the black duck. This can be done 
humanely. It’s just a matter of taking the eggs away from the 
hens when they’re hatching, because they all have a hatching 
area. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to instruct your officials to 
hold some meetings with the commercial fishermen up in 
northern Saskatchewan and just get a true feeling as to just 
what’s happening with the black duck. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: —The field work has been completed on 
that particular study I can advise the hon. member, but the 
master’s thesis has not yet been written. A study by the name of 
Barbara Handbidge from the University of Saskatchewan had 
been putting everything together. The thesis, the final piece of 
work with recommendations, has not yet been received. And, 
yes, if you wish those meetings to be held and some 
consultation to take place, once we have that information and 
once we have the thesis, officials from my department would be 
more than pleased to meet with the groups that you already 
indicated. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I now 
want to turn to other studies that your department has taken, and 
I particularly want to turn now to the big game studies and the 
surveys that I know your department has taken every year. 
 
I wonder if you could indicate, of the surveys that you have 
taken regarding big game, if you could give me some idea as to 
just what the population is? And number one, I would ask for 
the moose populations and the white-tail deer and the antelope 
populations, and any other big game population surveys that 
have been taken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, if it’s agreeable to  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1342 
 
 

the hon. member, I can provide that information in writing as 
soon as tomorrow, and then we can give you details. We have 
ballpark figures, but I’d rather give you specifics than ballparks. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s have the ballpark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — You want the ballparks? You want 
round numbers? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, what I would like to know is 
if there is any fluctuation in the herds that we have in the 
province, and the populations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll give the hon. 
member ballpark figures. I would prefer however, after I’ve 
done this, to give you something in writing because this could 
be fairly rough. 
 
In terms of moose, we’re looking at a population of about 
40,000. In the Pasqua hill area, that’s up; and the rest of the 
province is fairly constant and the population is holding its own. 
 
White-tail deer, we’re looking at approximately 250,000. In the 
southern part of the province, for a variety of reasons — tough 
winters, biological reasons, the last couple of years — we’re 
down about 30 per cent. But getting further north we’re up 10 
per cent. 
 
Antelope, which you’d asked about, the surveys are done during 
the summer so we don’t have that survey complete. 
 
And mule deer, which are primarily south-western part of 
Saskatchewan, we’re looking at a herd of about 105,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And 
you’ll provide me in writing with the surveys. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It’s been a major concern with the big 
game up in northern Saskatchewan, and I have a number of 
letters that have been written to you. And I’m going to refer to 
one tonight, an individual who has written to you on a number 
of occasions asking you to take action on the wolf population, 
and it is from one Narcisse Mirasty of Sled Lake. 
 
And Mr. Mirasty has indicated to you and indicated to me on 
many occasions — and I have had the opportunity to go into 
that area and check out his findings, and he most certainly 
knows what he’s talking about when he says that there have 
been some major kills. And now we have a situation in that 
Doré Lake-Emmeline Lake country, and Sled Lake into the La 
Plonge area, and farther north and west over in the Cummings 
Lake and to Dillon area, where populations of moose are way 
down, deer populations are way down, and now this year we see 
that there is a very little wolf population because the game is 
gone. 
 
And Mr. Mirasty has indicated on a number of occasions to you 
that there had to be something done to control the wolf 
population in northern Saskatchewan. We now have  

a cycle up there where the big game, the moose and the deer 
and the woodland caribou in that area, are way down. And all 
the fishermen, the trappers, will tell you the same thing. And I 
think your hunting statistics will show you that hunters that are 
going into that area are just not bagging any of their limits. 
 
(2045) 
 
You indicate . . . and why I’m bringing this out is the type of 
responses that I have seen come from yourself, Mr. Minister, to 
Mr. Mirasty. And I think, when you’re talking to an individual 
or you’re writing to him . . . And I say to you, you’re dealing 
with an individual who is 79 years old who has lived in that 
Sled Lake-Doré Lake country all his life, has been a trapper all 
his life, and has watched the cycles come and go — a man who 
knows what he’s talking about. 
 
Yet you indicate, and I just want to quote . . . and I think it’s 
something that should not be done and it should not be written 
or verbally transferred to an individual of Mr. Mirasty’s stature. 
I want to quote from the letter that you wrote to him. And you 
say to this individual: 
 

If you have not attended one of these seminars (and you’re 
talking about a trapping seminar), I recommend you 
consider attending if another one is held in your area as I 
think you may find it interesting and informative. 

 
Well I tell you, if you want to hold a trapping school, then you 
should get Mr. Mirasty to be the instructor, because he is a 
trapper. He is an individual who has trapped all his life and he 
knows what he’s talking about. And he has been involved with 
conservation officers. He has been involved with conservation 
officers over the years in controlling the numbers of big game 
population in northern Saskatchewan - a man who knows what 
he’s talking about. And I think that to tell this individual that he 
should go to a trapping school is an insult from yourself, Mr. 
Minister, and it should be retracted. 
 
The same thing come from another one of your officials — the 
same — by a C.G. Scheelhaase. And I don’t know, Mr. 
Minister, I’m sure he’s not a conservation officer, but I find it 
kind of odd because he is telling Mr. Mirasty the same things. 
And I think here is another case. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to co-operate with your side of the 
House. I’m trying to get the estimates through. And if I’m going 
to have to re-ask my questions, or if I’m going to have to put up 
with all the chattering that’s going on across there, then I may 
as well sit down and turn it over to the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, because I tell you I’m trying to ask 
questions, and he’s talking to the minister, the minister that I’m 
. . . They’re continually talking back and forth. And I’m not 
going to continue to ask questions if this is the way they are. 
We may as well leave the department when they can pay 
attention. And a little bit of order would be in order in here. 
 
That’s fine. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that there has to be some 
control. I know you don’t have the figures of the  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1343 
 
 

populations of the big game in the regions. And I think that 
once you tabulate that and find out, you’ll find out that there is 
a drastic drop in that population. 
 
Granted that population will come back now because the 
trappers tell me now that the wolf population has started to 
disappear and die off because . . . mainly through starvation, or 
they have moved farther south to where there is game for them 
to survive on. But that’s the kind of a cycle that we don’t want 
to happen because we can control it. 
 
There is a certain part of nature that man can control, and 
there’s a certain part of nature that man should not control. But 
this is one where we need to have some control of because it is 
a resource that is used by not only the tourist and the tourist 
operators in this province, but by the citizens who live in 
northern Saskatchewan, and who use that game for their daily 
food. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, that I think that Mr. Mirasty . . . And I 
haven’t quoted anything from his letters because you have them 
on file. What he was telling you makes a lot of sense, and I 
would ask you, if you have a chance, to drop into Sled Lake and 
have a talk with Mr. Mirasty, and you’ll find that he’s a very 
intelligent individual. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the . . . I’ll wait 
till these fellows are finished their private conversation here. 
 
The hon. member has referred to wolves and wolf population, 
so I feel somewhat duty bound to address that particular area 
which came up. 
 
Now, I’m not wishing in any way to defame the reputation of 
Mr. Mirasty, a 79-year-old gentleman who spent his life 
trapping and hunting in the North and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The hon. member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
is obviously an expert on wolves. I suppose on his farm he’s 
polluted by wolves. 
 
First of all, Parks and Renewable Resources has no evidence to 
suggest that wolf populations are indeed too high or in fact that 
they are causing significant mortality for big game species. I’d 
like to make that point. 
 
In the far northern forest areas wolf populations are permitted to 
fluctuate naturally. Increased trapper education programs to 
which the hon. member referred — and I may say, we use 
trappers to teach those programs, not officials within the 
department — these programs have resulted in relatively high 
harvest rates and have maintained populations at a normal level. 
 
We do not consider the use of toxicants as acceptable control 
technique nor, Mr. Chairman, in Saskatchewan do we like the 
search and destroy techniques that have been employed in other 
provinces, whereby helicopters go up, people with 
high-powered shotguns with big clips — and I’m talking big 
clips like 50 shots with S and B’s in them — go out there, they 
track wolves, they throw down flats, they search and destroy. It 
is totally abhorrent. Nor will we go along with that type of 
situation as officials in this department, Mr. Chairman. 
Certainly not as long as I’m minister, we’re not going to be 
doing that. So we’re  

not going to get into any large-scale, aerial shooting programs 
at all. 
 
Throughout northern Saskatchewan wolf control consists of two 
facets. First of all we promote wolf trapping by the NFCA 
(Northern Fur Conservation Area) trappers through trappers’ 
schools put on by department, utilizing trappers to run the 
schools. And we also have control effects and selective problem 
sites which are put in place by department staff. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But, Mr. Minister, seeing that we’re on the 
moose populations, I want to turn to another experimental 
program that your department had, and that was with moose, 
particularly in the Cumberland area where you had problems 
with the bears consuming young moose. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you could indicate if you still have that program in 
place where you are testing the young moose, and if you are 
still having problems with the bears who have been consuming, 
as you indicated, young moose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, yes we still have a problem 
with bears. We’ve got a bear population in Saskatchewan of 
approximately 40,000. Yes, we acknowledge that they can be a 
problem for young moose, and we are endeavouring to come to 
grips with that. That’s why we do have a bear hunting season. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And are you still tagging some of the 
young calves of the moose population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, we’re not carrying that out. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But that is a program that you did carry 
out, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, we did. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder if you could indicate how many 
young moose that you caught and put whatever tags, or 
whatever it is that you put on them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We had 14 transmitters on calf moose, 
and we found 12 of the transmitters, so you can guess what 
happened to the 12 moose. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — No, I’m not going to guess because this 
isn’t a guessing game. I wonder, is the two transmitters still 
transmitting, and could you indicate what happened to the 12 
young moose that you got the transmitters back from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The 12 were eaten, we presume; the 
other two, the transmitter batteries are short term, and they’ve 
since ceased to transmit. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well you indicate “you presume,” but you 
did get the 12 transmitters back? You’re talking about the 12 
transmitters and you assume that they were eaten. Do you 
assume that they were eaten by bears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We did recover the transmitters, and 
when we found the transmitters, we found the bones scattered 
around beside them. The indications, the juxtaposition of the 
bones, would indicate they were  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1344 
 
 

in fact eaten. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 
indicate how you trapped or how you got a hold of these 14 
young moose in order to put the transmitters on them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — They were captured by net from a 
helicopter. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I find that quite interesting. We were 
talking about controlling the wolf population, and I never 
mentioned anything about a helicopter and going around 
shooting moose. And I don’t suspect that the Department of 
Parks and Renewable Resources in Saskatchewan at any time 
used a helicopter to control the wolf population. 
 
But now you stand up in this House and you tell me that you 
took a helicopter, and you went out on top of a mother moose 
and her young calf, and you threw a net down and plucked the 
calf out of the bush right in front of the mother. And let me tell 
you — you talk about being humane. That, I think, is one of the 
most cruelest things that could ever happen. 
 
Can you just imagine taking a helicopter and flying over top of 
a cow moose and plucking her calf out of the bush beside her? 
There is very little animals in this world that are more vicious 
and will fight to protect their young as a moose — and capable, 
because it’s a big animal. But you and your own department 
have taken helicopters and went out, plucked the young moose, 
took them to a station, and put monitors on them. 
 
And then what did you do? You sent them back out in the forest 
with a helicopter and dropped them down. And I’ll tell you 
what happened. I’ll tell you what happened. The mother moose 
wasn’t there to take that calf because . . . I just wonder how you 
could take that calf moose, and take it into a holding pen, and 
get it back to the mother, with a helicopter both times, create 
that kind of emotion to that mother moose, and you think that 
that young calf is going to survive. 
 
Well, I’ll tell why they didn’t survive, and I’ll tell you why the 
bears consumed the 12 young moose that you found the 
monitors for. They consumed them because them young moose 
were left after the helicopter dropped them. The mother 
disbanded them, and they were left there at the mercy of the 
bears, and that’s why they were consumed. 
 
You talk about other provinces use helicopters to shoot timber 
wolves. Well let me tell you, you may as well have shot them 
young calf moose, because you don’t know where the other two 
are. You know that 12 were consumed by bears. And I suggest 
to you, Mr. Minister, that those 12 young moose that were 
consumed never had a mother with them when that bear came 
along and consumed them because they were alone and they 
were left there by themselves. They were abandoned. 
 
And that’s what happened. And I say that you, Mr. Minister, 
you get up here and you talk about shooting timber wolves from 
helicopters. I never suggested that.  

And I know that your officials in your department have never 
done that. It’s never been done. But let me tell you, for you to 
start that type of a debate and then go and do this to a young 
moose, I think that that is something that has to come to an end. 
I’m assuming that it has proven to be a failure and will never 
happen again. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, let’s get a couple of 
things straight here. There were no holding pens involved. The 
nets were dropped from a helicopter. The tagging was done, 
everything was done within five minutes. The biologists were 
on site to make sure the cow and calf were reunited. 
 
Now I don’t know why you want to get argumentative and 
spread nonsense around the legislature and try and somehow 
mislead these people into thinking there was some cruel 
operation mounted when you were the man — and I have a 
letter on file from you — advocating massive wolf poisoning 
program in Saskatchewan. So don’t you stand there, 
supercilious, pious, and sanctimonious, and try to lecture me. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I think we will just continue this 
debate on the moose population. Yes, I did. I stood up in this 
House and I said that we had to control the wolf population. 
And I can tell you that Mr. Narcisse Mirasty and other people 
have told you that we have to control the wolf. 
 
I want to tell you that your department has done it in years 
passed. They have done that. So that’s right. But you want to 
start hollering and screaming about the way you handled the 
young moose and that in five minutes they were all back with 
their mother and that’s why it was an unsuccessful program. All 
14 are gone. You put monitors on 14 young moose. Twelve of 
them you found that were the remains of the 12. You know that 
they were eaten up. Did you ever ask yourself why they were 
eaten up, why the 12 young moose were eaten up and you never 
found the other two monitors? Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve got a lot to learn about northern Saskatchewan and 
you’ve got a lot to learn about resources in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You can stand up and holler all you want. I 
have nothing to worry about. I’m not ashamed of what I have 
said. And I tell you, I’ll say it again: if we don’t control the 
wolf population in this province, we will allow them to go out 
and to kill the young moose and the young deer, exactly the 
way you allowed the bears — by picking them up with a 
helicopter and literally scaring them to death. And the mother 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the minister can laugh. But 
I tell you, you take a helicopter up in the air and you come 
down on top of a cow in a farmer’s field, and you just see 
what’s going to happen . . . and pick that calf up, and it’s quite 
easy — you’ve got a field. But you try this out in the bush and 
in the muskeg where the moose, where the cow-calf is grazing. 
I’ll tell you, it’s a lot different than a cow in the field. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1345 
 
 

But you just try that and see what will happen. The chances are 
that young calf, when it’s picked up in a net and hoisted up by a 
helicopter, it’s going to die of a heart attack because they’re so 
scared. And to say that a young animal hasn’t got fear, they’re 
born with fear. And then to have a helicopter swoop down and 
pick them up . . . now let me tell you . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, I don’t know what they did with that net then. You 
told me that they dropped down and picked them up with a net. 
So I just . . . If you want to get into a shouting match, I’ll stand 
my ground and fine, you take your ground. 
 
But let me tell you, the folks in Saskatchewan are going to 
make a decision on who’s right. And I hope they get that chance 
in the near future. Because next year when estimates come 
around, if you’re lucky enough to get through that election, 
you’ll be on this side and we’ll be on the other side. 
 
I just say, Mr. Minister, that I would . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! The member for Athabasca is 
trying to ask a question and is having difficulty. I would ask the 
House to please allow him to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I just asked, then I’ll get off 
that subject, that you discontinue the use of helicopters for the 
tagging of young moose. And if you think that you have a bear 
population in that area, I would suggest that you solve that 
problem with the local trappers. They’re quite capable of 
looking after that problem. 
 
I now want to turn to the water bombers that were ordered by 
the province. I believe it’s four new water bombers. Could you 
indicate, Mr. Minister, when they will be in the province and in 
use for fire-fighting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’ll have that information for the hon. 
member. But I just can’t let one comment go, that he made 
about swooping down with helicopters, scooping up calves, 
taking them up in the air. No, the nets were dropped from the 
helicopters. The tagging was done on the ground; they were 
never lifted off the ground. And I just checked — none died of 
heart attacks. 
 
However, leaving that one aside . . . the question regarding the 
water bombers. Two aircraft purchased by the federal 
government will arrive in December ’86, and January ’87. The 
two provincially purchased aircraft will arrive in August and 
September of 1987. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to continue along 
the line of questioning on the water bombers, but I’m going to 
make a comment. 
 
You just indicated that the nets were dropped from a helicopter, 
and that the helicopters really didn’t disrupt the cow moose or 
the calf. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can visualize how a 
helicopter . . . if you could visualize how a helicopter can move 
in and drop a net on a cow and a calf, or a calf moose. 
 
I suppose you think that the helicopter shuts off its motor  

and it comes in silent and that’s it —  they drop the net. Well let 
me tell you — let me tell you — before they get into position to 
drop that net, I would assume that there would be a chase 
involved. The moose isn’t just standing there waiting for the 
helicopter to swoop down and let the net drop. They would be 
chased. And I say to you that that is a cruel disruption of a cow 
moose and her calf. 
 
Mr. Minister, I didn’t get the dates that the new water bombers, 
the first, ones, will be in operation. Could you just give me the 
date that the first water bomber will be in operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Certainly I’d be happy to give you that 
information. 
 
Let’s go back to the moose and the helicopters for a minute. 
We’re talking a technique that’s used all across North America 
and Canada and Europe. And for you to get up and try and 
make some kind of a partisan fight out of something like that 
that is carefully supervised by wildlife biologists who are very 
carefully trained — somehow you try to impugn their 
reputations, denigrate their abilities — I find that totally 
disgusting. 
 
But, you know, if this is the way you want to play it . . . I’m 
well aware you’ve no intentions of letting the estimates go 
quickly. You want to keep it here as long as you possibly can. 
And I’m more than willing to oblige you. And if you want to 
get into these vituperative type of exchanges, you got it. 
 
However, back to your question on aircraft. The two aircraft 
purchased by the federal government will arrive in December 
1986 and January 1987. The two provincially purchased aircraft 
will arrive in August, September of 1987. 
 
And I find it unfortunate that I’m constantly being berated by 
these racial comments from the member from Shaunavon, who 
somehow objects to the fact that my accent is Scottish. I admit, 
I was not born in Canada. I’m a new Canadian; I’m an 
immigrant. But I really get somehow disgusted listening to 
racial comments coming from the Don Juan from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for 
giving me the date that you’re going to get the new water 
bomber. 
 
And I find it quite interesting that you would stand up and say 
that you find this exchange disgusting . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now, you said disgusting. When we’re talking 
about dropping nets on live animals — yes, that’s done all over. 
But let me tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s done on adults. And if you 
ever watched a film of how they do it, there is quite a chase that 
takes place. And there’s lots of films that you can view. And 
they all . . . there’s always a chase and the animal is running 
through the deep snow, and then they get the net on him. But 
it’s usually done with adults. It’s not done with a cow and a 
young calf. So you guys can make as much fund of it as you 
want. And the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake can joke 
all he wants from another seat. That’s fine. But I think it’s 
serious and I don’t find it disgusting. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1346 
 
 

And to suggest that because we’re having an exchange that I’ve 
got no intention of letting the estimates to through tonight, I 
don’t know why that would even enter into a discussion like 
this. I don’t even know why you would do that. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I have indicated before in the House, I 
indicated to you that I thought that we had to change our ways 
of fighting fires. And I think that we have to go back to the old 
way where we used more manual labour, fighting when the sun 
is down, not when the sun is up. And I believe that; and my 
constituents believe that too, that you don’t fight fire with 
expensive water bombers in the daytime. It has to be done just 
before the sun goes down. And then you put the manual 
fire-fighters in there, and just at sunrise — just when the sun 
rises when it’s cool, and that’s when fire-fighting should be 
done. 
 
And I think that the Canso water bombers which plays a major 
part and can play a major role in fighting our forest fires, and I 
hear rumours that your department is now negotiating to sell the 
Canso water bombers. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, is there any 
truth that there has been negotiations or that there has been any 
plans to sell the Canso water bombers that the Department of 
Parks and Renewable Resources have for fighting forest fires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — You’re referring to the Cansos, and 
disposing of the Canso fleet upon the arrival of the CL-215s? 
 
The three Cansos which we have - which are going - we’re 
going to keep them until the four new ones come in. But the 
new ones dump twice as much water; they’re double the 
capacity. So we’ll have far more significant capacity with the 
new craft. 
 
The CL-215 is capable of carrying 1,200 gallons of water, and 
that compares to 800 by a Canso. And the 215 flies 
approximately 35 miles per hour faster than a Canso, so that 
translates into delivery of almost twice as much water by a 
CL-215 per hour as a Canso. So we intend to be able to have 
double the capacity we currently have. 
 
Mr. Thompson: Mr. Minister, does the CL-215 get its load from 
the lakes or is it done on the airfield? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: This is done on the lakes. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The CL-215 picks up water like a Canso 
water bomber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, it’s a water bomber. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, I know they’re all water bombers, but 
do you use a mixture or do you use straight water in CL-215s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Straight water. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. But they won’t be in the 
department’s hands until December of this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That would be the earliest one, yes. 
 

Mr. Thompson: — I mean that there is negotiations under way 
to sell the Canso water bombers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The Canso fleet is really controlled by 
Supply and Services, but that is our understanding, and 
certainly we will have use of them until such time as we take 
possession of the new planes. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But you are confirming that negotiations 
are under way to sell them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I honestly don’t know, hon. member. I 
would have to assume that’s the situation because it’s controlled 
by another department, Supply and Services. I imagine they 
would make arrangements to dispose of them, but I really don’t 
know. You’d have to talk to my colleague, the Minister of 
Supply and Services, when he’s up for estimates. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I’ve had concern expressed to me by 
officials in your department, Mr. Minister, stating that that is 
something that should not be done, that the Canso water 
bombers should not be sold. That is a very important part of 
fighting fires in northern Saskatchewan. And as you know, Mr. 
Minister, we have many lakes and small lakes in northern 
Saskatchewan. We have many small fires that take place in the 
North where we don’t need the large water bomber, but the 
Canso is sufficient to do that, and it’s always been an efficient 
water bomber. It’s a water bomber that this government has 
spent millions of dollars in repairing them water bombers. And 
they’re in good shape, and that is something that should not be 
sold. 
 
And I just ask you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider with your 
colleague, the member of Supply and Services, to not sell those 
water bombers, because if you do, you’re selling off an asset 
that this province has had for many years and has put many 
millions of dollars in to rebuild them. We now have a good 
aircraft; they’re in good shape, and most certainly should not be 
sold. It’s something that we have; it’s an asset that we want to 
keep. And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to confer with the 
member from Meadow Lake and cancel any negotiations to sell 
those water bombers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well I can point out to the hon. member 
that the Canso fleet is very old and it is in need of repair. And 
it’s expensive to keep those up. We’ve done studies on our 
capacity when we get our new planes and we will be better 
equipped, we will have a better fire-fighting capacity, than 
neighbouring provinces. I should remind the hon. member if he 
would look back to 1980 when you had your Trackers sitting in 
Calgary waiting to be repaired and they weren’t repaired, and 
we had forest fires burning all around us. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well regardless of what problems you had 
with the other water bombers, I’m just saying to you, Mr. 
Minister . . . And you talk about the money that’s been spent on 
repairing the Canso water bombers. And I say, that is true; there 
has been a lot of money. There’s been millions of dollars over 
the years spent to take those aircraft and completely rebuild 
them. And they are in  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1347 
 
 

good shape now and they’re an important part of this 
department’s fire-fighting force. And to say that they’re 
expensive to maintain and that we’ve got to get rid of them, I 
say that’s not true; and I just ask you not to negotiate the sale of 
them water bombers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well last year, as I recall, the hon. 
member was not very happy because we were talking of the use 
of water bombers. He was saying, don’t use craft; you’ve got to 
use more people on the ground and create jobs. Now he’s 
somehow berating the department in the decision to increase 
our water bomber capacity. I’m really a little mystified by . . . in 
exactly where you’re coming from on this. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well what I said last year, I just got 
through repeating five minutes ago. I said that we have to fight 
fire with water bombers and men. I said that we have to make 
sure that we fight fires the right way and not the wrong way; 
and that men have to be used, and the water bombers are an 
important part of that. I just got through five minutes ago saying 
that the water bombers should be used just before sunset and 
just after the sun rises, and that they men should be in there 
doing the work and helping them. One complements the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re confusing the issue. I never indicated that 
at all. And I just say that, if you’re going to keep confusing the 
issue, we’re going to be here for a long time. But I most 
certainly maintain what I said; I said it five minutes ago and I 
still do. But I still maintain, and I ask you, Mr. Minister, not to 
sell the Canso water bombers. They are an asset that we cannot 
afford to lose. 
 
I want to now turn, Mr. Minister, to the campsites that you have 
indicated that you will be closing down. And I wonder if you 
could indicate to me now if some of the campsites or any of the 
campsites that are going to be closed down are in the southern 
part of the province, or are they all in the northern part of the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — They are fairly evenly distributed 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
indicate the complement of workers that are in the McLean 
campground just 20 miles east of Regina. Could you tell me 
how many employees that are employed at that campsite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It would be about half a dozen, 
approximately, who would service that site. They also service 
other sites. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you tell me how many were 
servicing that campsite last year? Approximately you say six. Is 
that how many employees that looked after the McLean 
campground last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that figure would be right. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have been told that 
that campsite last year had 13 employees working at it; that this 
year there are three employees working at it. There are many 
families, as you know . . . That’s along a  

major highway, 20 miles east of here. I’m also informed that 
there was a store that was operated at that site last year by your 
department, and I wonder if you could indicate if that store is 
now still in operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that the store there is open 
at the peak periods of the year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Is that the way it’s been throughout the 
years, or is this a new policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It may not always have been that way; 
that’s the way it is this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, that’s right. That’s how it is this year. 
Could you indicate how families who are travelling down that 
road and go into that campsite pay for the stalls that they use at 
McLean campground? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — During the non-peak season, 
self-registration. During the peak season there will be the 
normal gate procedure. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you tell me how you determine the 
peak season, from what time of the year is the peak season. 
When does it start, and when does it finish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — June 27th until Labour Day. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. So I’m assuming that at the present 
time out there, it’s voluntary payment. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Self-registration at the present time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Self-registration and voluntary payment. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I suppose, hon. member, in essence 
you’re right, that we do trust people using the facility to be 
honest and when they are involved in self-registration that that 
is precisely what they do. There is a box present and they put 
the money in the box, and we do check it periodically. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I think, Mr. Minister, that’s exactly how 
you are operating Parks and Renewable Resources and Tourism 
and Small Business in this province. Last year . . . And there 
were many families from the city of Regina who would drive 
out for a picnic at the McLean campground. There was 13 
employees working out there. There was a store that was 
operated out there and now it’s not operating. And now instead 
of having people who were employed every year — they know 
their job, every year they know that they’re going to be able to 
have a job out there, whether it be cleaning up the campsite, 
replenishing it with wood, or taking the fees as they come in — 
now what you have done, and it’s exactly what you have said in 
some of your new releases, that you’re going to leave them 
open. But, and I quote you, you’re not going to maintain them. 
 
Now last year what took 13 individuals, 13 people who had a 
job to run and operate the McLean campsite, now  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1348 
 
 

you have three. And families are telling me in Regina that 
they’re concerned and they’re worried that there’s not going to 
be enough maintenance out there, and then they’re worried 
about when they take their families out there. Because if you’re 
going to replace 10 employees at one campsite alone — one 
campsite alone — how do you expect three individuals to 
operate that campsite when there were 13 before? 
 
And now you have voluntary payments. They have voluntary 
payments at a lot of the small golf courses around the province, 
and I suppose that’s where you got the idea from. 
 
But let me tell you, I think what you’re doing is cutting back on 
jobs in this province. You’re cutting back on services to 
individuals who are criss-crossing our province and are taking 
advantage of our resources that we have, our picnic sites, our 
lakes, and our streams. But you’re discouraging that. And 
you’re discouraging that by closing down these sites. 
 
It’s no different than closing down the Beaupré Creek campsite. 
That’s a historic site. That’s the first site, that’s where the first 
conservation officer had his cabin in that Doré Lake, Stead 
Lake, Smoothstone area. That’s where the first conservation 
officer had his cabin. And that’s a historic site. 
 
And let me tell you, there are senior citizens’ groups who use 
that site every year. They go into Doré Lake, or they go to 
Smoothstone, or they go to Stead Lake; they stop at the Beaupré 
campsite. Now you’re going to close it down. 
 
And I tell you I’ve talked to individuals who say that on a 
yearly basis there are Boy Scout groups from Moose Jaw and 
all over this province that travel into northern Saskatchewan, 
and they stop at those campsites. They know they’re there. 
They know that when they arrive at 3 in the afternoon, there’s 
going to be wood for them to start their fire, there’s going to be 
fireplaces. They know that there’s going to be garbage disposal. 
They know that they’re there. 
 
But you can imagine the surprise that’s going to be on the 
citizens of Saskatchewan and out of the province who also use 
these sites, when they come there this year and they see them 
closed. Still open, as you say, but not manned. There’ll be no 
fire there for them to stop and use. A bus load of senior citizens 
will move in there. There’ll be no garbage disposal. The grass 
won’t be cut. They won’t be able to walk around and enjoy the 
scenery. And that’s what you’re doing. You’re discouraging 
this. 
 
(2130) 
 
And I think it runs deeper, Mr. Minister. I think it runs deeper. 
When we see a government that has an accumulated debt of $9 
billion and an operating debt of $2 billion, I think that’s the 
motive behind cutting back on our services. That’s what’s 
happening. The McLean campsite, 20 miles out of Regina, 
you’re cutting the staff. You had an individual hired to take the 
payments; now it’s voluntary. You drive in and put your money 
in a box, and that’s how you’re trying to collect your debts. 
 

And you know, when you took over this province, you had 
$140 million in the bank. We had 11 years in this province with 
a balanced budget. And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, the member 
from Turtleford is hollering and laughing, but we left this 
province with a 3.3 accumulated billion dollar debt. And now 
that accumulated debt is 9 billion. So now we see they’re 
cutting back on services. You just have to take a look at your 
estimates. They’re being cut back. You have to take a look at 
how you handled your capital. You switched it over to another 
Crown corporation that you created . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, you were against crown corporations; you wanted to 
get rid of them. 
 
But I tell you, you’re taking it out . . . You’re taking the 
mismanagement of this province out on the backs of the senior 
citizens and the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides in this province 
by closing down these sites. And you’re closing them down all 
over the province. And that is going to come to an end, Mr. 
Minister, just as soon as your Premier decides to call an 
election. And I can assure you that. 
 
And then this is something that Saskatchewan cannot tolerate. 
We have always been proud of our campsites and our lakes and 
our rivers and our streams. We’re proud of the services that 
we’ve provided to our senior citizens and our Boy Scouts and 
our Girl Guides and the rest of the citizens of this province. 
We’ve always been proud of that, and we are expanding 
services for them. 
 
Now all of a sudden you come in and you want to close them 
down, and you want to cut back. And I think that that is 
something that cannot be tolerated, and you are going to have to 
answer for it - you’re going to have to answer for it. 
 
To close down campsites such as the McLean campground, 20 
miles east of Regina, literally, that’s exactly what you’re doing. 
You had 13 employees that were out there to maintain that site, 
now you have three. Do you honestly think that three 
individuals can take the place and do the job properly the same 
as 13? Well, that’s not true, that’s just not true, and that’s 
what’s happening. 
 
You are closing down the campsite at Shirley Lake. Now 
Shirley Lake — and if you talk to your colleagues here . . . And 
then there’s your colleague from Shellbrook, I’m sure he’s not 
in favour of shutting down that campsite. He’s used it for years. 
I’ve used that campsite for years, and citizens all over this 
province have. And this province has invested a lot of money in 
Shirley Lake by stocking it with rainbow trout and restocking it 
and making the campsites. And those campsites were there. 
There are so many citizens in this province that know that the 
campsite is at Shirley Lake, and that they can go there, they can 
put their boat in the water, and they will not be disturbed. They 
can fish, and they get their trout, camp overnight, make a fire. 
The wood is there, the garbage disposals are there. Now what’s 
going to happen now when you close them down? 
 
Well I can tell you what’s going to happen. You’re going to 
have garbage all over. Nobody’s there to maintain it. Somebody 
goes in there and catches a fish and they want to cook it, where 
are they going to get their wood? They  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1349 
 
 

are going to go into the forest and chop down the first dry tree 
they see. And you’re actually destroying the system that’s been 
set up, and it’s a good system. It’s a good system. 
 
But to come out and shut down 75 of those sites, I think is 
unfair to the citizens of this province. And I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to reconsider that. And I ask you to reconsider the 
McLean campground just out of Regina here and get that back 
in full operation. Hire the 13 individuals that worked there last 
year. Don’t cut back. Let’s expand on our tourism. This is Expo 
’86 year, and we’re going to have a lot of tourists going through 
this province, and they will want to take advantage of our 
campsites, and our picnic sites. And we want to do that. 
 
You know, you talk about the forests and protecting this. I want 
the minister to respond to the closing down of the campsites, 
and I would ask him to reconsider closing them down and any 
cut-backs this year in our campsites and in our tourist facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — First of all, I don’t know where the hon. 
member got the figure 13. My officials have been looking 
around for a number 13. We don’t have it. Secondly, McLean is 
not being shut down. Thirdly, if indeed he’s right that there are 
three staff, and I believe he is, it’s running with three staff 
because we opened it early this year, three weeks earlier than 
usual with a skeleton staff because of tourist traffic and because 
of people coming through and going to Expo. So McLean is 
definitely not closing. I don’t know where you get your 
information from, and I challenge all of your numbers as well. 
 
You mentioned deficits. You forgot to mention you left a $6 
billion deficit behind in 1982. You forgot to mention you had a 
deficit in 1979, and the Leader of the Opposition looks very 
doubtful, so let me quote him on a couple of things, seeing as 
he’s shaking his head. I know it’s late. But he said . . . What did 
he say in the past? In 1983 he says, “I share with the Minister of 
Finance the view there is nothing particularly wrong with 
deficits in tough years.” Hansard, February 27, 1983, page 
2182. 
 
Back in 1962 when he was the provincial treasurer, he had this 
to say about his own deficit. And I know you folks are fond of 
saying you never had one. Well you better turn and talk to your 
leader because he was the provincial treasurer and he had one. 
He said, I quote: 
 

I do not apologize for this deficit. I believe that in times of 
recession governments should be prepared to incur deficits 
and, indeed, if the situation demands they are duty bound 
to take the action that only governments can take to assist 
the economy towards recovery. 

 
Hansard, March 9, 1962, page 11. So you know, if you want to 
get into another argument, another red herring on deficits, we 
can run through that one if that’s what the hon. member wants 
to do. But don’t stand there and mislead anybody. 
 
In view of the . . . You’re talking about cutting campgrounds 
and shutting them down. We’re talking 10  

small campsites with a total of 75 spots out of a total of 9,000 in 
our system. Just today we had second reading of a new Parks 
Act which will introduce five new provincial parks to this 
province with many more new campsites. What the people of 
the province want, and what tourists coming through the 
province want, and what they’re telling us, is they want 
electrified campsites, they want showers, and they want 
washrooms. Those are the kinds of facilities they want, and 
those are the ones we have increased every year since we’ve 
been in office. We have not cut back services; we’ve expanded 
services. And somehow on a three-stall campsite at Beaupré, if 
you can get all these Boy Scout troops in there, I’ll be amazed; I 
don’t know how you got them in. 
 
You referred to fishing at Shirley Lake. Are you saying that 
there is no more fishing in Shirley Lake because there are three 
camp spots not being maintained? They’re not being closed; 
they’re not being maintained. Are the fish going to get up and 
run away and say, my goodness, there aren’t going to be three 
camp spots at Shirley, we all had better die and get out of this 
lake. That’s absurd. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how this 
member is going to go out and campaign. I was not talking 
about 24 years ago. And he somehow has confused what I said 
with a budget of 24 years ago, and which did not turn out to be 
out a deficit. But what is . . . Mr. Chairman, what has 1962 got 
to do with the statements I just made? 
 
I said that in the last 11 years under our government, we had a 
balanced budget. Now I didn’t talk about 1962; I wasn’t talking 
about that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We had a surplus. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We had a surplus. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I think both sides should get 
back to the estimates for Parks and Renewable Resources and 
we’ll continue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. Order. 
Once more I’m asking both sides to keep their remarks to 
estimates on Parks and Renewable Resources, and we’ll finish 
this if we can. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I sincerely hope 
that that applies to the hon. member from Turtleford who also 
was straying the same as I was straying. But I . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well that’s fine if you want me to rephrase the 
question, I can most certainly keep going. If that’s what you 
guys want. But I tell you I’m prepared to stand here and debate 
our budget and our spending estimates against your spending 
estimates, and our deficits against your deficits, if that’s what 
you want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, if the members who are 
talking from their seats want me to debate that, fine. I’ll debate 
it. But this is final. 
 
I want to now congratulate the minister, Mr. Chairman. I want 
to congratulate the minister and his department for taking the 
advice of the New Democratic Party in stopping the spraying of 
our forest in northern  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1350 
 
 

Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Minister, that that was a smart move 
for you to put an end to that. We have always indicated that the 
spraying of our forests in northern Saskatchewan should not 
take place. If we want to thin out the forests, let me tell you, 
that can be done by manual labour, and should be done by 
manual labour. We do not want to put the chemicals in there. 
And I congratulate you, Mr. Minister, for stopping that 
program, and not going ahead with the spraying of our northern 
forests. 
 
I want to turn to the . . . and I know that the Weyerhaeuser deal, 
Mr. Minister, that you’re not directly involved in that. But in 
the deal where Weyerhaeuser purchased the Prince Albert 
pulp-mill, he also purchased the cutting rights. Mr. Minister, he 
also purchased the cutting rights of the Big River mill’s forestry 
agreement. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would just like to make a few comments 
that I think that if you were going to sell the pulp-mill, I don’t 
know for the life of me why you sold the Big River sawmill and 
all the bush operations and the cutting rights that the Big River 
sawmill had. 
 
I know that you have indicated that the Big River mill was 
losing money. I say that the Big River mill is just as efficient as 
the mill at Hudson Bay or the mill at Carrot River. But 
somehow it was singled out that Big River was the culprit. And 
I say that that was the wrong thing to do. 
 
Now we’re going to have a giant in the forest industry that’s 
going to come in with the large equipment and start harvesting 
the Big River sawmill’s rights to that forest. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, that that is something that we should put a stop to. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would take a look at the 
forestry policy that you have in your department and go back to 
some of the cutting habits that we had in years past. 
 
I now see that in Big River last winter that there was an 
operator, one Bob Dunn in Big River, who started logging with 
horses this winter. Bob Dunn — and they’re constituents of 
yours — Bobbie Dunn and Ernie Montgrand, who used to be a 
constituent of mine, and they were harvesting wood this year 
with horses. They went back to the horses. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that we have to have a new forest 
policy in this province, one that gets us away from the clear 
cutting. Because, you know, we’re spending millions of dollars 
on reforestation, yet we’re allowing the large companies to go 
in and clear cut and to literally — literally destroy trees that are 
already immature and 20 years old. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to continue my remarks regarding 
the handling of the forests, and I would ask the hon. Minister of 
Parks and Renewable Resources to take a serious look at the 
types of operations that your constituent, Bob Dunn, carried out 
last winter with harvesting back with the horses and Ernie 
Montgrand, and I think that this is something that we have to 
do. 
 
(2145) 
 

When you travel around or you fly over our forests now and 
you take a look at the clear cutting, it’s something that we have 
to put a stop to, and it’s something that we have to change 
around and we have to go back to the selective cutting. And I’m 
not saying that we have to go completely back to horses. But I 
think that there is a new method of harvesting that should take 
place within the department and within Saskatchewan forests. 
And that could be done in strips. You could take strips and you 
could take the logs out, the mature timber out of these strips, 
and not destroy the 20-year-old spruce tree or jackpine or poplar 
that’s already growing and in another 15 to 20 years would 
mature. But what we do — we take in large equipment and we 
clear out, or we knock it down with that equipment. 
 
And I think that there has to be a new forest policy in this 
province and I can assure you — I can assure you that our new 
forest policy won’t be to give $248 billion to an American firm 
to come in and clear cut our forests and take our assets. That’s 
not going to be our policy in the forest industry. I’ll tell you, we 
won’t be paying any large corporation to take our assets. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member . . . Are you through 
with your question? Yes, he is. Okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, here’s an area where . . . I’m 
sorry, did you wish to continue? 
 
Mr. Thompson: What I was trying to impress upon you, Mr. 
Minister, is that we need a new forest policy in Saskatchewan. 
We just cannot continue - we cannot continue to go out and 
have large equipment clear cutting our forest. There has to be 
some planning, and that can be done. That can be done. We can 
still use modern equipment, but we don’t have to let them clear 
cut a large area. It can be done in strips, and they can take the 
logs out from each side, and the only place that you have to 
reforest is that strip of land in the middle of that lot, or wood 
lot, or whatever you want to refer to it as. And then the rest of 
the bush remains as it is. It worked out perfect in Big River with 
Bob Dunn and his horses. 
 
Because that’s how we used to operate in this province. We 
used small machinery. We used horses. We used timber cruisers 
who went in and they cruised the timber, and we had selective 
cutting. And I think, Mr. Minister, that we have to go back to 
the days where we selective cut, and we cannot destroy the 
forest by this massive waste that we have with clear cutting. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you would like to comment on that, I’ll take my 
seat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, we’re into 
an area now of discussion where actually we can have some 
common ground. When you mention, hon. member, taking a 
look at new forest policy for Saskatchewan, I wholeheartedly 
agree with you. 
 
In fact, later this year, hopefully in summer, we’ll be putting out 
a white paper as a precursor to a new forest  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

 

1351 
 
 

Act which I’d like to see introduced to the legislature as early as 
the fall, but more realistically next spring, which would more 
accurately reflect modern techniques of forest management, 
modern silviculture, and an emphasis on reforestation, and of 
course, concomitant with that, an emphasis on research. 
 
Now you mention clear cutting as opposed to selective cutting. 
The current policy is no more than 40 acres can be clear cut at 
any one time. So we’re not talking massive clear cutting. 
 
And we talk selective cutting. And I’m sure the hon. member is 
aware of this. We have to be careful in that in our Saskatchewan 
forest we do have some species that do not grow in the shade, 
so they will be taken out. And we really don’t have much 
choice. 
 
But in terms of clear cuts of massive areas of land, I think we 
have some room here for agreement. 
 
And may I just mention on the subject of research, this is very 
significant and important to our Saskatchewan forests because 
this year is the first year we’re putting seedlings in the ground. 
We’re putting in seedlings which we hope will grow 40-year 
forests, a softwood forest as opposed to the current 70 to 90 
years to full harvest maturity. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I just want to make a short comment, Mr. 
Minister, and I would ask that you consider the proposals that I 
have put forward, ask your officials to consider that, because I 
do think it’s important. You can talk about a 40-acre wood lot, 
but that’s still clear cutting. What I’m trying to say is that we’ve 
got to get away from clear cutting and get back to the selective 
cutting, and if we have to promote individuals like Bob Dunn 
who has got the horse operation . . . Because I think that the big 
operations that go in and just massively destroy our forests in 
this clear cutting operation, I think is something that we don’t 
need, and if we take a look at a new policy, I think 
Saskatchewan can get its forest back to where it was 30 years 
ago. 
 
When we were harvesting in them days, Mr. Minister, that same 
area would be harvested every 20 years because it was done 
selectively, and we weren’t destroying trees that would be read 
in 10, 15 to 20 years. And I just ask that you do that, Mr. 
Minister. And my colleagues have a few questions to ask, Mr. 
Minister, and if you want to agree to stop the clock . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Fine, then. If you want to respond to my 
remarks and then let somebody else go on here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — This is an area in which I am 
particularly interested. I must mention that at the outset. I can 
agree with the hon. member about some type of selective 
cutting as long as we’re not talking high grading. And 
eventually we do have to scarify and reforest those areas where 
we take the wood out. And our softwood won’t grow in shade, 
so we have to be very careful of how that is done. But I think 
there is some possibility here for common ground on what you 
are suggesting, and my  

officials were just making some notes and passing comments to 
me, and we’re not really very far apart in philosophy on this. I 
tell you what. We’re very anxious to see our forest regenerated 
and, indeed, so are the companies. Whether it be a Crown 
corporation or private company, they don’t make any money if 
they don’t have trees to harvest, so they have to have an interest 
in silviculture and reforestation. And so do we and we have a 
commitment to both of those. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I thank you very much, Mr. 
Minister, and I fully agree — and I’ve said it before — that we 
have to have a new policy. and I think that when you take a 
look at that, you can take a look at strip cutting and only let the 
machines operate in that certain strip, and that is the only strip 
that you have to regenerate or reforest. And if one really takes a 
look at that and then you think it through, it makes a lot of 
common sense rather than destroying all the forest around you 
— and bring them out into a common skidway. And that’s the 
only reforestation that you have to do, and we have less 
reforestation and more forest to work with. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will have your officials look at that policy 
and you will take a look at the operation that was done in the 
Big River area? There may be other areas in the province where 
horses have been used in the last year; I’m not too sure. I know 
they’re starting to use them more in British Columbia now. 
They see that this is important. And I think it’s also important in 
Saskatchewan — and use some smaller equipment. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I see it’s getting close to 10 
o’clock, and a number of my colleagues have more questions, 
and I suggest that we report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:57 p.m. 
 


