


















































March 26, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 26, 1986 
 
 

221 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The message from His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1987, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province ending March 31, 1986, and recommends the 
same to the Legislative Assembly. (Signed) F.W. 
Johnson 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I moved, seconded by the 
member from Estevan: 

 
That His Honour’s message, the estimates and 
supplementary estimates, be referred to the committee of 
finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I rise this evening, Mr. Speaker, to present 
the fifth budget of this Progressive Conservative administration. 
 
This government is proud of accomplishments during the last 
four years, and later this evening I will be outlining several new, 
exciting initiatives which will create jobs by stimulating 
economic opportunity and initiatives which will increase security 
by strengthening our traditional institutions. This dual emphasis 
on protecting social well-being and encouraging economic 
opportunity and job creation has provided a consistent focus for 
our government. And this budget maintains that focus. 
 
In April of 1982, the Progressive Conservative Party, under the 
leadership of Grant Devine, was swept into office to correct a 
host of serious problems which were facing the province. 
 
Inflation and interest rates were at record levels. High interest 
rates were placing a heavy burden on farmers and small business, 
and people were losing their homes. In the previous 
administration, programs were ineffective. 
 
Young farmers were unable to own the land they worked, and 
family farms could not be passed on from one generation to the 
next. The health of many of our rural communities was 
threatened. 
 
Business was unwilling to invest in the province because 

of government red tape and intervention, and there was an 
attitude that business could not be trusted. Jobs were being lost 
to other provinces. 
 
The family of Crown corporations was wildly out of control. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars had been invested in the Crowns 
with losses or minimal returns. Moneys were used to buy up 
existing companies that did not create new industries or new jobs. 
For example, not one new potash mine was built by the previous 
administration, and not one pulp or paper plant was built by the 
previous administration. 
 
SGI’s auto fund was virtually bankrupt. The previous 
government had injected almost $50 million into the auto fund in 
the three years prior to 1982. Six cents out of every gallon of 
gasoline sold in the province subsidized the fund. Insurance rate 
increases in both 1980 and 1981 were greater than 20 per cent. 
 
SaskTel rates were increasing by 10 per cent in some years, and 
people couldn’t even buy their own phones. Individual line 
service for residents of rural Saskatchewan was rejected out of 
hand as impossible. 
 
Hospitals and universities were in disrepair. University buildings 
in Regina and Saskatoon were collapsing. Hospitals were on a 
125-year replacement cycle. Saskatchewan was spending the 
least per student on elementary and secondary education of the 
four western provinces. 
 
There was widespread waste in government and the financial 
position of the province was seriously misrepresented. When the 
books were opened we discovered that the bottom line had been 
overstated by more than $250 million. But more importantly, the 
Heritage Fund was used for unproductive investments, and no 
moneys had been set aside for tougher times. And today, we are 
still paying for that lack of foresight. 
 
How did we address these serious problems, problems which 
threatened to destroy the very fabric of our society, problems 
caused in large measures by a government that had lost touch 
with the values of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
We introduced mortgage interest reduction plan to protect 
ordinary people from losing their homes. We removed the 
provincial sales tax on children’s clothing and power bills to ease 
the pressures of inflation on families. We removed the provincial 
sales tax on gasoline the day we were sworn in — a saving to the 
average Saskatchewan family of $1,000 over the last four years 
— the single largest tax reduction in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
We replaced the land bank with the Saskatchewan farm purchase 
program to allow young farmers to purchase and own the land 
they work, and almost 5,000 farmers have participated in this 
program. We announced that we were open for business to 
encourage business to invest and create jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier and other members of this government have 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

222 
 
 

worked diligently to encourage investment and job creation in the 
province. We created the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business to deal with the special needs of small business, and we 
abolished more than 1,300 outdated or frustrating laws and 
regulations. 
 
We restructured the Crown corporations and forced them to 
adopt more business-like management. Well-respected business 
leaders were appointed chairmen of the boards of directors, and 
the results have paid off. SGI had 3 per cent rate increase in 1983, 
no increase in 1984, and a rate reduction in 1985. The 6 cent a 
gallon surcharge imposed by the previous administration has 
been removed. SGI has been able to provide rebates to good 
drivers. 
 
SaskTel rate increases have averaged less than 3 per cent since 
1982. There were no rate increases in 1984 and in 1985, and there 
will be no rate increase in 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Premier has announced that individual 
line service will soon be a reality to all the residents of rural 
Saskatchewan, and because of good management this will not 
require a general rate increase. 
 
We dealt with the serious underfunding problems in health and 
education. We will have increased health spending by almost 
$500 million or 70 per cent since we assumed office. And we 
have increased elementary and secondary school budgets by 
$156 million or almost 52 per cent. Over the last four years, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan had the highest rate of increase in 
funding for post-secondary education in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Last year our Partnership for Progress 
announced five-year funding commitments of an additional $400 
million for education and an additional $300 million for health. 
 
We improved management in government. Management pay 
increases are now based on performance. And with the help of 
all government employees we have achieved savings of more 
than $300 million through more efficient management. And we 
have reduced the civil service by over 1,000 positions. 
 
Because of good management, employment rose by 3 per cent in 
1985. In the past year — February to February — 17,000 new 
jobs were created, of which the vast majority were full-time. 
Saskatchewan had the lowest annual average unemployment rate 
of any province in Canada in 1982, again in 1983, again in 1984, 
and the second lowest in 1985. Mr. Speaker, no province has 
done better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Inflation averaged 3.6 during 1985, the 
lowest rate in many years. And the province enjoyed a real 
growth rate of 4.3 per cent in 1985. This impressive performance, 
Mr. Speaker, was achieved in spite of low commodity prices, 
drought, flooding, grasshoppers, and early snow. But there was a 
cost.

The budget for 1985 anticipated a deficit of $291 million. 
Depressed international prices for potash and lower than 
anticipated tax receipts will result in reduced revenues. However, 
these decreases will be partially offset by better than anticipated 
oil revenues. 
 
Expenditures, on the other hand, will increase because of 
additional spending required to assist farmers. 
 
In order to keep the deficit as low as possible, our government 
sharply curtailed discretionary expenditures during the last 
quarter of 1985. Controls were implemented to prevent the 
traditional pattern of increased spending at year end, and through 
such measures the government was able to save an additional $25 
million. 
 
The combination of revenue decreases and our additional 
assistance to farmers will result in a 1985 deficit of 595 million. 
 
The alternative to a deficit budget was to severely reduce 
essential services to the public and refuse to provide emergency 
aid for farmers. This alternative was clearly not acceptable and 
this alternative would have resulted in severe hardship for those 
residents of our province least able to protect themselves. Mr. 
Speaker, we were not prepared to fight the deficit on the back of 
seniors, farmers, and the small-business men of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always had a fluctuating 
economy. The rise and fall of resource prices and the rise and fall 
of prices for our agricultural commodities lead to similar 
increases and decreases in government revenues. Saskatchewan 
has always had these ups and downs. 
 
But a responsible government puts money aside during the good 
times so that there are funds available in the tougher times. But 
rather than put money aside, the previous government chose to 
invest in the family of Crown corporations. If the previous 
government had of put that money in the bank, the investment 
today would be worth about $2,300 million. That’s more than the 
accumulated deficit. 
 
If the previous administration had simply taken out guaranteed 
income certificates, say, from the Sherwood Credit Union or the 
Saskatoon Credit Union, 1981, five-year GIC, the moneys today 
would be worth over $2,500 million —again much more than the 
accumulated deficit and would have left the province with a 
substantial surplus. 
 
If they had even put the moneys in investments similar to those 
that the ordinary Canadians could put into the Toronto Stock 
Exchange and got the same rate of return, the average on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange, they would have funds today of over 
$2,650 billion, more than enough money, Mr. Speaker, so the 
province would not have a deficit today — and in fact the 
province would have had a substantial surplus. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that even those of the opposition who 
believe in full government ownership of our resources will have 
to admit that money should have 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

223 
 
 

been set aside for at least two or three difficult years. But that 
was not what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
In 1982, we said there is so much more we can be. Today 
Saskatchewan is a world leader in our most important industry, 
agriculture. We are a world renowned producer of hard red spring 
wheat and this province is generally recognized as a pioneer in 
the research and development of canola as a marketable crop. 
Saskatchewan was instrumental in obtaining the registration of 
HY320, a new variety of high-yield wheat that has potential to 
increase sales abroad. The province’s purebred cattle are on a par 
with anything the world has to offer and are now being sold in 
the world markets. Aided by a new processing plant in La Ronge, 
Saskatchewan has led all provinces in wild rice production over 
the last few years. 
 
The province has taken a lead in developing a national 
agricultural strategy. Through the efforts of the Premier, 
agriculture has been placed on the national political agenda for 
the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Saskatchewan is a leader, both nationally and 
internationally, in the development and application of advanced 
technology. Sales are now $400 million annually compared to 
only $80 million in 1982, and Saskatchewan expertise is helping 
install fibre optics in other provinces, the United States, and the 
Caribbean. 
 
Saskatchewan engineers are now actively promoting rural 
electrification in India and Saskatchewan farmers are advising 
the Chinese on dry-land farming operations. Saskatchewan is 
now known around the world as a source of technical expertise. 
Saskatchewan companies are selling data switching technology 
to the U. S. space program and to the United States senate itself; 
satellite communication technology to Brazil; computer health 
care systems to the United States and to the Middle East; justice 
information systems to the Los Angeles police department; 
workers’ compensation systems to North Dakota; and telephone 
equipment to China. 
 
Superior farm implements have been developed in Saskatchewan 
and are now being manufactured here. The are sold to the United 
States, Australia, France, Saudi Arabia, Russia, and many other 
countries. The trade offices which we have established around 
the world are assisting Saskatchewan companies to expand into 
new markets. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that this budget contains funding for a 
new trade office in Minneapolis, and we are studying the 
feasibility of a Saskatchewan trade office in the city of New 
York. 
 
Saskatchewan people have risen to positions of prominence in all 
fields of endeavour, including business, entertainment, the arts, 
and sports. And this government has recognized their 
accomplishments through the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
Their success is a confirmation to everyone in Saskatchewan, that 
just as individuals have had great success, so can our 

province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But Saskatchewan must sell its story, its 
products, and its people to the world. This government and the 
people of the province have taken the first steps to put 
Saskatchewan on the world stage. We must look beyond our 
borders because it means opportunities and jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Economic growth is responsible for our quality of life. The jobs 
and prosperity generated from economic activity support the 
social institutions necessary for a progressive and a caring 
society. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the world 
economy was healthy, so governments devoted their energies to 
the distribution of unprecedented levels of income. But times 
have changed. The economic downturn in the early 1980s meant 
that the growth in government revenues has declined. This 
fundamental change in the economic environment has increased 
the need for governments to have solid plans for economic 
development and job creation if they are to preserve the social 
institutions and programs which provide for security for families 
and for individuals. 
 
In developing such a plan for Saskatchewan, we had to be 
realistic. The plan had to be able to deal with the peaks and 
valleys of world and national economies. The plan had to prepare 
Saskatchewan to stand on its own, ready to face the world. 
 
And the plan that we have employed so successfully has three 
components. Firstly, the creation of a positive climate for 
economic development. Secondly, those sectors of the economy 
where we have natural strengths must be developed. And thirdly, 
the encouragement of public participation. It’s a common-sense 
plan, a plan that we have followed consistently and a plan that 
provided the framework for the economic development 
initiatives that I will announce later this evening, and I would like 
to review the progress we have made in implementing this plan. 
 
Creating a positive climate for economic development meant that 
the image of Saskatchewan had to be changed. We gave a clear 
message that the government was again willing to work with 
business after many years of anti-business rhetoric. The 
open-for-business theme was a visible demonstration of our 
commitment to encourage Saskatchewan companies to expand 
into the national and international market-place, to provide 
services to business to help them to succeed, to maintain the 
competitiveness of our agricultural energy in small-business 
sectors, and to improve the investment climate. 
 
Business is like everyone else, it doesn’t go where it’s not 
wanted, and open for business is clearly working. In a difficult 
time for agriculture, a total of 17,000 new jobs were created last 
year, proof of the increasing diversification of our province. 
 
This government has played a major role in developing new 
foreign markets by providing financial assistance, 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

224 
 
 

market research, and export counselling to Saskatchewan 
companies. Since 1982 the Aid To Trade program has resulted in 
the creation of almost 400 new jobs in the province, and several 
trade offices have been established including those in Hong Kong 
and Vienna. And our pavilion at Expo ’86 will show-case 
Saskatchewan to the entire world. Mr. Speaker, this government 
is not afraid to look out towards the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Scientific and technical programs have been 
put in place to foster co-operation between industry, the 
universities, and government. The Advanced Technology 
Training Centre in Saskatoon was created to respond to the need 
for skilled manpower in the high technology sector. Between 
1982 and 1985 the number of advanced technology firms has 
increased from 40 firms to almost 140 firms, employing nearly 
2,900 people. 
 
Interest rates on loans to small business were reduced to nine and 
five-eighths per cent to make the climate for small business more 
secure. Over 5,200 businesses are participating in this program, 
introduced only last May. The program has helped maintain 
nearly 23,000 existing jobs. 
 
Changes to the oil royalty tax structure resurrected a dying 
industry and quickly created over 4,900 person-years of 
employment. Various initiatives to foster gas drilling, including 
a natural gas self-sufficiency program, spurred record levels of 
activity. A tax holiday was provided to Saskatchewan small 
business engaged in manufacturing and processing. In addition, 
a sales tax on research and development prototypes was 
eliminated. 
 
The investment climate had to be changed as well to encourage 
Saskatchewan savings to remain in the province and to create 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. Opportunities to invest in Crown 
corporations, the venture capital program, and livestock 
investment tax credit provide major opportunities for the people 
of Saskatchewan to invest in their own province. And these 
programs are providing a strong signal that the investment 
climate has changed in Saskatchewan. 
 
We recognized as well that it is important to build on our natural 
strengths. Agriculture has been and will continue to be the 
mainstay of the provincial economy. In order to build on our 
strength in agriculture, we’ve provided incentives to encourage 
hog production. If the hog producers of the province are prepared 
to take up the challenge before them, the expansion of 
Intercontinental Packers and Gainers has the potential to create 
up to 4,000 additional jobs. A five-year, $200 million agricultural 
development fund was introduced last year to finance major 
programs in research and productivity improvement, a major 
commitment to the future of agriculture in this province. 
 
Government loan guarantees have meant that the construction of 
the NewGrade upgrader will proceed as planned, and this project 
will result in 2,800 construction jobs and will allow 
Saskatchewan oil to be refined here in Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would just caution the members 
in the galleries that they are not allowed to participate in what’s 
happening here. It’s only elected members that are allowed to 
participate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We remain, Mr. Speaker, fully committed to 
the Lloydminster upgrader. Our government believes that this 
project is vital to the future of Saskatchewan. We cannot be 
short-sighted. We will continue to work vigorously to ensure that 
that project proceeds. 
 
And we are building on the other resource strengths of 
Saskatchewan. The Rafferty and Alameda dams and the Shand 
power project will provide electric power, a recreational lake, 
and water for irrigation. These projects will create 7,000 
person-years of construction employment and 280 permanent 
jobs. 
 
International co-operation has resulted in a significant financial 
contribution to this project by the people of the United States. 
This government is also actively pursuing major developments 
in further processing of our natural gas resources. 
 
And yesterday this government announced an exciting new 
initiative in further processing of our forestry resources in 
Saskatchewan. The sale of money-losing P.A. Pulp Company 
and the commitment to a new paper mill will result in 215 
permanent jobs in northern Saskatchewan, 500 construction jobs, 
and new opportunities for Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In order to prepare our young people for the 
opportunities that economic development will create, we 
instituted a major expansion of our technical training service. The 
number of training spaces available to our young people has been 
increased by more than 45 per cent since 1982. In addition, 
funding for approximately 5,500 new placements was added to 
our community college system. 
 
Long-term funding commitments were made to our elementary 
and secondary system and to our universities. Four hundred 
additional million dollars will be spent from 1985 to 1990 to 
ensure that our young people are prepared for the 1990s. 
 
Traditionally, the investment benefits of Saskatchewan savings 
have not remained in the province; instead they’ve been siphoned 
off to New York and Toronto by the banks and trust companies. 
Even our own Saskatchewan pension plans were not investing in 
the province. A major challenge for our government was to 
devise ways and new vehicles to encourage the investment in 
Saskatchewan savings here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The programs that were developed have been greeted with 
enthusiasm. For example, the venture capital program was 
created to allow individuals to invest in the 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

225 
 
 

province’s manufacturing, processing, tourism, and research and 
development industries. And to date, more than 50 firms have 
taken advantage of this program. And this has resulted in $32 
million of additional investment by Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1930) 
 
The livestock investment tax credit was developed to provide 
both farm and non-farm investors with the opportunity to invest 
in finishing livestock. And to date, almost 5,000 individuals have 
made use of this program. 
 
The previous administration prevented the people of 
Saskatchewan from investing in their own Crown corporations. 
And I am pleased that nearly 30,000 Saskatchewan people have 
participated in the economic development of this province 
through the purchase of Sask Power and Saskoil securities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Together these opportunities have raised 
$275 million for Saskatchewan Crown corporations. And by the 
end of June of 1986 our Crown corporations will have made 
almost $25 million in interest payments to Saskatchewan people. 
That’s money, Mr. Speaker, going to Main Street, Saskatchewan 
— not Bay Street, Toronto, and not Wall Street, New York. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government welcomes the increasing 
participation of women in the business community in 
Saskatchewan. In 1985, Saskatchewan held two 
women-in-business conferences which were attended by over 
500 women. Our government is confident that this province will 
soon see its first women’s venture capital corporation, and this 
government is looking to women for business leadership in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The community economic development program provides 
assistance to communities to encourage new economic 
development opportunities. It is an example of yet another kind 
of participation that we have encouraged: local people 
participating in planning their own economic futures. And to date 
some 53 communities have participated in this program. 
 
In the past, native peoples have not been given the opportunity to 
fully participate in the province’s economic development. 
Opportunities are now provided through the Indian economic 
development fund, and over 80 initiatives are either ongoing or 
on the drawing-boards. And I am pleased that this budget 
increases that fund by an additional $1 million for 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government has recently settled land 
claims with the Fond-du-Lac Indian Band and approved a 
settlement with the Lucky Man Band. These settlements will 
provide the opportunity for these two bands to achieve economic 
self-sufficiency. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan embarked on a new direction for 
economic policy in 1982, a policy that is clearly delivering 
results. Between 1982 and 1985, the number of small businesses 
in Saskatchewan increased by nearly 4,000 businesses. As I said, 
nearly a total of 17,000 new jobs created last year, and since 1981 
the labour force has increased from 446,000 to nearly 500,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Later this evening I will be outlining several 
new initiatives which are consistent with our plan to create 
economic opportunities and jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s nice to be able to drink the Regina water, thanks to the 
leadership of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government is committed to 
encouraging opportunity and protecting people. I have just 
outlined the economic development plan that we have been 
following since we took office — a plan that is working in spite 
of difficult economic conditions, a plan that is creating 
opportunities and jobs for the people of this province. 
 
This government also recognizes that it must provide our citizens 
with protection against sickness, natural disasters, 
unemployment, and hardship, and that it must protect and 
enhance our quality of life. And I would like to describe some of 
those security initiatives. 
 
This government repeatedly demonstrated its resolve to protect 
the family farm. The Farm Land Security Act provides relief for 
farmers facing foreclosure actions. The 1985 crop drought 
assistance program made $68 million in drought assistance 
available to 13,000 farmers, and this is in addition to the $374 
million already provided under the regular crop insurance 
program. 
 
The livestock drought assistance gave 16,000 farmers $29 
million in 1984, and $30 million to 13,000 in 1985. The 
production loan program has provided more than $920 million at 
6 per cent interest to more than 46,000 Saskatchewan farmers, 
and this is a first in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The oil royalty refund program will return 
over $42 million to Saskatchewan farmers in 1986. This 
government has not and will not turn its back on the family farm, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Funding for the Department of Agriculture 
will more than double in 1986 — an increase of over $118 
million, the largest increase in expenditures on agriculture in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

226 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — And this government has been strong in its 
resolve to protect and enhance the quality of rural life in rural 
Saskatchewan. We believe that one of the best ways to encourage 
people to remain in rural Saskatchewan is to provide them with 
the same amenities that urban residents enjoy. 
 
Sask Power’s natural gas distribution and rural underground 
distribution programs, and SaskTel’s rural individual line service 
are examples of this government’s commitment. 
 
But we’ve also recognized the need to provide rural residents 
with a broader choice of television service, and regulations were 
changed to allow municipalities to own and operate local cable 
TV and rebroadcasting systems. White City and Regina Beach 
have already been licensed under this initiative, and over 40 other 
Saskatchewan communities have expressed serious interest. And 
other provinces are now following Saskatchewan’s lead. 
 
In addition to enhancing the quality of rural life, these initiatives 
will create more than 1,000 jobs in 1986. They’ve also resulted 
in a new manufacturing plant for Phillips Cable in Moose Jaw; 
an expansion of Canada Wire and Cable in Weyburn; and an 
increase in the number of employees at Northern Telecom in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes that no institution, 
however, is more important than the family. And we are 
committed to protecting our families from economic hardship. 
Our government is proud to have put in place a program which 
protects single parent families. Through an automated system to 
enforce the payment of maintenance orders, we’re ensuring that 
single parents will collect the maintenance that is their rightful 
due. 
 
And the government has taken initiatives to prevent family 
violence, including the prosecution of wife batterers. 
 
This government also recognizes that it must improve the quality, 
availability, and affordability of child care in the province. And 
this budget provides more than $13 million for day care in the 
province, an increase of over 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And this 
budget includes, for the first time in Saskatchewan, provisions 
for direct operating grants to day care centres. 
 
The hard work and determination of our senior citizens built this 
province, and this government will not see them in need. In our 
budget two years ago, we increased the monthly senior citizen 
supplement by $25 for singles and $30 for couples. And this year 
the senior citizens’ heritage program will put almost $40 million 
into the hands of our senior citizens, helping them to lead 
independent lives. 
 
We are continuing to provide funding for the five-year $25 
million senior citizens’ home repair program. And I am pleased 
to announce that this budget will increase the seniors’ non-profit 
housing program by some $4.5 million. 
 
Our government ended the moratorium on nursing home 
construction imposed by the previous government. We have also 
contributed towards the construction of over 

2,000 senior citizens’ housing units during the past four years. 
For 1986 an additional 540 senior citizen housing units will be 
supported by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Our government’s determination to protect 
families and individuals from economic hardship has been 
demonstrated again and again. We protected families from the 
high cost of living. We protected 44,000 Saskatchewan families 
from high mortgage interest rates. We eliminated the provincial 
sales tax on gasoline, saving the average Saskatchewan family 
more than $1,000 over the past four years. We eliminated the 
sales tax on children’s clothing and footwear. 
 
We undertook those initiatives because we recognize that the 
costs of raising families are increasing. And this government also 
recognizes that middle-income families are coming under 
increasing economic pressure. And I’m pleased that our 
government has decided to expand on these initiatives to help 
families. 
 
Effective midnight tonight, all clothing, footwear and yard goods 
valued at less than $300 will be exempted from the sales tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And this measure will provide an additional 
$23 million in tax savings to Saskatchewan residents in 1986 
alone. We’re proud, Mr. Speaker, that virtually all essential 
goods are now sales tax free in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Less than half of all Canadians are covered 
by a private pension plan. Today many Saskatchewan people do 
not have the opportunity to save for a secure and worry-free 
retirement. Low- and middle-income earners who are 
self-employed, or who work for small businesses are particularly 
under-represented in private pension plans. 
 
Part-time workers and home-makers also have less opportunity 
to put money aside for their retirement than other members of 
society. And this government is committed to ending these 
inequities in Saskatchewan. We are making a major commitment 
to improving the opportunity for Saskatchewan people to save 
for their retirement. 
 
As announced in the throne speech, this government will be 
introducing the Saskatchewan pension plan. This voluntary plan, 
which is not designed to compete with private pension plans, will 
help small business to establish pension plans for their part-time 
and full-time employees; to assist self-employed people to 
establish savings plans for their retirement. 
 
Our government has demonstrated its commitment to the 
Saskatchewan family. However, Saskatchewan home-makers 
who have chosen to raise families, or who interrupt their work to 
have children, intending to return to the workplace, have very 
few opportunities to save for 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

227 
 
 

their retirement. And this government is committed to removing 
this unfairness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government is committed to protecting 
home-makers who are the heart and soul of our families, and this 
government will be including home-makers in the Saskatchewan 
pension plan. We are moving forward to provide a safe and 
secure future for Saskatchewan home-makers and we will be 
encouraging the federal government and other provinces to 
follow our lead and develop a national home-makers’ pension 
plan based on the Saskatchewan model. Five million dollars has 
been budgeted for 1986 to start the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this administration is proud of 
its achievements in providing quality health care to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have been committed to and are committed to 
protecting and enhancing the health care system. We forecast an 
average health expenditure in 1986 of $1,200 for every man, 
woman, and child in this province. In total, the health care budget 
of $1.2 billion amounts to nearly one-third of the total provincial 
budget. 
 
In 1976 the previous government placed a moratorium on the 
construction of nursing home beds. We launched a five-year $25 
million program to build 1,000 new nursing home beds and to 
replace another 600 that had fallen into disrepair. I’m proud to 
say tonight that we are extending this program to an additional 
sixth year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
In 1985, Partnership for Progress announced a five-year 
commitment of $300 million towards new health care facilities. 
This year’s expenditure for health care facility construction will 
exceed $75 million, the largest amount in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, that is more than double the 
best year by any other government in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Provision has been made for almost $70 
million to be spent on hospitals, including those in Saskatoon and 
Regina, and the new cancer clinic in Saskatoon. Special care 
facilities will be allocated over $5 million. The Minister of 
Health and this government have expressed their concern about 
the length of waiting list for elective surgery. This problem is 
most severe in Saskatoon in large part because of the demand for 
Saskatoon services by other Saskatchewan residents. In order to 
address this problem, we will be establishing a second day 
surgery unit at Saskatoon City Hospital, expanding in-patient 
surgical capacity at St. Paul’s and University Hospitals in the city 
of Saskatoon. 

We recognize that quality health care is more than just buildings 
and beds. In 1976, the former government reduced hospital 
staffing by over 300 positions. This administration has added 
over 700 positions in the last four years. The Minister of Health 
has recently announced the creation of a five-year $100 million 
patient care fund. The fund will provide new equipment, 
increased patient care, and reduce waiting lists. Nearly 700 new 
health care positions will be provided to hospitals and nursing 
homes in 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The first stage of that program, 
approximately 300 of these new positions will be nursing 
positions. This government has increased the number of health 
care positions every year since 1982, Mr. Speaker. In total, 
expenditures for the health care system will increase by $126 
million during 1986, the largest single-year increase in health 
care expenditures in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m not sure I need to remind hon. members 
that Regina and Moose Jaw waited 11 years for good water. Mr. 
Speaker, this problem was solved by this government in three 
years, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that the hon. members enjoy it 
because it may be their last time in Regina. 
 
This government has recognized the importance of protecting our 
primary and secondary education systems, and for this reason we 
have increased funding by almost 52 per cent or $156 million 
since 1982. For 1986, funding for elementary and secondary 
education will have increased by approximately $41 million or 
10.2 per cent, and this includes a 5 per cent increase to the 
operating grant which will maintain the province’s share of 
education costs. 
 
In addition, 45 new capital projects will be funded, including five 
new community schools — public schools for Moose Jaw, Prince 
Albert, and Saskatoon, and new public and separate schools for 
Regina. Total 1986 expenditures from the five-year education 
development fund will be $60 million, an increase of $25 million. 
These funds will be available to school divisions for such 
initiatives as computer equipment, libraries, and other program 
improvement. 
 
In last year’s budget, Partnership for Progress also established a 
five-year $125 million renewal and development fund to provide 
the universities with a stable and predictable base level of capital 
funding. This has now made Saskatchewan universities the envy 
of others throughout Canada. The fund is also used to enhance 
research capabilities and repair or replace collapsing buildings. 
The 1986 portion of this fund will be $18 million, another 
example of this government keeping its promises. And I am 
pleased to announce tonight that the operating grants to the 
universities will increase by 3.2 per cent to almost 144 millions 
of dollars. 
 
The Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower will be 
announcing the details of changes to our student 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

228 
 
 

assistance program, changes which will remove unfair 
restrictions, increase loan limits, and reduce the interest rate on 
student loans to 6 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In addition to providing opportunities for our 
young people to participate in economic growth, the linking of 
skills training to the market-place creates a positive climate for 
business by providing a highly skilled and motivated work-force. 
 
In 1982 over 50 per cent of the applicants to the technical 
institutes were turned away because there were not enough 
training spaces. We embarked on a four-year program at a cost 
of $52 million to rectify this situation. This year’s budget also 
provides $9 million for the Northern Institute of Technology in 
Prince Albert to provide over 700 training spaces for our young 
people. 
 
This government is optimistic about the future of our province 
and our optimism is exemplified by our commitment to the 
educational systems of this province; education to equip our 
young people to participate in our economic prosperity. 
 
This government also recognizes that municipalities depend to a 
large extent on the provincial government for financial support. 
It would have been easy for the government to pass on the 
economic burdens to the municipalities as previous governments 
and other provinces have done. We have chosen not to follow 
that course. In 1986 we will be providing more than $70 million 
to urban municipalities in unconditional operating grants, and 
over $17 million in unconditional capital grants. Rural 
municipalities will receive more than $48 million in operating 
and capital grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economic development plan is encouraging 
economic opportunity in order to create permanent and 
productive jobs. In a few moments I will be describing some 
exciting new initiatives, initiatives which will encourage further 
economic opportunity and job creation. Initiatives which are part 
of our plan to create the climate, build on our strengths, and 
encourage public participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed, as I’ve said, to 
protecting the family farm, and more than 46,000 grain farmers 
have benefited from the production loan program. I suggest that 
if the previous government had given interest rate protection to 
farmers when interest rates were greater than 20 per cent, most 
farmers would not be in difficulty today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And only this government is determined to 
create opportunities that will ensure the future prosperity of our 
agricultural industry. The oil royalty refund program will return 
over $42 million to Saskatchewan farmers this year. The 
five-year agricultural development fund is supporting initiatives 
in irrigation, research and development, and marketing research, 
and this government will provide $25 million to the agricultural 
development fund this year. 

The Premier recently announced that we will be building the long 
needed college of agriculture building in Saskatoon at a cost of 
$78 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The new building will ensure that the college 
maintains its place as a world leader in agricultural research and 
education and will provide our agricultural industry with the new 
opportunities to retain its competitive edge in the international 
market-place. 
 
The livestock investment tax credit program announced in 1984 
is an innovative way to invest Saskatchewan savings in 
Saskatchewan, and it will be extended an additional three years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hog production must be increased by 200,000 per year in each 
of the next five years in order to realize the full potential of the 
opportunities in this industry. And this government has 
developed a comprehensive program to provide working capital, 
encourage construction of new or expanded facilities, and to 
attract equity investment. First, the Premier announced the cash 
advance program to provide working capital. Secondly, the 
eligibility criteria for the agricultural credit corporation loans 
were expanded and the interest rate fixed at 8 per cent. 
 
Thirdly, tonight this government is announcing a livestock 
facilities tax credit equal to 15 per cent of the capital cost of 
eligible livestock facilities. The tax credit will apply to the 
construction of all new facilities or the major expansion of 
existing facilities begun after January 1, 1986, where the 
principal use is raising livestock. Mr. Speaker, the rest is up to 
the hog producers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We all know that agriculture is facing difficult times, and we 
have acted forcefully to protect the family farm. We recognized, 
however, that we had to act today to lay the foundations for 
prosperity tomorrow. And our initiatives to encourage economic 
opportunity by building on our strength in agriculture will 
achieve that goal. 
 
In recent years the small-business sector has been responsible for 
the creation of the majority of new jobs in Saskatchewan. Small 
business must be given the opportunity to further expand and to 
create more new jobs. In order to improve the climate for the 
formation of new small businesses, this government will 
introduce a two-year corporate tax holiday for new small 
businesses incorporated after midnight tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The holiday applies to most new small 
businesses, but there are some minor exceptions, for example, 
professional corporations. This will improve the financial 
stability and cash-flow positions of new business ventures. It’s a 
major signal, Mr. Speaker, that we are counting on small business 
to create the opportunities and to create the jobs. When we 
created a favourable tax climate in the oil industry, it flourished. 
And this government is confident that the same thing will happen 
in the small-business sector. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

229 
 
 

A stable interest rate climate is essential to encouraging the 
expansion of existing small businesses. I am pleased to announce 
that effective midnight tonight, we’ll be making a major 
improvement to our small-business interest reduction program. 
The interest rate will be reduced to 8 per cent and the maximum 
loan limit increased to $100,000. The program will be expanded 
to include implement and automobile dealers. In addition, the 
small-business corporate tax holiday on manufacturing and 
processing income will be continued. 
 
Saskatchewan business people have been telling us of their 
concerns about the unfair burden imposed by the business tax, of 
which one-third of the provincial total is collected by the city of 
Regina. Our success with the oil industry should provide a useful 
example to communities. When we lowered taxes, the industry 
grew, jobs were created, and our revenues increased. If 
communities were to lower their taxes for business, their tax base 
would expand and residential taxes would be reduced. I’m 
pleased to note that the town of Lafleche is the first that has 
removed the business tax and other communities are aggressively 
studying the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am announcing tonight the creation of a stock 
savings plan to encourage equity investment by Saskatchewan 
people. The plan is part of our continuing emphasis to encourage 
public participation in the Saskatchewan economy. The plan will 
improve the availability of capital to Saskatchewan businesses 
and will be used by Saskatchewan public companies to finance 
future expansions. 
 
The industrial incentive program provided one-time payments of 
$7,500 for each new permanent job created by manufacturing and 
processing firms. This program has encouraged more than 300 
companies to expand and create more than 3,500 new permanent 
jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And the industrial incentive program will be 
extended. 
 
The venture capital corporation program was introduced in 1984 
to encourage investment in small business and I am pleased to 
announce the further expansion of this program to include 
agricultural firms. 
 
In addition, the provision which limited certain types of 
investment to communities of 5,000 or less, has been revised 
upwards to communities of 20,000 or less. Mr. Speaker, we can 
now expect to see new venture capital corporations in Weyburn 
and Melfort, Yorkton, North Battleford and Humboldt, and many 
other communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has announced its commitment to involving 
organized labour in the creation and maintenance of jobs through 
new labour venture capital corporations. These corporations will 
give organized labour the opportunity to create jobs in 
Saskatchewan by channelling their investments in small and 
medium-sized businesses. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The individual union member will receive a 
provincial tax credit equal to 20 per cent of the cost of the 
investment. When combined with the matching federal tax credit, 
a 40 per cent tax benefit will be available. 
 
If organized labour takes up the challenge, there is the potential 
to create 1,000 new jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
union members and their families will have a real opportunity to 
both create jobs in Saskatchewan and to save taxes. 
 
This government will also introduce a Saskatchewan agricultural 
and commercial equity corporation to provide Saskatchewan 
residents with a unique opportunity to make diversified 
investments in their province. The corporation will make 
investments in various sectors of the Saskatchewan economy and 
will be able to participate on a joint venture basis in major capital 
projects. The corporation will provide a major stimulus to 
economic development. It will establish a highly visible centre 
of corporate management expertise in Saskatchewan, and 
significantly enhance Saskatchewan’s image in the Canadian 
business sector, as the Alberta energy corporation did for the 
province of Alberta. 
 
We will be providing financial assistance to municipalities to 
establish community development corporations, implementing a 
major recommendation of the rural development task force. 
 
And the Minister of Tourism and Small Business will be 
announcing the details of an entrepreneur training program. This 
program will provide individuals with the necessary skills to 
create and start their own small businesses. We are providing 
every opportunity for people in Saskatchewan to own and operate 
their small business. And, Mr. Speaker, there will never be a 
better time for Saskatchewan people to own their own small 
businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members; Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The long-term benefits of these programs 
will be substantial. In keeping with our promise, 60,000 more 
people will be working this summer than when we took office. 
 
This administration believes that banks and the large 
corporations should do their part in establishing and promoting 
small business in Saskatchewan. Two new taxes, applying only 
to large corporations and banks, will finance the new 
small-business initiatives. 
 
Our plan for economic development is working. In the past year 
alone we created 17,000 new jobs under difficult economic 
conditions. We also recognized that temporary employment, 
on-the-job training programs, and government capital spending 
are a necessary component of our efforts to provide economic 
opportunities. Need I say more? 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

230 
 
 

It is for this reason that Partnership for Progress introduced a 
five-year $600 million employment development program. We 
will be providing approximately $125 million through the fund 
for job creation and training programs in 1986. This activity, 
when combined with our capital spending, will create in excess 
of 20,000 jobs in Saskatchewan next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Direct employment and job training 
programs will be available to all employers to alleviate seasonal 
fluctuations and unemployment for the general labour force and 
for students through short-term study subsidy programs, and to 
reduce high unemployment rates for disadvantaged workers 
through targeted employment subsidies and training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we came to office we found a welfare system 
that encouraged 16- and 17-year-olds to leave home, to leave 
school, to collect welfare; a system that encouraged abuse but 
gave no hope. And these are the reasons why we instituted our 
program of welfare reform. Although the purpose of this program 
was to restore to welfare recipients those basic Saskatchewan 
values of hard work and individual initiative, it has met with a 
good deal of opposition. But this government persevered. 
Saskatchewan was the first province to provide welfare recipients 
with meaningful training and employment opportunities. Other 
provinces are now following our lead. 
 
In 1985, 1,700 jobs were created for former welfare recipients, 
and 2,000 assistance clients were registered in training. And 
largely as a result of these programs, I’m happy to report that last 
year’s social assistance costs were $24 million less than they 
would have been under the previous government’s 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have not been satisfied with the 
improvements, Mr. Speaker. We are convinced that more can be 
done, and this government will stay the course on welfare reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — During 1986 we will establish a 
comprehensive employment opportunity strategy for employable 
social assistance recipients. This new program will ensure that 
welfare recipients do not merely receive a cheque from 
government but also have the opportunities to learn job skills, job 
responsibilities, and perform public service. Those with special 
needs, such as single parents and youth, will be given the 
opportunity to participate in programs to improve their 
employment prospects. 
 
This government wants to give welfare clients more than a 
subsistence living. We want to give them hope and a 
determination to succeed on their own. We want to break the 
welfare cycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes 
that the housing industry is a major creator of employment in the 
province. I’m announcing tonight an additional housing 
initiative, a first-time, new home buyers program. First-time 
home buyers purchasing a new home between now and the end 
of 1986 will be eligible for a $3,000 grant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The grant is effective immediately and 
applied to the current inventory of unsold new homes. This 
program will make housing more affordable for those families 
interested in purchasing their first new home. At the same time it 
will create opportunities in the housing industry by stimulating 
an additional 7,000 new starts and creating almost 1,800 new 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is not a realistic proposal 
that is seven years too late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the creation of economic 
opportunities in the resource sector has been challenging for this 
government — challenging because of the legacy of the previous 
administration, a legacy of government intervention and the 
complete alienation of the private sector. 
 
Our actions were straightforward. We created a new climate. We 
worked with the industry and private investors, not against them. 
In four short years we’ve achieved remarkable successes — 
successes which have helped diversify our economy, successes 
which cushion the effects of the drought on many communities 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1982 the oil industry was in a shambles. Oil-servicing 
companies were receiving government subsidies to pay 
employees not to work. By the end of 1985 we had created 4,900 
person-years of employment and over $1 billion of investment. 
In 1981, 807 wells were drilled; in 1985, 3,848 wells were 
drilled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We provided the climate, and the industry 
responded to the challenge. But recently the actions of OPEC 
have caused a sharp drop in world oil prices. We believe that the 
price drop is a relatively short-term phenomenon, and that by the 
end of 1986 prices will have recovered to reasonable levels. 
 
The potash industry is also troubled by weak international prices, 
which reflect world over-supply. The legacy of the previous 
government in the potash industry is particularly unfortunate. 
Potash companies whose mines were bought out by the previous 
government used that cash to build new mines. Excessive 
taxation in Saskatchewan meant that mines were being built in 
New Brunswick, and in other countries. 
 
In 1981 and 1980 when demand for potash was high and supplies 
were limited, the pricing policies of the previous government 
alienated many international customers. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

231 
 
 

Countries don’t like to be gouged either. Had the former 
government remained in power, they would have implemented 
policies to have Saskatchewan mines fighting against other 
Saskatchewan mines in offshore markets. 
 
This government has implemented solid long-term potash 
policies which will provide a solid foundation for a thriving 
industry into the 1990s. We’re pursuing a moderate price strategy 
to keep competitors out of the market-place. 
 
Market development and initiatives in offshore countries such as 
China are beginning to pay dividends. Advertising campaigns 
promoting Saskatchewan potash are now a daily occurrence in 
China. And through these initiatives we expect to see 
strengthening in both prices and volumes in 1986. 
 
Natural gas remains a bright spot in the resource sector. The 
previous government was content to buy natural gas from Alberta 
at the expense of jobs for Saskatchewan people. Only nine 
natural gas wells were drilled in 1982. But last year the Premier 
announced a new Saskatchewan self-sufficiency policy to 
increase Saskatchewan’s natural gas revenues, and to create 
Saskatchewan jobs. Last year not nine wells were drilled, but 437 
wells were drilled in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In addition, the increased exploration activity 
has resulted in an increase in our estimate of natural gas reserves. 
The province is now well on its way to natural gas 
self-sufficiency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Uranium prices are beginning to strengthen as international 
inventories are depleted. With Saskatchewan’s competitive 
production position, the future of this industry in the province is 
encouraging. 
 
Through much of the first half of this decade, markets for our 
forest products have been depressed due to a combination of 
declining housing starts and weak demand for Canadian kraft 
pulp and paper products. This government modified existing 
policies to keep Saskatchewan forest industries viable in 
anticipation of better international conditions. 
 
And conditions are now improving for our forest industry. 
Increases in the value of foreign currencies against the Canadian 
dollar, coupled with a recovery in housing starts, will lead to 
increased forest product demand. 
 
Tax incentives and targeted government geological surveys have 
increased exploratory activity in northern Saskatchewan. In the 
past four years alone gold exploration has tripled, and we fully 
expect a new gold mine to be in operation north of La Ronge in 
1987. 
 
Our initiatives in the natural resource sector have diversified 
Saskatchewan’s economy during the last four years. 
 
As we look to the future, we recognize that there will be peaks 
and valleys in our natural resource industries. In 

contrast to the previous government, our initiatives will ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan receive the maximum economic 
benefits from the rich natural resource heritage. 
 
I would now like to turn to the government’s financial 
management plan for 1986-87. For 1986, forecasts indicate that 
Saskatchewan will have one of the highest growth rates in the 
country, and inflation will approximate 1985 levels. 
Saskatchewan has been the leader in job creation, and that trend 
will continue. 
 
With a good crop in the coming year, we can expect agriculture 
revenues to increase. International economic conditions indicate 
that oil and potash will strengthen from existing levels, but lower 
than we anticipated at this time last year. Provincial oil revenues 
are expected to fall by $144 million in 1986 from the 1985 budget 
estimates. At the same time, potash revenues will decline by $21 
million and these decreases are a direct result of low world prices. 
 
(2015) 
 
Saskatchewan residents enjoy one of the lowest tax burdens in 
the country, so it would have been easy to make up those revenue 
shortfalls by tax increases, but we chose not to follow that course. 
The government does intend to see that those corporations and 
individuals who have the ability to pay are required to pay. 
 
For the reasons I outlined earlier, we believe that it is only fair 
that the large corporations and banks should help establish and 
promote small business in the province. Our small-business 
initiatives will be financed by two tax increases affecting only 
our largest corporations. 
 
Effective January 1, 1986 the general corporate capital tax rate 
will increase from 0.3 per cent to 0.5 per cent, and for banks the 
rate will increase from 2 per cent to 3 per cent. For trust and loan 
companies, the rate is increased from 0.8 per cent to 1.2 per cent. 
And these increases will only affect those corporations with 
paid-up capital greater than $10 million. But they will generate 
an additional $21 million in revenue in 1986. 
 
Effective January 1, 1986 the general corporate income tax rate 
will increase by one percentage point from 16 per cent to 17 per 
cent, and this will result in additional annual revenues of $7 
million. Small businesses with active business income less than 
$200,000 per year will be not affected by this measure. 
 
In addition to these tax increases, I am announcing one other 
revenue-generating initiative. Effective midnight tonight, the tax 
on cigarettes will be increased by 25 cents per package, or 1 cent 
per cigarette — for those to calculate, opposite — with similar 
increases for cigars and cut tobacco. This measure will generate 
$22 million in revenue in 1986. 
 
In total, our revenue-raising measures will provide an additional 
$50 million in revenue in the 1986 fiscal year. 
 
We were pleased to see the federal government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Not in a pack of 25, for the 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

232 
 
 

hon. member  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We were pleased to see the federal 
government follow our lead and introduce a 500,000 lifetime 
capital gains tax exemption. This will result in a provincial tax 
saving of more than $20 million for Saskatchewan farmers and 
small-business people. 
 
The federal program was designed to accomplish the same 
objectives as the Saskatchewan program. In addition, the 
continuation of the Saskatchewan rebate program after the 
introduction of the capital gains exemption, will result in some 
individuals receiving a rebate for provincial tax that they did not 
have to pay. And they did not pay. Accordingly, I am announcing 
the termination of the provincial capital gains tax rebate program 
for the 1985 taxation year and thereafter. 
 
These revenue initiatives, combined with tax measures to 
stimulate investment and the growth of small business, form a 
package of tax changes which generates revenue from banks and 
large corporations and at the same time, the tax burden on 
families and small business is reduced. 
 
Total provincial revenues for 1986 will be 3.359 billion. This 
includes an additional $28 million in revenue generated from 
banks and our largest corporations. 
 
Combined expenditures will increase to 3.748 billion, an increase 
of 281 million or 8 per cent from estimated expenditures for 
1985-86, when increased expenditures for health, agriculture and 
debt charges are excluded. Government spending will increase 
by only 1.6 per cent. 
 
Twenty-nine of 39 government departments and agencies had 
either no increase or a decrease in their budgets between 1984 
and ’85. And 17 of the 39 will either have no increase or a 
decrease between 1985 and 1986. A clear sign that government 
expenditures are well under control. 
 
One of the ways that expenditures will be controlled is through 
the creation of a new property management corporation. The 
corporation which is modelled after similar Crown corporations 
in British Columbia, Manitoba, and Quebec will acquire, finance, 
and manage government land and buildings. No longer will these 
functions be spread out among several government departments 
and agencies. Instead they will be centralized in one Crown 
corporation to achieve maximum efficiencies. Line department 
managers will then be able to concentrate their efforts on the 
programs they know best, leaving property management 
functions to the experts. 
 
For the first time in Saskatchewan history government managers 
will be held accountable for the efficient use of space. And for 
the first time government will be able to obtain the true cost of 
programs. We anticipate that the savings resulting from the new 
corporation will be substantial. 
 
Creation of this corporation is in keeping with our commitment 
to eliminate waste and duplication in 

government; commitment which has resulted in savings of over 
$300 million to date and a reduction in the civil service of more 
than 1,000 positions since 1982. 
 
Another important initiative to keep the 1986 deficit as low as 
possible is the further reduction of the civil service by more than 
300 positions. This reduction will be used to offset the increase, 
partially offset the increase in nursing positions that the Minister 
of Health has recently announced. Mr. Speaker, I want to assure 
you that no one will lose their job as a result of this efficiency 
initiative. The reduction will be achieved through the 
management of vacancies. 
 
In addition, we will continue to maintain the very close scrutiny 
of all expenditures by departments throughout the year. 
Managers will no longer be given automatic pay raises. Salary 
increases for government managers will now be based on merit. 
Deputy ministers will approve all expenditures greater than $500, 
and all out-of-province travel. It was through measures such as 
these that our government was able to save more than $25 million 
during the last quarter alone. And we will continue this program 
of restraint in 1986 and thereafter. 
 
These stringent expenditure controls and revenue stabilization 
through the effective use of capital assets will result in a deficit 
for 1986 of $389 million — a decrease of over $200 million for 
the revised estimates of 1985. And this government is fully 
confident that a balanced budget can be achieved within the next 
five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This reduced deficit for ’86 is the first step 
towards this goal. And we will be examining additional ways to 
improve efficiency and accountability, and one possibility that 
will be closely examined is a more formal capital budget 
approach. 
 
Total capital financing requirements in 1986 are estimated at 1.62 
billion. Net borrowing requirements, after providing for 
refinancing, will amount to 1.24 billion. Of this amount, $900 
million will be allocated to Saskatchewan Crown corporations. 
 
Major Crown corporation projects which are helping build a 
better Saskatchewan include the continuation of the rural natural 
gas distribution program; the beginning of the rural electric 
underground program; and the beginning of rural individual 
telephone line service. And these projects demonstrate this 
government’s commitment to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Canada Pension Plan will provide $120 million in capital, 
with the remainder coming from various capital markets. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, Main Street, Saskatchewan, will have the 
opportunity to be provided with attractive opportunities to invest 
in our Crown corporations. 
 
Before this government assumed office in April of 1982, the 
people of Saskatchewan were faced with problems of crisis 
proportions. They wanted a change. We took immediate 
responsible action. We protected family 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

233 
 
 

homes from high mortgage interest rates. We removed the tax on 
gas and essential commodities. We allowed young farmers to 
purchase the land they work. We improved efficiency in 
government. New businesses have been formed, and thousands 
of new jobs are being created. Unemployment levels are low. The 
economy is growing. 
 
This strong performance was achieved because we have a plan 
for economic development. A plan that builds upon those values 
and beliefs which have made Saskatchewan great. A plan that 
creates opportunities; and a plan that creates jobs. 
 
Our common sense approach to economic development, together 
with our firm commitment to protect families, the family farm, 
and our social institutions, has guided this government’s actions 
during the last four years. It has also formed the basis for our 
budget for 1986. A budget that provides additional opportunities 
for economic development and major improvements to our 
security net. 
 
The highlights of this budget include: the Saskatchewan pension 
plan; the exemption of all clothing under $300 from the sales tax; 
an 8 per cent interest program for small business; a two-year 
corporate tax holiday to new small businesses incorporating after 
budget night; expansions of venture capital program; a provincial 
income tax credit for the construction or expansion of livestock 
facilities to stimulate livestock production; a stock savings plan; 
an agricultural and commercial equity corporation; a first-time 
new home buyers program providing a $3,000 grant to families; 
the largest increase in agricultural and health expenditures in the 
history of the province; a major increase in spending in 
education; a new approach to funding day care centres in the 
province; and a property management corporation to improve the 
management of the Crown’s land and buildings; and a reduction 
in the deficit and a commitment to a balanced budget in five 
years; and, Mr. Speaker, for the Leader of the Opposition, a 6.3 
per cent increase for capital projects and highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides further stimulation to small 
business to create new economic opportunities and jobs. It also 
provides additional protection for families and for our social 
institutions. It is a budget which is part of an economic 
development plan for the province; a plan which is founded on 
the basic values of the Saskatchewan people themselves; a plan 
created by a government which is proud of our past and 
optimistic and confident about our province’s future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, opposition policies which 
threaten the start of the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford 
will not keep Saskatchewan working. They will cost 
Saskatchewan young people jobs and opportunities. And the 
NDP policies which call for the phasing out of uranium mining 
will not keep Saskatchewan working. That will cost young 
people jobs and opportunities. And NDP policies which will 
cancel and stop the Estevan power project will not keep 
Saskatchewan working. That will cost young people jobs and 
opportunities. NDP political policies which will 

cancel business incentives to the oil and natural gas industry will 
not keep Saskatchewan working. They will cost our young 
people jobs and opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province can’t afford not to have another four 
more years of Grant Devine and the Progressive Conservative 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
committee of finance. 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t deal at length with 
the rewriting of history contained in the early part of the 
minister’s speech. It not only rewrites the history of the pre-1982 
years, but it rewrites the version of those years advanced in 
previous budgets by the member for Kindersley, who is not here 
tonight. 
 
But let me touch on a few points. He tells us on page 2 that the 
government is working diligently to encourage investment. He 
says the Premier has worked diligently to encourage investment, 
and maybe he has. But he certainly hasn’t worked effectively. He 
certainly hasn’t worked effectively. 
 
During the period from 1979, 1980, and 1981, business 
investment in this province increased at the rate of 19 per cent 
per year, compounded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — During ’82, ’83, and ’84 — and I don’t 
have the ’85 figures — during those three years it was less than 
1 per cent a year, compounded, because diligence is not enough; 
a little leadership and competence would be useful. 
 
The minister talks about investment in health, and he 
congratulated his government for what he called, dealing with the 
underfunding in health. I wonder why his colleague, the Minster 
of Health, is unwilling to explain these outstanding programs at 
meetings called by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. I wonder 
why in Saskatoon on Monday night not one single MLA would 
turn up at the meeting called by the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The member for Regina North West 
declares that he was there. He is no longer a Tory. He has turned 
his coat and he is now a WCC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — What I am asking is why the members 
from Saskatoon were unwilling to go and tell the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses the outstanding job that has been done by the 
government. I think the answer 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

234 
 
 

is because the statistics will not bear out the rhetoric of the 
Minister of Finance. It is because of the fact that the waiting list 
for elective surgery in Saskatoon has increased from the order of 
about 2,000 when they took office, to the order of 5,000 now. 
And it is difficult to put that to somebody who knows the facts. 
The Minister of Finance will come here and tell us how 
wonderful things are, but he nor his colleagues would say that to 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurse, because they know the facts. 
 
He goes on to say that he is unprepared to fight the deficit — and 
I am quoting him now — on the backs of “seniors, farmers, and 
small business.” Note he doesn’t even mention that he might, 
over three or four years, have fought a little on the back of oil 
companies. 
 
It’s certainly true that seniors and farmers and small business 
have had a tough four years. Nobody denies that. But some have 
not had a tough four years. Unlike farmers, unlike small business, 
the oil industry has made record profits. Yet the minister was 
unwilling even to whittle away the deficit a little bit by asking 
these, who have had their greatest profits in history, to make a 
little more contribution to our common welfare. 
 
Let me touch on two or three or four other things mentioned by 
the Minister of Finance. He indicated that in the bad old days, 
people were unable to own their own land. Would he be good 
enough to explain why there are fewer farmers now owning their 
own land than there were four years ago? And I think the answer 
is that economic conditions had dictated that farmers are having 
tough times under Tory governments. 
 
He goes on to rewrite history and talk about saying that in the late 
1960s and early 1970s the world economy was healthy. Well, the 
world economy may have been healthy, but certainly the 
economy of Saskatchewan was not healthy. And anybody whose 
mind goes back to those days would know that the Minster of 
Finance is not being accurate when he recalls the good old days 
of the government with which he was associated, the government 
of the Hon. Ross Thatcher, when wheat could be bought for 2 
bushels for $1. 
 
Those are the facts, and it’s no good for the minister to try to say 
that those were the good old days, and now he is in tough times, 
and not able to do the things that he knows ought to be done. 
 
He deals with the Lloydminster upgrader, and says he’s all for it. 
What I want to know is: who isn’t for it? The PC government at 
Ottawa says they’re for it. The PC government at Alberta says 
they’re for it. Why would anybody doubt the upgrader unless 
they doubt the words of some of those governments? 
 
And I think they’re wise, both to doubt the words, and perhaps, 
to doubt that those governments will have the intestinal fortitude 
to go ahead with that worthwhile project, because we’re not 
seeing many positive words out of Ottawa, or indeed out of this 
government, or out of Edmonton, on whether or not that project 
should go ahead. 

Now the minister talks about new directions. And I want to point 
out one of the new directions, and you’ll find it on page 23 of the 
budget speech, for those who wish to follow along. It deals with 
the question of borrowing. No government has ever borrowed as 
much in four years as this government has borrowed. No 
government, I suspect, has borrowed half as much in four years 
as this government has borrowed. 
 
And it’s illustrated by the fact, on page 23, that last year they 
borrowed $855 million, public borrowing; and this year they 
propose to borrow $1.616 billion. Double — double in one year 
of borrowing. We all know — all know that this has to be paid 
back. 
 
And I suspect when we get the estimates tomorrow that it will 
show that the interest on the public debt in the estimates will be 
of the order of 10 times what it was when you people took office. 
And that, I suspect, is the situation. And it comes from your belief 
that borrowed money never has to be returned. 
 
Well, let me make one other . . . I don’t have total criticism for 
the member opposite, the Minister of Finance. He said there was 
never a better time to own and open a small business. And I 
happen to agree with him there. 
 
I would urge any small-business person to get into small business 
today, because we believe that a climate for profitable operation 
and growth for Saskatchewan small business can be restored, and 
will be restored, just as soon as the government opposite is 
removed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Let me move on to one other point. Did 
you note that on page 12 the minister is complaining about the 
international sales of potash by the previous administration? 
These methods “alienated many international customers.” And 
every tonne was sold by Canpotex. Every tonne was sold by 
Canpotex? He says that Canpotex alienated international 
customers — that’s what he says — but we should stick with 
Canpotex. We should allow them to continue to alienate 
international customers. That seems to be his argument. Which 
does he claim is not true? Does he deny what he puts in his budget 
speech or does he deny that those sales were made by Canpotex? 
And if international customers were alienated, it was done by the 
agency which he so vigorously supports. 
 
Now one final comment about this rather whimsical statement 
that the budget will be balanced in the next five years. Well all I 
can say is that it’s Easter week and anyone who believes that will 
believe that the Easter bunny is going to arrive on Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at this budget we see that in essence 
the problem of this budget and the problem of the previous 
budgets of this government has been a problem of fairness. A 
year ago this PC government hit the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan with the biggest tax increase in the history of this 
province. It slapped a flat tax on income, making Saskatchewan 
the only province in Canada with not one but two provincial 
income taxes. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

235 
 
 

The flat tax will take $400 out of the pockets of the average 
Saskatchewan family this year alone. Last year’s budget took 
hundreds of dollars a year in property tax relief away from 
Saskatchewan home owners and renters and small-business 
people and farm families when you scrapped the property tax 
rebates. 
 
And then there was the used vehicle tax which the PC 
government dumped after only nine months, knowing that it had 
been a mistake and unfair, but declining to make any refunds. 
 
Those were the record tax increases last year, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people had hoped that the budget would repeal the 
unfair flat tax, restore property tax relief, and refund the money 
collected through the unfair used vehicle tax. They had hoped for 
these changes. They were disappointed tonight. Not one of those 
changes is in the budget. 
 
The budget contains virtually no relief for the unfair tax burden 
now weighing on Saskatchewan families. The Minister of 
Finance makes a big deal out of exempting some purchases from 
the sales tax. And he claims that they will save families $23 
million. Now that’s one-fifth of the amount that this same 
minister is taking out of those same Saskatchewan families 
through his flat tax. He’s taking out $100 million, going to give 
back 20 million in rebates on sales taxes. He says, we’re going to 
sock it to you by hundreds of millions of dollars a year in your 
income tax, but you should thank us because we’re not going to 
charge sales tax on neckties and aprons and shoe-laces and 
sneakers and zippers. Well, I’m sure people will think that’s 
great. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to move to another area now. This 
budget is, I predict, the last budget of this legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve been wrong before, my boy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I have. I have. But I’m not wrong this 
time. Not even the government opposite would attempt to cling 
to power for a full year while the public’s indignation rises and 
rises and will wreak its vengeance upon them. 
 
So in 1982 in your election platform, you promised to eliminate 
the 5 per cent provincial sales tax during our first term of office. 
Remember that? And it was in the ads of virtually every member 
opposite. Now the time has come. You’ve had five budgets and 
you have not done it. It was a promise and it’s been broken. 
 
I’ve looked through some of the material that the minister has 
tabled tonight and it looks like he is going to get even more 
money from sales taxes. I’m estimating that. I don’t have 
material. But it seems to me that that will be the result. Certainly 
you’re going to get more than $350 million based upon my 
recollection of the figures from the tax which you and your 
colleagues campaigned on that you would eliminate in your first 
term of office. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the budget not only fails to restore direct 
property tax relief to home owners and renters and small 
business, but it’s likely to drive up property tax bills. There is no 
indication that there will be substantial increases in grants to 
municipalities. If they had been substantial, you can bet . . . 
 
I don’t have the Estimates. I note the member for Regina 
Rosemont holds up the Estimates. I have just had them now. 
Members are chuckling but I want to say that it was the custom 
in this House prior to your government coming to office to supply 
the Leader of the Opposition with a copy of the Estimates when 
the minister stood. You have decided that in keeping with your 
withholding of information such as the public accounts and 
otherwise from members, you would distribute them after the 
opposition critic was on his feet. That’s what you have done and 
I think it says a little bit about your government. It says a little 
bit about your government. It says a little bit about your 
government. It says a little bit about the type of debate you would 
like to see in the House. 
 
But I will carry on and make it very clear, very clear that you are 
taking money from people through withdrawing the property tax 
rebates. There are virtually no indications of major increases in 
grants to municipalities. I predict that mill rates will increase and 
I predict, therefore, that the tax burden will also increase. 
Members opposite may be perfectly confident that that won’t be 
so. I doubt it. I do not accept their assurances that there will be 
no increase in mill rates. 
 
We have increases in taxes for big business of the order of 20 
million. The flat tax is going to take 100 million. Is it reasonable 
to take $100 million from ordinary families in tax increases and 
only $20 million from major corporations? Does the ordinary 
citizen feel he’s five times as well as off as the banks? I doubt it. 
It’s a question of fairness. The big business tax increases are 
peanuts. Even the budget speech admits that they are going to get 
almost as much from smokers as they are getting from the banks, 
the oil companies, and all the major corporations. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it will be of interest to note that the budget 
speech mentioned, as I believe it was, not one but two Crown 
corporations, new ones. No government has ever formed more 
Crown corporations in any four-year period than the government 
opposite. Count them up, count them up. And it is rather 
fascinating that members opposite who have decried Crown 
corporations from every platform in this province have begun to 
establish them at a rate not equalled in any previous government. 
 
And I suspect, and again we’ll have an opportunity to analyse the 
material, but I suspect that when we analyse the material it will 
be shown that the purpose of these two Crown corporations is not 
so much to improve the quality of life in Saskatchewan but to 
hide the quantity of the government’s financial mismanagement. 
 
I suspect that the numbers are going to show. We’ll have an 
opportunity to deal with this tomorrow, and members who are 
shaking their head, I know, will wish to enter the debate later on 
in the week — next week — and they will 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

236 
 
 

be able to refute any suggestion that budgetary revenues are 
wildly overstated and budgetary expenditures are grossly 
understated. And I think that is going to be shown. So we will 
see; we will see. 
 
The member for Prince Albert says that is a trick. He will have 
an opportunity to prove that, and I bet you he will not. I bet you 
he will not stand up and analyse that budget. I bet you he will not 
indicate whether he thinks those are a fair statement of revenues 
and a fair statement of expenditures. 
 
Interest costs will be, I predict, $200 million. And it is 
worthwhile to note that that is more than the combined budgets 
last year of the following agencies: the Department of Rural 
Development, the Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources, the Department of Energy and Mines, Environment, 
Labour, Culture and Recreation, Economic Development, 
Tourism and Small Business, Consumer Affairs, Co-ops, Science 
and Technology, and Executive Council. All of those agencies 
together get less money than we’re now paying to the bankers 
and the bond dealers because of the accumulated deficit of the 
government opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to make any further comments 
on the budget directly, but to make some comments on what 
should have been in the budget. 
 
People are telling us that they’re fed up with the government 
opposite, and they’re fed up with their record of unfair taxes and 
rising unemployment, financial mismanagement, and weak 
leadership. People are telling us that we just can’t afford four 
more years like the last four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — They want a government committed to 
fair taxation and job creation and competent financial 
management, compassion for those in need and standing up for 
Saskatchewan at Ottawa. 
 
With respect to fair taxes, a New Democratic government will 
see to it that large corporations and the wealthy pay their fair 
share of taxes. There will be no paper tiger hikes for big business 
under a New Democratic government. In order to get the Devine 
government Devine deficit under control and to ease the heavy 
tax burden on low- and middle-income people, we will get more 
from major corporations and we will then have more to lower 
taxes. The unfair flat tax as structured by the government 
opposite will be repealed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Property tax relief for home owners and 
renters and small business and farmers will be restored. The 
money collected under the unfair, used vehicle tax will be 
refunded. 
 
With respect to job creation, Saskatchewan small business will 
be encouraged to grow and create new job opportunities with a 
guarantee of stable interest rates. We will offer to small business 
a guarantee extending over a number of years of stable interest 
rates. 

Unlike tonight’s budget which tried to throw the municipal 
business tax problem onto the shoulders of municipal 
governments, a New Democratic government would work with 
those municipal governments to eliminate municipal business 
taxes by increasing the revenue sharing pool. 
 
A New Democratic government will institute a policy of 
Saskatchewan first. When we are spending large amounts of 
public money, we will take steps to see that there are contracts 
for Saskatchewan business and jobs for Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Unlike the members opposite who offer 
large incentives to the Peter Pocklingtons of this world, who hire 
Alberta companies without tender, bring in Alberta workers 
without any opportunity for Saskatchewan workers to get those 
jobs, to build plants in Saskatchewan with Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A New Democratic government will 
build new facilities to create jobs for today and lasting assets for 
the future. Things like hospitals, like the Regina General Hospital 
which has been a hole in the ground since 1982. Those projects 
should be gone ahead with, both because we need the jobs today 
and we need the facilities tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the number one job creation 
sector in the Saskatchewan economy is housing. If a government 
has a solid comprehensive plan to get the house sector growing, 
it has a solid comprehensive job creation program. That has been 
the history of job creation in this province. 
 
New Democrats believe that we have a solid housing program. 
We have committed a New Democratic Party government to a 
housing program which will see the creation of 18,000 direct new 
jobs, and which will generate more than $1.3 billion in new 
economic activity over the next five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — For young families buying their first 
home, a New Democratic government will provide $7,000 in 
down payment assistance for the purchase of a new home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Unlike the panic program introduced in 
the budget, it will not run for nine months, but will run for three 
years 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — This will avoid the boom and bust 
mentality which hit the housing industry in this province 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

237 
 
 

when there were grants of $6,000 a couple of years ago. 
 
Our family home protection plan will guarantee home mortgage 
rates of 7 per cent for seven years on the first $70,000 of the 
mortgage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It will provide interest rate stability to 
encourage existing home owners to make major consumer 
purchases. It will provide interest rate stability so that young 
families can quality for longer-term mortgages. 
 
For those who own an older home in need of major repairs, a 
New Democratic government will offer up to $7,000 in rehab 
assistance, as long as the repair projects are creating new jobs 
and new economic activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — For low-income families, people in the 
North, seniors and the disabled, a New Democratic government 
will have a real commitment to the construction of social 
housing. 
 
The PC government has cut back on the construction of the social 
housing sharply, sharply. It’s only about one-third of its former 
levels, and we will change it and change it quickly. 
 
If the member opposite says oh, oh, oh, I invite him to go up to 
La Loche and count all the new houses built in La Loche. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of comprehensive housing policy will put 
housing within the reach of thousands of Saskatchewan families. 
It will create jobs for thousands of Saskatchewan workers. It will 
mean new contracts and new opportunities for thousands of 
Saskatchewan businesses. It will mean new activity for our retail 
sector, our forest industry, and hundreds of communities large 
and small who need some impetus to their economy. 
 
For our farm families, the number one problem is commodity 
prices. And I hope nobody opposite denies that the basic problem 
being faced by farmers is commodity prices. A New Democratic 
government will push the Mulroney PC government in Ottawa to 
introduce a deficiency payment for Canadian farmers to bring the 
price of wheat up to the level at which American farmers are 
being subsidized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite will know that the 
governments in Europe and governments in the United States are 
doing that. It is only right that our provincial government should 
be pressing our federal government to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — If Brian Mulroney can find a billion 
dollars over 48 hours to bail out a couple of banks, I think he 
ought to be able to find something like that to 

protect the prices that our farmers get for their commodities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Here in Saskatchewan a provincial 
government should be doing everything in its power to help to 
solve the other key problems, and that’s input costs. A New 
Democratic government will reduce the price of farm fuel by a 
minimum of 32 cents a gallon. We will introduce measure to cut 
the cost of farm fertilizers. We will pressure Ottawa to introduce 
legislation which allows the development of low-cost generic 
farm chemicals, as we have had low-cost pharmaceutical 
chemicals for several years. A New Democratic government 
would join with the Saskatchewan farm organizations to fight the 
disastrous recommendations of the Nielsen task force report on 
agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Turning to other issues, a New 
Democratic government will provide a guaranteed minimum 
income for Saskatchewan seniors 60 and over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We will increase health care staffing —
not by announcing but by having people on the ward. We will 
improve and extend home care services. 
 
Now these are just some of the positive proposals which we have 
put forward to get Saskatchewan working again. They stand in 
stark contrast to the backward-looking, big business budget 
we’ve heard tonight. 
 
In light of the budget speech, I say to the Premier, I say this to 
him: your government has no mandate to continue its path of 
unfair tax increases for the ordinary people of this province. You 
have no mandate to give away dollars to out-of-province 
companies in hundreds of million of dollars drops. 
 
While refusing to provide adequate help to Saskatchewan 
businesses and Saskatchewan workers, you are offering vast 
benefit to out-of-province companies — 145 million to Manalta. 
How much to Pocklington? We don’t know. We don’t know the 
Weyerhaeuser deal, but it looks as if they get 248 million without 
any firm obligation to repay. Those surely are far, far more than 
you are doing for ordinary people. You’ve no mandate to 
squander our future through mismanagement of our public 
finances. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people want an opportunity to tell you that they 
think your government’s policies are unfair and that your record 
is dismal. They want an opportunity to turf your government out. 
I call upon you, therefore, in the next very few days, to call an 
election and give the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to 
pass judgement on your administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

238 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(2100) 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the committee of finance be resumed 
on Thursday, March 27, 1986. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before I ask for 
adjournment I would like to, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, 
invite all members and guests here in the Chamber this evening 
to a tea in room 218, which is just to your left and down that 
corridor. I now ask, Mr. Speaker, that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9 p.m. 
 


