


















































June 12, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 12, 1986 
 
 

1899 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, a group 
of students from Wild Rose Elementary School, 13 grade 7 
students, accompanied by their teacher, Mr. MacKenzie, who 
has been down here, I think, every year since I’ve been in this 
House. I’ve had many occasions to meet with him and his 
students. Their chaperons, Mrs. Schutte and Mrs. Anderson. 
 
I certainly want to greet them here to this legislature. They 
come from a very pretty and unique part of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I certainly enjoy their part of the world; I live 
not too far from there. 
 
I would ask all members to wish them a good time in Regina, a 
pleasant journey home, and I will be meeting with them for 
pictures and drinks at 2:30. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, through you and to 
you, I’d like to introduce some guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
They’re from Hafford Elementary School. There’s 27 students, 
grade 4 and 5, and they’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Mary Linnell, and Mr. Dennis Taylor. The bus driver is Mr. 
Peter Prebushewski. The accompanying chaperons are Mrs. 
Mary Bogar, Mrs. Elaine Brunet, Mrs. Ruth Marchewka, and 
Mr. Andy Prebushewski. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 2:35 p.m. in the members’ 
lounge for refreshments and any questions they have to ask me. 
I hope that their stay here this afternoon will be interesting and 
educational, and I ask the members to welcome them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with distinct pleasure that I introduce to you, and through you 
to the Legislative Assembly, a grade 4 and 5 class from 
Connaught Elementary School, accompanied by their teacher 
Gloria Roman. Connaught is a community school. The 
provision was made for these community schools in The 
Education Act in the mid-70s. Not many were set up, and 
even fewer survived. This is one that does, and it is a real 
success story. And it is in many ways a tragedy that there 
were not more community schools that got started as it has 
worked very well in an area with vastly different income and 
racial backgrounds. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students. I hope that they 
enjoy the proceedings today as much as I’ll enjoy meeting with 
them at 2:30 and answering their questions. I invite all members 
to welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
the honour of introducing and meeting on behalf of my hon. 
colleague, the member from Morse, a group of students seated 
in the west gallery. They are from Success, Saskatchewan, 
which is just slightly north-west of Swift Current off the 
Trans-Canada Highway, and they are in grade 7 and 8. Mr. 
Speaker, they are about 15 in number, and they have with them, 
Mr. Friesen, and also three chaperons, Sharon Reimer, Judy 
Anderson, and Bev Anderson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group at 3 o’clock, and 
I look forward to their questions. If the name of their town, 
Success, Saskatchewan is any indication of their achievements 
in school, I’m sure that they will do well indeed. And I would 
ask that everyone welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Introduction of Proposed Amendments to The Forest Act 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Your government has introduced amendments to The Forest 
Act which allow the forest companies and the provincial 
government to totally ignore local governments and local 
zoning by-laws or development plans with respect to the 
harvesting of timber and all related activities. 
 
Can the minister inform the Assembly how many local 
governments you consulted with prior to the introduction of 
these outrageous amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, these outrageous 
amendments, as my hon. friend refers to them as, can be 
debated in committee of the whole, and we’ll find out how 
outrageous they are when we get there. 
 
But when he’s talking about consultation, the consultation that 
took place prior to this Bill coming into the Assembly took 
place with the people who are most directly affected by any 
proposed amendments. 
 
Now let’s just get something clear, Mr. Speaker. The section to 
which my hon. colleague across the way has referred merely 
confirms that the authority for the regulation of forest-related 
activities on Crown land in provincial forests lies with the 
provincial government through The Forest Act. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
a number of local governments which could be affected by 
these amendments claimed they found out about them only by 
accident, and claim that you never once consulted with them 
about the changes. 
 
In light of their comments, can you provide the Assembly with 
a full list of who you did consult with and when, with  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1900 
 
 

respect to these amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, when 
we get to committee of the whole I’ll be giving much more 
information, in fact a lot of information that you people over 
there won’t want to hear about. And you’re going to be very 
embarrassed that you brought this up. 
 
Let me point something out, Mr. Speaker, municipalities do not 
have the right to regulate timber companies in the province 
now. They don’t have that right at all. Regulation of logging 
and other forestry activities on provincial forest lands has 
always been under the jurisdiction of The Forest Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one other point I want to make, and I want to 
make it in the very strongest possible terms: the Forest Act of 
Saskatchewan is not going to be written by the reeve of one 
R.M. who lives in Saskatoon and doesn’t even live in the 
municipality. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
can you explain why your government has decided to run 
roughshod over the rights and opinions of Saskatchewan’s local 
governments in this way. These changes centralize 
decision-making power in the hands of the minister and his 
officials in Regina and remove any say in forestry development, 
as you have just admitted, from the local governments it 
affected. Why this decision to reduce local autonomy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the member needs a new 
speech writer. He should have done a little more homework of 
his own, a little more research, before he got up here. Again, 
when we get to committee of the whole, I’ll be delighted to get 
into those specific arguments with you. 
 
But for now let me point out, Mr. Speaker, we are currently 
negotiating forest management license agreements with various 
forest companies in this province. Part of the FMLA process is 
that the companies must produce a forest management plan. At 
that point we consult with the R.M.s who are involved, and we 
show them the forest management plan which is for 20 years, 
five years renewable. 
 
And if those people over there want to get into any kind of 
debate at all about consultation, we’ll talk about the lack of 
consultation they put in in 1973 when they introduced 
amendments to The Forest Act to squeeze all the small 
operators out of business. In fact, I’d be pleased to quote the 
Leader of the Opposition who met with several members at that 
time, among them constituents of mine, when we get into 
committee of the whole. You, sir, will probably choose to be 
absent during that period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Delighted. Would the minister concede that 
under the minister’s proposals: no local development plan, no 
zoning by-law, no interim development control by-law, no 
municipal development plan, no district development plan, no 
district zoning by-law will have any effect and the minister will 
have total control over how forests are developed in and around 
many  

communities and many built-up areas, resort and otherwise, in 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well I’m kind of surprised at the lack 
of research coming from the Leader of the Opposition, 
particularly a man of his stature and supposed intelligence. So I 
would like to set the record straight for him. I know he has to 
get to bed early at nights, and he probably didn’t get his 
homework done. 
 
Currently there no approved municipal or district zoning 
by-laws or development plans which prohibit or restrict the use 
of provincial forest lands for timber harvesting or other forestry 
activities outside – I stress outside – recognized recreational 
business or residential reserves. If the Leader of the Opposition 
takes a look at the rest of the Bill, he’ll find that in actual fact 
the minister is giving away some authority and not gathering all 
total authority under my jurisdiction whereby I will have total 
unilateral control over the lives of the people of Saskatchewan, 
in complete and stark contrast to what that gentleman did when 
he sat in this chair over here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, would the minister make 
clear what he is talking about? He, on one occasion, said that 
the arrangements applied to provincial forests; on another 
occasion to provincial forest lands. Will he admit that those are 
totally different areas, and will he concede that it is provincial 
forest lands that he’s talking about, which is virtually every 
piece of land in this province that has commercial timber on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll get into this in 
committee of the whole, but let me just make one absolute, 
clear, unequivocal statement. As long as I live I’ll concede 
nothing to that gentleman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have no 
doubt that the minister is right. He would not concede that 
today was Thursday because it would be as a matter of principle 
that he wouldn’t concede the truth. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you a supplementary. Could you 
explain why citizens who have relied upon existing zoning 
regulations and invested their money on the basis of those 
zoning regulations should have their rights totally taken away 
by the Act of the legislature without any consultation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member made 
some reference to truth. I would remind him, he’s the leader of 
the party of which one member stood up here on May the 16th 
and made these blatantly false comments: 
 

Camp fees have doubled, swimming pools are only 
open on weekends – that for twice the money – park 
fees have gone up, they’re open for a shorter period of 
time, people are paying for fire wood . . . 
 

I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. If we’re going to discuss 
credibility and truth, sir, I’ll put my reputation against your 
actions, since you became Leader of the Opposition, on the 
table any day of the week. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1901 
 

Restoration of Piwei Camp Ground 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Parks. Mr. Minister, this has to do with your 
government’s destruction of the Piwei camp ground and picnic 
site in north-east Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we informed you in May of your 
department staff going out there and bulldozing this facility to 
the ground and burning what was left, you had claimed at that 
time that the whole issue was a terrible mistake and that the 
facilities would be fully restored. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us if that restoration work has begun, 
and if not, when do you expect that it will begin? Will the 
people have an opportunity to use that facility this fall or this 
summer? And, Mr. Minister, can you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what that big mistake that you made at that point 
is going to cost the taxpayers of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to 
respond to the question from the member for Pelly in reference 
to the Piwei camp ground, picnic ground, which he said was 
bulldozed. I personally checked into that, and what happened 
was one small John Deere, little green tractor, went in and 
knocked down one old picnic shelter which was in need of 
replacement and repair. 
 
Giving a little history on this, Mr. Speaker, I was a little 
disappointed, and indeed surprised, by the alacrity and indeed 
the zeal with which certain officials went about their work in 
that particular ground. Since then, the officials have been told to 
replace the things they withdrew from the camp ground so that 
the folks who have been enjoying it can go ahead and enjoy it. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, have you checked with your 
department to see if there was any similar destruction done in 
any other picnic sites in the province, and can you supply us 
with an updated list of what camp grounds and picnic sites you 
have closed around the province or handed over to local 
communities. Can you tell us what the cost of restoring the 
Piwei camp ground is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no 
bulldozing. And if they want to come in with some evidence 
that there were bulldozers and cats went in to picnic grounds 
and campsites and bulldozed them, I’d certainly be pleased to 
see it. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, you completely avoided 
the question. Could you inform this Assembly, or can you 
inform us, of how many other facilities in the province you 
have either closed down, bulldozed, or used a green tractor on – 
or any other colour tractor, Mr. Minister, on them to knock 
them down. How many other sites have you closed up in that 
manner, or turned over to local communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the total which was 
scheduled to be closed was 10. Of that 10 I believe three have 
been closed. I could be wrong; I’ll find out for sure and bring 
the answer back to the hon. member. 
 

Grasshopper Outbreak in Saskatchewan 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture, 
and it deals with the severe outbreak of grasshoppers which are 
threatening the crops in many parts of Saskatchewan. Can you 
give us the latest status report from your officials as to how 
many acres you expect are going to be affected, and how many 
acres of crop are going to be threatened by this outbreak of 
grasshoppers, and the potential dollar value loss? Last year it 
was over $100 million due to grasshoppers. Is it correct that this 
summer’s outbreak has the potential of being even more 
serious? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the stats 
with me right now in question period, but my estimates are up 
today and I’ll have my officials here, and the information that I 
have with respect to the estimates of how widespread it is will 
be at my fingertips. So I will respond a little later today. I don’t 
have the numbers. 
 
I can say that there's been up to a 90 per cent hatch across a 
great deal of southern Saskatchewan. Some areas are 95; some 
are 55 per cent. We’re spraying. There’s ample supplies. And 
farmers in some areas have it under control; in some areas it’s 
much worse. And the hon. member is aware of that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, the crop damage that is expected 
to be affected by the grasshoppers this year could be a very 
substantial loss to both the farmers and particularly to crop 
insurance. In spite of that, do you still refuse to introduce a 
program that would encourage farmers to spray extensively for 
grasshoppers by refunding them, like your colleagues in Alberta 
do, up to 50 per cent of their costs of spraying. By helping 
farmers to spray now you would save later on crop insurance 
claims. Will you consider now your position to introduce such a 
program as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the logic of the member is 
not quite sound because he’s making the assumption that 
farmers are not going to spray. And I, from my understanding 
and from all information I got, farmers are spraying. 
 
Now compared to the Alberta program, they’re putting $3 
million out; we’re putting $8.5 million up to the R.M.’s to start 
with, and we’ve got $1 billion out at 6 per cent money that 
certainly is cash. I mean, if you compare a $3 million program 
in Alberta to 8.5 here, we cover 100 per cent of the costs of the 
rural municipalities plus $1 billion in operating money. 
 
I mean, your logic that there isn’t enough money to spray is not 
sound. And I have not heard of farmers not spraying. They have 
access to credit, and they’ve received a great deal of money, 
and they can use that on spray chemicals for weeds, seeds, 
insecticides, and anything else. So the logic that they’re not 
spraying is just not there. They are spraying, and they have 
substantial amounts of operating capital because we’ve made 
sure they have. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Premier, you’re missing the mark 
completely. Farmers can’t afford to spray repeatedly. I know 
many, many farmers have sprayed at least three times and they 
are running out of extended cash, their  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1902 
 
 

own cash or whatever working capital they can lay their hands 
on. It’s a serious problem. If they can control grasshoppers, 
both you and the federal people will save money on crop 
insurance. Now can you tell us today whether the Mulroney 
government in Ottawa has agreed to help finance such a 
program? The federal Minister of Agriculture. I heard him 
myself on CBC radio in an interview, and he’s been on other 
stations. And I understand he’s made it clear that he would 
consider federal financial assistance to deal with the 
grasshopper situation if he gets an officials request from the 
province – if he gets an official request. 
 
Has a formal request for help from Ottawa been made to control 
grasshoppers and to pay 50 per cent of the farmers’ costs like 
Alberta does? I don’t think Alberta has a limit on their amount. 
They say 50 per cent of what a farmer spends, right across the 
board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the hon. 
member is accurate there with respect to . . . It’s $3 million that 
they’ve allocated. And, Mr. Speaker, in my conversations with 
the Minister of Agriculture, federally, he said that he’d be 
prepared to look at any requests that come from the provinces 
with respect to disaster and so forth, and he’s prepared to 
consider. He didn’t say that he had money, but he said, “I would 
look at any reasonable proposal.” Well that’s understanding for 
him, so I don’t think it’s fair for you to put words in his mouth. 
 
I know that in Saskatchewan – not in Alberta and not in 
Manitoba – that we have provided over a billion dollars at 6 per 
cent money so farmers can have access to cash so that they can 
do the kinds of things that they want to do. I’m also advised, as 
I travel around Saskatchewan, that indeed they’re spraying for 
grasshoppers. And if you’re telling me that they’re not spraying, 
well the information that I’m getting is certainly inconsistent 
with that. 
 
They have operating money to spend. I mean, it’s called a 
production loan program for 1986. That’s what we set it up for 
— $1 billion — $1 billion, which is a great deal of money, Mr. 
Speaker. And the farmers can use that for fertilizers or 
chemicals or anything else. 
 
If I had made it $2 billion or $5 billion, the member opposite 
would say, will you still help me spray for midge, or will you 
help me spray for grasshoppers. I mean, he has to be harping 
about something. We put billions of dollars out there in terms of 
cash – billions – and you’re still saying, well, can I have 3 
million more, or can I have 2 million more for this. 
 
I mean, he knows very well the problems you get associated 
when if you start spraying for one insect and then you’re going 
to be asked to spray for another insect, and then you’re going to 
be asked to spray for weeds which help control crop insurance, 
and you’re going to ask to do other cultivated techniques which 
will help your crop, and then you won’t have to have crop 
insurance. 
 
I mean, your logic takes you that we should pay for every single 
solitary thing that would add any impact on crop insurance. You 
didn’t do your homework when you said the people weren’t 
spraying. They are spraying. 

And with respect to your logic that you’re going to save money 
on crop insurance, well we could pay for virtually everything a 
farmer does so that we’d save money at the other end because 
he would have a crop. Well obviously, if you get into that, 
you’re drawing boundaries. You pay for one insect, then 
another insect, then another insect. You pay for weeds. You pay 
for weed sprays. You pay for everything. 
 
Now what next would you want money for? All right; I’ve said 
when we put $3 billion out and no other province has done it; 
well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a fair amount of money. Compared to 
Alberta, or compared to Manitoba, it’s head and shoulders 
above either one of them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I appreciate 
the Premier practicing his lecturing, because you’ll need that 
after the next election. You’ll maybe get a job back at a 
university where you can lecture. I don’t need a lecture. The 
farmers are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is . . . Order! The member 
rose on a question, and if you have a question I’d be glad to 
take it, but the member is giving information not relevant to any 
question. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, my new question deals with the 
fact that farmers have been contacting me on the business of 
grasshoppers and how many times they have to respray, and on 
collecting crop insurance for reseeding, and when is it 
available? 
 
My question to you is this: in some areas of the province, 
farmers have already decided to reseed crops damaged by 
grasshoppers, and one of the key problems holding them up is 
getting a crop adjuster out to look at their crops. Will you tell 
me why farmers are being made to wait for adjusters when 
many of the adjusters have called me and said they haven’t been 
asked to go back? 
 
The adjusters themselves have called and said, look, I’m there, 
I’m available. My neighbor next door wants to reseed. Three or 
four days or five days after he’s asked, after three or four calls, 
there’s still no adjuster there. Will you instruct your crop 
adjusters to get out and respond to claims? Because it’s very, 
very important when you’re reseeding. If you’re going to have 
to reseed, it’s good to get it in early, especially when it’s getting 
this late in the month. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 
not accurate in his statement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you calling me a liar? Do you want 
their names? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You can call yourself whatever you like. 
If you want to call yourself that, you call yourself that. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that the turn-around time, the 
turn-around time now for those people that are calling is, on 
average, three days across Saskatchewan – three days and you 
can have an inspector there. We have increased inspectors. 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1903 
 

Second observation. If you can’t get an inspector with that time, 
you’re told to go ahead and seed it and leave a test strip and 
we’ll look at it again. And that’s standard knowledge out there. 
So for you to say that they have to wait a week or 10 days or 
there’s no inspectors, it’s just not the case. It’s not the case. 
 
And you may find one isolated case here or one some place 
else, but on average it’s three days in the province of 
Saskatchewan. If they call, they’ll have the inspector there 
within three days. And if they’re not, they’re informed: go 
ahead and reseed the whole outfit, leave a test strip, and we’ll 
go and inspect it later. 
 

Cost of Advertising in the Saskatchewan Report 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have a question to the Deputy Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, last week I asked you a question 
about advertising placed by departments of government 
agencies and Crown corporations in the Saskatchewan Report 
magazine. You indicated last week you would have that 
information for me last Friday. It is now a week later and I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you’re now able to provide 
that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I apologize to the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker. As the hon. member knows, I wasn’t here last Friday 
and I wasn’t here last Monday and I wasn’t here last Tuesday, 
but I do invite all members to once again join with me in 
offering congratulations to that publication on its first 
anniversary in Saskatchewan. And I will tell the hon. member 
I’ll bring the information. I know it’s on my desk in my office. 
I’ll bring it down tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, can you 
also assure me, when you bring that, you will bring comparative 
figures to show how much advertising for the same period of 
time was done in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the 
Saskatchewan Business magazine which you also undertook to 
provide? And if you can do that tomorrow, I would be quite 
satisfied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will be absolutely 
thrilled to provide the information that the hon. member asked 
for last week, and I had inadvertently forgotten to bring it down 
to the House, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
only forgot today because previously I wasn’t here, so I 
couldn’t very well forget to do something that I couldn’t do 
when I wasn’t here. 
 

Power Line from Uranium City 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, and it has to do with his admission last week that 
not all power users to be served by a new power line in the 
Uranium City region will see their power bills drop 
immediately, as he had claimed when he announced the project 
in March. 
 
Can the minister tell us which specific categories of power 
users will see their power rates remain high until after the $48 
million line has been paid for, and can you tell us how long 
their power rates will remain at this high  

level? Would it be five years or 10 years, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. Eldorado at Rabbit Lake will be 
paying a significantly . . . well they’ll be paying the diesel rate, 
I think, for 10 years at a particular consumption level. And it’s 
estimated that after 10 years the project will be paid for out of 
that. There are certain categories that won’t feel the immediate 
impact of the reduced cost because of the hydro. 
 
This question falls in the same category as the question from the 
member for Regina North East. I believe you asked me this 
question last Thursday, a week ago, and I have been absent 
from the House in that period. I’m sure it’s in the same . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the whole session you’ve been 
absent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ve been absent from the House for a 
large part of the session, as the hon. member just pointed out. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be prepared to bring that information, 
along with the other information that I bring down for the 
member for Regina North East, hopefully, Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow. I will try very, very hard not to forget this time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you be here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I hope so. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Commercial Bingo Inquiry 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to release the Report of the Saskatchewan 
Commercial Bingo Inquiry and the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs draft response on the commercial 
bingo operations for public comment. 
 
I wish to take this opportunity to publicly express my thanks 
and appreciation to the three members of the inquiry – to 
Chairman Norman McConnachie, of Swift Current, Margaret 
Cuddington, of Regina, and Anne Matthews, of Saskatoon. The 
report is thorough, thoughtful, and reflects the many hours of 
hard work which went into this public inquiry. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, gambling in Canada is prohibited 
under the Criminal Code. However the federal government does 
allow the provinces to license charities to conduct bingos, 
lotteries, and raffles for charitable purposes. Hon. members will 
recall that the bingo inquiry was established because of public 
concern about the rapid growth of commercial bingo operations 
and their ultimate impact in Saskatchewan. 
 
Commercial bingo operations over the past five years have 
grown dramatically, and with this dramatic growth problems 
began to emerge. The public and the government became 
concerned that the charitable organizations were not getting a 
fair share of bingo revenues as prize boards and operating 
expenses soared. The government established a commercial 
bingo inquiry to receive public input into this controversial 
subject. 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1904 
 
 

The report, which I am releasing today, and the department’s 
draft response, outline a comprehensive set of recommended 
actions and guide-lines which I believe address the problems 
associated with bingo operations by protecting players and 
placing greater responsibility and control in the hands of the 
charities. 
 
The bingo inquiry travelled to 11 communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. The inquiry went to Prince Albert, La Ronge, 
Meadow Lake, North Battleford, Lloydminster, Yorkton, 
Weyburn, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
Public response, Mr. Speaker, was overwhelming, with over 
500 written submissions and 214 groups or individuals making 
presentations to the panel. Service clubs, church sponsors, 
individual bingo players, senior citizens, native groups, 
commercial bingo operators, and a whole host of other 
individuals and organizations made submissions to the inquiry. 
 
Input from the public was varied, with some strongly held, 
diverging points of view. Consequently the report of the inquiry 
is complex and the response required careful consideration. The 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs worked 
intensively to carefully analyze the report and to prepare our 
response. The issues and concerns raised by the inquiry are 
complex. I wish to emphasize as strongly as I can today that this 
is not government policy, but proposals for further discussion. I 
want public comment now on the best way to go about 
implementing the inquiry’s recommendations. The department 
response provides this opportunity. 
 
The primary recommendation is the establishment of a gaming 
authority to control bingos, break-open tickets, casinos, and 
raffles; to receive public comment on gaming issues, to 
recommend gaming policy, and to oversee the administration of 
gaming in Saskatchewan. As well, the need for a stronger 
enforcement agency was identified. The enforcement agency 
could be attached to the proposed authority, or be placed in 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
In addition to the establishment of the authority, a number of 
other actions and guide-lines are being considered. The 
department has put forward a series of proposed actions for 
public discussion. I would like to enunciate some of them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The establishment of a limit on prizes and restricting the 
number of sessions to be licensed at any one location in a 
24-hour period. 
 
Provision to allow organizations to allow for a once-a-year 
special event license to conduct a major bingo with a prize 
maximum of $100,000. This, Mr. Speaker, would allow for the 
continuation of large, special event fund-raisers such as those 
conducted by service clubs in so many Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
All organizations receiving a bingo license being required to 
register as a charitable organization under The Non-profit 
Corporations Act. This recommendation, Mr. Speaker, means 
that organizations raising funds will be answerable to the public 
as the Act requires. It also  

ensures that a democratic process will prevail in the operation 
of any organization operating a bingo. Accountability to the 
general public is critical. 
 
The inquiry’s report recommended that some groups such as 
individual sports teams be prohibited from sponsoring bingos. 
Mr. Speaker, traditionally, these groups have been permitted to 
sponsor bingos, and we believe it unfair to cut them off 
completely. The government is now asking the parties involved 
to give us direction on how this problem which was identified 
by the inquiry can be fairly resolved to the satisfaction of all. 
 
The inquiry recommended the establishment of mandatory 
bingo hall user associations. The department agrees that there is 
a significant merit in setting up bingo associations. However, 
we prefer to encourage the establishment of city-wide, 
voluntary associations, rather than forcing hall users to establish 
an association for a particular hall. 
 
The primary goal outlined by the department’s draft response is 
to return control of bingo operations to the sponsoring charity. 
 
The inquiry recommended the removal of break-open tickets 
from bingo halls. This, as you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, would 
have a very dramatic effect on fund-raising capabilities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The results of the inquiry’s own questionnaire indicated that 94 
per cent of respondents wanted break-open tickets sold in bingo 
halls. We believe that with proper controls, break-open tickets 
should be continued to be sold in bingo halls. Break-open 
tickets are available in many other outlets and should be 
available in bingo halls as people go there for that purpose. 
 
Hon. members will appreciate that this is a matter which the 
proposed gaming authority will probably wish to examine 
further. At this time, the government will be governed by public 
response. 
 
Whatever provisions we institute after public comment is 
received, I want to make a commitment to the charitable 
organizations in Saskatchewan. The new provisions that will be 
introduced in keeping with the Criminal code amendment will 
specify the role and the responsibilities of charitable groups 
when sponsoring bingos. These responsibilities are significant 
and are not unlike those required to run a small business. My 
department will be developing a self-help kit for charitable 
groups to familiarize themselves with the provisions and to 
assist them in acquiring, where necessary, the management and 
administrative procedures required. Instituting a series of 
provide-wide training programs may also prove helpful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I have just outlined a comprehensive 
approach to public concerns regarding bingo and gaming in our 
province. This has been a difficult issue for the government to 
deal with because of the controversial nature of the broad 
questions of gaming. Everyone recognizes the potential for 
negative social consequence if gaming is not properly 
controlled, but banning gaming altogether is not the answer. 
Public  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1905 
 

education so that individuals can make wise decisions about 
their own involvement, coupled with proper controls, is 
essential. 
 
We believe that the above approach can provide the necessary 
balance to most effectively protect the public interest. More 
specifically, it will ensure that the original purpose of licensing 
bingo is realized and, of course, that is to raise money for 
charitable objectives. 
 
I look forward to the comments of the public on both the report 
of the commercial inquiry and the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs’ draft response. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to thank the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Presumably that was the report word for word, and she saved us 
the necessity of ever reading it. I can’t imagine the report is any 
more verbose than the statement. 
 
Madam Minister, there is a number . . . I wish to point out to 
Madam Minister, that there’s a limit to the number of times you 
can spin the wheel, and I want to remind you of the process. 
You had a public inquiry so that you might get public input. 
You got the report almost six months ago. It took you six 
months to table it. In those six months you’ve not taken the 
position, not expressed any opinion on the recommendations. 
All you did in six months apparently was read the report. 
You’ve now tabled it, and you want public input. 
 
Madam Minister, what the charities and the public of 
Saskatchewan want is not an opportunity for input, they want 
some action from you. There are some very serious problems 
with bingos, everything from charities who can no longer enjoy 
the revenue they used to, to RCMP officers reporting illegal 
activities involved in bingos. 
 
Madam Minister, none of that apparently is worthy of any actin. 
What we would have expected after six months of inaction was 
not a request for further input but for some action. It is really 
regrettable, Madam Minister, that apparently another year is 
going to go by without any action being taken since action 
almost certainly involves legislation in this area. 
 
I take it, Madam Minister, that we are going to go through 
another one of these processes of paralysis by analysis. I wished 
I knew what was causing the minister so much difficulty, and I 
might try to help her with it. I don’t know what on earth is 
taking Madam Minister so long to make up her mind on a 
problem which cries out – shrieks in the loudest possible terms 
– for action. 
 
So I ask you, Madam Minister, if you won’t reconsider your 
inactivity and take some concrete action at the earliest possible 
moment. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill NO. 56 – An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. And Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper 
Mill in Saskatchewan 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince Albert Pulp 
company Ltd. And Saskatchewan Forest Products corporation 
and the Establishment of a Paper Mill in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 – An Act respecting Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today and move second reading of the Bill creating the 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations. 
 
As members are aware, I have previously brought forward a 
Bill to create the stock savings credit Act, and the Premier, the 
Minister of Agriculture, has introduced a Bill to create the 
livestock facilities tax credit. This Bill introduces the third and 
final new tax credit initiative announced in the budget. 
 
These measures, combined with the extension and enhancement 
of the livestock investment tax credit and the venture capital tax 
credit, create an extremely effective strategy in promoting job 
creation and economic development in the province. They 
promote activity in targeted sectors of our economy, sectors 
which have demonstrated perseverance and dedication in the 
pursuit of expansion and development. 
 
(1445) 
 
The labour-sponsored venture capital program fits well into this 
strategy. It opens another opportunity for small- and 
medium-sized business to raise equity financing for expansion 
and job creation. 
 
However, this new incentive does much more. This program 
will also provide an opportunity for employees to become 
actively involved in the ownership of Saskatchewan businesses. 
This will have the effect of increasing the employees’ 
commitment to the work place in instances where his or her 
investment in a labour-sponsored venture capital corporation is 
channeled through to his or her place of employment. 
 
Finally, this program will create a Saskatchewan-based 
investment alternative for employees who would normally be 
attracted to investments which result in a capital outflow to 
other parts of Canada. 
 
In presenting this Bill today, I would like to make some specific 
comments regarding the contents of the legislation as it defines 
the proposed structure of the labour venture capital program. 
 
This legislation presents a number of considerations  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1906 
 
 

which have never been introduced in Canada previously. We 
have attempted to introduce a program which will maximize an 
employee’s interest in investing in small- and medium-sized 
business through a consolidation of tax incentives being offered 
by the federal and Saskatchewan governments. 
 
We’ve also attempted to design this program so that it will be of 
interest to a wide variety of labour groups, ranging from major 
labour unions to smaller employment co-operatives. 
 
The essential design parameters are as follows: 
 
The labour groups will be permitted to organize and manage 
labour-sponsored venture capital corporations. 
Labour-sponsored venture capital corporations will take one of 
two basic structures: type A corporations, which will be broadly 
based investment funds that invest in a variety of eligible 
investment; and type B corporations, which will be formed by 
employees wishing to invest in their employers’ business. 
 
Eligible investors will be employees who reside in 
Saskatchewan. And in the case of type B corporations, only 
employees of the related business will be eligible. 
 
Eligible investments include small- and medium-sized 
businesses resident in Saskatchewan. Permitted investments 
must have as their primary objective the maintenance, creation, 
or protection of Saskatchewan jobs. And finally, employees 
who invest will earn a provincial tax credit equal to 20 per cent 
of their investment, to a maximum of $700 per year. 
 
It is possible that investors will also be eligible to receive a 20 
per cent federal tax credit with an annual maximum of $700. 
The employee could also consider part or all of the investment 
as a contribution to a registered retirement savings plan. 
 
These design parameters have been developed through a 
process of consultation with interested parties, including labour 
organizations and the Government of Canada. These discussion 
have provided a great deal of insight into the conditions under 
which this program must operate. However, we have not 
finished the consultative process. 
 
There are still a number of considerations which we are 
currently reviewing in the interest of finalizing a design which 
will effectively promote labour venture capital in 
Saskatchewan. As a result, while this Bill presents most of the 
primary design components of the labour-sponsored venture 
capital tax credit, it does provide an opportunity for future input 
and negotiation by labour in tailoring the program to meet 
Saskatchewan’s unique requirements. 
 
The Bill also defers the definition of certain terms and 
conditions which are important in ensuring a proper fit between 
our program and the recently announced federal labour venture 
tax credit program. This is a critical element in program design, 
since the attractiveness of the labour venture capital initiative 
depends on the application of both programs. 
 

The Bill is an important step in the achievement of a strong 
business community. It represents an innovative concept, where 
labour is able to invest funds in a business, in addition to the 
important contribution that is made through an individual’s 
labour. It is our belief that labour will react positively to the 
labour venture capital concept and will continue to work with 
us in the maintenance and creation and protection of jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It therefore gives me great pleasure to move second reading of 
Bill No. 52, An Act respecting Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations, that the Bill now be read a second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill is interesting. It 
is technical in nature. I would want to have an opportunity to 
study the remarks of the minister before expressing a firm point 
of view on the Bill; accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dutchak that Bill No. 51 – An Act to 
amend The Legal Profession Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want only to make a 
few brief comments in respect to Bill 51, the Legal Professions 
Act. 
 
One of the amendments to The Legal Profession Act provides, 
as is indicated by the minister in his comments, a 
recommendation from the national law society body that it will 
be necessary for persons who wish to be admitted to the 
practice of law in the province to be Canadian citizens. 
 
This is an interesting provision, and I want to pursue it more 
with the minister in respect to that provision. Because 
previously under The Legal Profession Act, if you were a 
British subject, you were entitled to practice law here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. This is a departure – and I don’t 
know to what extent. There has been no indication, and we can 
get into that in the committee of the whole, of course, as to what 
discussion has taken place. 
 
I suggest there are problems in respect to the implementation of 
this here particular recommendation or limitation on allowing 
people other than Canadian citizens to practice law. And in fact 
I draw to the attention of the House a recent case where this 
very matter was tried in British Columbia; keeping 
non-Canadians out of the B.C. bar violates the Charter. And in 
this law case . . . Section 15 of the Charter provides certain 
rights that you won’t have discrimination on the basis of race, 
colour, creed, and so on. And in this particular case it went to 
the Court of Appeal, and the Court of Appeal held in this 
instance, and they gave their decisions, their reasons, that in fact 
there could not be a discrimination – that on the  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1907 
 

basis of having to be a Canadian citizen. 
 

Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 
the right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law 
without discrimination and, in particular, without 
discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, 
colour, religion, sex, age, mental or physical disability. 

 
And that particular section in the B.C. case, the Court of Appeal 
in British Columbia indicated that the B.C. bar enactment 
violates the Charter of Rights. 
 
This may be the problem here, and I will be asking the minister 
whether or not he has turned his mind to it, and whether or not 
he has had any input from the Saskatchewan bar. 
 
I’m a little concerned also in the direction that it may take, and 
that is closing off the opportunity of some very talented people 
coming and joining our profession. I think it’s a concern, and I 
would hope that we may take a look at it because I would have 
thought, as the world became smaller and the interchange of 
societies – we are talking about free trade and so on – and the 
interaction of various cultures and countries, that rather than 
closing the society to people that we would welcome qualified 
people. 
 
We’re not dealing strictly here with the qualifications, that is 
the educational competence or whether they’re properly trained. 
We’re dealing primarily just on the basis of not being a 
Canadian citizen and they have to qualify for that before being 
entitled to practise law. 
 
I’m concerned in the direction – other direction, if I might 
mention – and that has to do with other foreign students, for 
instance at the Regina campus, not being able . . . or being 
somewhat discriminated against by a massive increase in the 
amount of the tuition fees. And surely I hope that Saskatchewan 
will, in fact, always welcome to inside its borders competent 
people. So I would like to know whether there is a particular 
problem here, whether we have, in the view, documented 
problems with foreign lawyers practising; whether there are 
deemed to be too many, or what is the reason for precipitating 
it. 
 
I want to pursue that, Mr. Speaker. The other amendments are 
more technical in nature, and some just make it more 
convenient for the process of the hearing committee and the 
appointment to the various committees – discipline and the 
hearing committee. I think we are in agreement with those. 
There’s a particular new section that I’ll want to deal with in 
detail. But I raise that particular concern, and we’ll be 
discussing that in committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 53 – An Act to 
amend The Forest Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill 
proposes a number of amendments to The Forest Act, and 
several of these amendments will have a significant impact on 
parts of our province. So I think we should examine them with 
care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was the Minister of Energy who got up in the House on June 
10 and moved this Bill to second reading stage. Some of what 
he said at that time was of considerable interest. The minister 
said that the forest companies had, and I quote: 
 

. . . expressed some discomfort with the present forest Act. 
 

The minister went on to say that, in making the changes asked 
for by the company to provincial law and regulations, the 
provincial government has two key objectives, and again I 
quote: 
 

(1) to provide forest companies with a secure fibre base and 
security of tenure within the limitation of the resource base; 
and (2) to conduct relations with the forest industry in 
general on a more business-like basis through contractual 
arrangements that specify the terms and conditions of 
operations. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the government’s apparent sole 
interest is to grease the wheels for the timber companies, 
especially the Weyerhaeuser corporation. You will notice that 
the minister is stating the key objectives of the government, 
makes absolutely no mention of conservation or environment 
protection, or multiple use of forest land for protecting the 
livelihood of small-business people involved in resort 
operations, or the role of local governments in deciding the 
amount of logging to be permitted for local input to decisions. 
 
Note: none of those are mentioned. Apparently they are not 
important enough for the Devine government, or to even 
mention its objectives. What is important are the two key 
objectives. One of these objectives is: 
 

. . . to provide forest companies with a secure fibre base and 
security of tenure within the limitation of the resource base. 

 
Which is to say go ahead and cut until the trees run out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this Act is going to – it erodes the 
autonomy of many of our local governments. And I want to 
give you an example of how control is today on a small 
northern community, and I’m going to use Buffalo Narrows as 
an example, which has a 3-mile radius that they have control 
over. And in that 3-mile radius, the community of Buffalo 
Narrows, they have the say as to who will go in and cut the 
timber. And they have real beautiful timber stands within their 
3-mile jurisdiction. 
 
(1500) 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1908 
 
 

If somebody wants to go in there and cut 10,000 board feet of 
timber or lumber, what they do, the contractor would go to the 
local Parks and Renewable Resources office to get a permit to 
go in there and cut. But before Parks and Renewable Resources 
would give them that permit or permission to go in and cut, they 
would first go to the village office, and they would ask the 
mayor and council if they wanted that contractor to come in and 
cut this timber out. Now that is local autonomy that our 
municipalities have. 
 
Under this legislation, I say that if a contractor goes into 
Buffalo Narrows and he wants to cut the timber in there, he has 
the right to go over the heads of the mayor and the council and 
go directly to the minister, and the minister, with his authority 
under these amendments, will be able to give that contractor the 
right to go into that forested areas which is under the control, in 
the town limits, and take out the timber; and also, not only to 
take the timber, but to construct roads into that timber. 
 
Right now the community has the right to say, the roads shall 
go into that bluff of timber in a certain area, not necessarily the 
shortest route in, but they have some say as to where the road 
will go and the timber. And I think that this is going to erode a 
lot of our local governments in this province who have a right 
to say who is going to harvest this timber and how it’s going to 
be harvested. And we all know that timber around our 
communities, some of that timber should be cut today, and 
some of it should be cut 10, 15, 20 years down the road. 
 
So I think that we have to make sure that that control is not 
taken away from the local communities and that the R.M.s, that 
they have that control, and if the timber is going to be taken out 
of there, that it is cruised by Parks and Renewable Resources. 
They have the timber cruisers to go in there and cruise it and 
only take the mature timber. The rest will be left until it 
matures. 
 
And I will continue with my remarks, Mr. Speaker, which is to 
say, go ahead and cut until the trees run out. 
 
The other key objective is to conduct relations with the forest 
industry in general on a more business-like basis to contract an 
arrangement that specify the terms and conditions of the 
operation. And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 53 certainly does that. 
 
This Bill, if passed, will make useless any regulations of the 
forestry Act, and any municipal development plan, and any 
zoning by-law and basic planning statement; any interim 
development control by-law; any district development planned, 
and any district zoning by-law. I have just spoken on that, that it 
takes away the local autonomy. 
 
Section 3 and section 8 of this Bill do exactly what I have just 
said. And if you don’t believe me, look at the explanatory notes 
handed out with Bill 53. 
 
Section 3 of the Bill is described as follows, and I quote: 
 

This amendment will allow specific provisions in a 
management licence to prevail where they are in  

conflict with the regulations. 
 

What that means, Mr. Speaker, is this. The regulations attached 
to The Forest Act are available to the public and can be used by 
any group or individual to have the government and the timber 
companies conform to certain standards. But the regulations are 
to be discarded under section 3 of this Bill and replaced by the 
back room deals worked out between you and the timber 
companies. 
 
It is changing the system from one which is open, 
straightforward and honest to a system that is open to abuse, 
political patronage, kick-backs, and it’s conducted behind 
closed doors. 
 
I mentioned earlier, section 8 of this Bill, and again I want to 
read the explanatory note produced by the Department of Parks 
and Renewable Resources, and it reads as follows: 
 

This section will clarify that the authority for the use of 
forest lands for forest-related purposes lies with the 
provincial government through The Forest Act, and not with 
other municipal jurisdictions. 

 
And I alluded to that also, what it would do to the local 
autonomy. That, Mr. Speaker, is a real slap in the face to 
municipal governments who have a direct interest in the logging 
activities inside their boundaries. I use as an example the Rural 
Municipality of Lakeland in north-central Saskatchewan. 
Lakeland included communities and resorts like Christopher 
Lake, Anglin Lake, and Emma Lake. 
 
The R.M. of Lakeland has a very extensive municipal 
development plan, which was passed by the R.M. council as a 
by-law on July 13 of 1982. The R.M. then negotiated the 
agreement of the Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources and Rural Affairs. 
 
On October 14, 1982, the Lakeland municipal development 
plan was approved by the Department of Rural Affairs with the 
deputy minister signing the agreement for the minister. Under 
the municipal development plan agreed to between the province 
and Lakeland R.M., timber cutting is permitted in the 
municipality, but in a managed and sensible way. 
 
The R.M. of Lakeland has never tried to eliminate the timber 
companies from the municipality. The local government has 
simply tried to have some say over such things as protecting 
resort areas from logging, and keeping hauling roads out of 
populated areas, and preserving the natural surroundings near 
settlements. 
 
If someone objected to these restrictions, they could take their 
case to the development appeal board, and if dissatisfied there, 
they could appeal the matter in court. The province had always 
considered itself bound by municipal development plans which 
had been approved by the provincial government. But that all 
will change now, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill passes. If the 
legislature passes Bill 53, municipal governments will be 
completely unable to regulate or control logging that goes on 
within  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1909 
 

their boundaries. 
 
R.M.s like the one I mentioned, Lakeland, which as done an 
excellent job of designing a by-law to cope with multiple use of 
land, are now being told by the Devine government: get lost, 
you are not going to have a word to say about timber cutting in 
your own backyard – and that’s really what the Bill says. 
 
This is really an example of big brother at work. The 
Conservative government has decided to grease the wheels for 
their pals who head up the big timber companies; and municipal 
governments, conservationists, resort operators, cabin owners, 
trappers, environmentalists, northern residents in general can be 
damned. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, we in the New Democratic Party 
are not going to stand idly by and permit those people to be 
trampled by the Conservative government. We are going to 
fight hard to have satisfactory answers to the legitimate 
questions brought to us. Questions like: why is it necessary to 
suspend the regulations of The Forest Act, and in their place put 
the terms of a private deal worked out behind closed doors with 
the owners of timber companies? Why are all the rights and 
powers of municipal governments being stripped away by a big 
brother provincial conservative government? Why is that 
necessary? Why are you scrapping the requirements for a forest 
management plan which is in The Forest Act now? Why 
abandon this sound management procedure which helps us 
work towards long-term, reliable yields from our own forests? 
 
And why is it necessary for this Bill to repeal section 22 of the 
present Act? The existing section 22 permitted the provincial 
government to change a timber agreement when the company 
refused or neglected to comply with the licence. Now that right 
has been removed and more power put in the hands of the 
timber companies – and we want to know why. 
 
We want these important questions answered, Mr. Minister, 
before we ever consider support for this proposed legislation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add some words 
to those of my colleagues with respect to this Bill. This Bill 
contains a number of principles. I will touch on three or four. 
 
The first one, really, is set out in section 3 of the Bill, and it is 
repeated in a number of other sections. And what it says is that 
the previous provisions of The Forest Act – which made forest 
management licences and other dispositions of Crown timber, 
made them subject to the Act and subsequent Acts and to the 
regulations – is to be repealed. And hereafter the provisions of a 
forest management licence, which will go on for 20 or 25 years, 
will not be subject to the Act and the regulations. 
 
I think that’s the fair reading of this section and the other 
sections which follow it. 
 

There’s a further provision which seeks to change the legal 
status of the Crown and removes the exemption which the 
Crown may have from certain legal actions which might have 
been mounted. That is contained, Mr. Speaker, in section 58 of 
the existing Act and is dealt with in section 7 of the Bill. 
 
Now with respect to that provision, I am not now quarrelling. I 
have long been in favour of provisions which limit the 
exemptions which the Crown may have from being hailed into 
court if they are in breach of certain arrangements which they 
may have made. 
 
The third point I want to touch upon is the one which my 
colleague, the member for Athabasca, has touched on in some 
detail, and that is the excluding of any application to forest 
lands – and we should understand . . . If I understand the Bill 
correctly, we’re not talking about provincial forests. We’re 
talking about all the forested land in the province, excluding 
from all of this land, and from others which may be transferred 
into that category by order in council – which can be done 
every day; any Crown land that is in the hands of the 
Department of Agriculture can be made forest land by a simple 
order in council – again if I understand the provisions of the Act 
correctly. 
 
All of this land is to be excluded from any application of The 
Planning and Development Act, and any of the zoning by-laws, 
and any of the many, many other provisions of a similar kind 
which we have developed in order to give land owners, 
householders, farmers, cabin owners, resort operators, and 
others, some security of tenure in knowing what sort of an 
activity will take place in their immediate neighbourhood. 
 
That’s what zoning is all about, and in effect zoning is being 
abolished by this Act in so far as it might relate to any land on 
which trees grow. That overstates it only mildly, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly doesn’t overstate it with respect to any land on 
which commercial timber grows. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to come back to the first point. I have 
not heard the arguments which say that somehow we must 
make a forest management licence entered into by the minister, 
paramount, superior, having greater force and authority than 
orders in council passed by the Premier and his cabinet, and 
than Acts passed by this legislature. And that’s what this Bill 
does. And I know of no demonstrated reason for it. 
 
These are not the first forest management licences we have had 
in this province. Forest management licences have operated in 
the past. Simpson Timber Company Ltd., for example, has 
operated with a forest management licence or equivalent for 20 
years. Simpson Timber, a U.S. timber company, has operated 
successfully in so far as I am aware, without molestation under 
Liberal governments, New Democratic Party governments, 
Progressive conservative governments. The current rules work 
and so far as we are aware, we have never heard people like 
Simpson Timber Company say that they feel particularly at risk. 
 
MacMillan Bloedel, which is perhaps Canada’s largest  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1910 
 
 

timber company, has operated for close to 20 years; it may be 
over 20 years now. With a timber disposition, under the existing 
Forest Act, I believe a forest management licence – but I’m 
subject to correction on that, and it doesn’t matter for the 
argument; it doesn’t matter what the title on the top of the 
document is – they have been subject to the existing Forest Act. 
And so far as I’m aware, they have never expressed any view 
that their source of fibre was at risk. 
 
(1515) 
 
Certainly when our party was in office, I recall no submissions 
on behalf of Simpson Timber, no submissions on behalf of 
MacMillan Bloedel saying they felt insecure as to their fibre 
supply because of the existing provisions of The Forest Act. 
 
And the same, Mr. Speaker, is true with respect to the Parsons 
and Whittemore organization which operated under the name of 
Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited and some other 
subsidiary, the names of subsidiary companies. And Parsons 
and Whittemore, if anybody, would have perhaps felt insecure 
since it is common knowledge, I think, that when the 
government changed in 1971 there was a difference of view 
between the new government and Parsons and Whittemore with 
respect to some proposed operations in the north-west area of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Notwithstanding that, notwithstanding the fact that there was 
some pretty hard bargaining, notwithstanding the fact that a 
settlement was arrived at, I can recall no occasion on which 
Parsons and Whittemore suggested that their fibre supply was at 
risk under the provisions of the existing act. 
 
And I am very puzzled, Mr. Speaker, to know why members 
opposite suggest that we must now change the whole structure 
of the forest legislation to make forest management licences 
supersede the regulations, and apparently – and that is the way 
the Bill is written – apparently supersede legislative provisions 
that might be enacted by this legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is put forward on the basis that it is 
business-like. Mr. Speaker, it is not business-like, at least with 
respect to legislation, for this very good reason. Nothing that we 
pass in this legislature can stop the next legislature from 
abrogating what we may pass here today or next week. 
 
None the less, Mr. Speaker, to put these provisions in an Act, 
saying that the forest management licence supersedes 
legislation when we know it isn’t true – we know that the next 
legislature can legislate that all away – creates in the minds of 
people who may not be familiar with our system a belief that 
the forest management licence rests on a different footing than 
in fact it will. And that’s not good business. Not good business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite are shouting about buying 
things back for a dollar. The dealings with the timber 
companies of this province, U.S. and Canadian, during all the 
years under three governments, have not suggested any 
arbitrary action on the part of any  

government, and I don’t expect any. 
 
Therefore I don’t, Mr. Speaker, think that we should legislate in 
a manner which would suggest that a person entering into, or a 
corporation entering into, a forest management licence had 
somehow some protection against acts of this legislature 10 
years hence. We all know that isn’t true. We all know that that 
cannot be done, and it is simply bad business to suggest to 
someone it can be done. If it was sought to say that the forest 
management licence should supersede the provisions of an 
order in council, that could be done. The wisdom of it might be 
debatable. 
 
But this Bill, if I understand it, — and it’s very confusing in its 
language – seems to suggest that the forest management licence 
will somehow have paramountcy over any Act of a special or 
general nature. I’m reading section 3 of the Bill, and I admit it 
to be confusing as to its legal effect. 
 
What it seeks to convey, however, is not confusing. It seeks to 
convey the impression that these forest management licences 
somehow will be paramount, will take precedence over any 
regulations which are passed in the future, and any legislation 
which is passed in the future. And we know, at least with 
respect to legislation, that is not true. 
 
I don’t want to get into an argument about regulations, but with 
respect to legislation, we know it isn’t true and we’re not 
dealing straight up with anyone if we try to suggest to them that 
it is true. And again, Mr. Speaker, nothing in what has 
happened in the last 20 years, I suggest, with Simpson or 
MacMillan Bloedel or Parsons and Whittemore, has laid any 
groundwork for believing it is necessary. 
 
I therefore find this type of legislation unfortunate and unwise. 
Unwise because I think we are suggesting to timber companies 
that the forest management licences will stand on some 
different footing than in fact they will. I understand, I believe, 
what is being done to attempt to suggest to companies that the 
forest management licences will be treated with great 
seriousness and will not be frivolously or arbitrarily interfered 
with. And I think that’s fair. 
 
That’s fair because people are investing substantial sums of 
money on the basis of a source of fibre, and understandably 
they would like to know that if their investment is for a 20-year 
term, their source of fibre is for a 20-year term. And that is 
understandable. 
 
I wish however, Mr. Speaker, to reiterate the point that in the 
type of government we have, nobody – this legislature acting in 
1986 – nobody can bind a legislature of 1996, and we shouldn’t 
suggest that we can. We can’t, and we know we can’t, and it’s 
bad business to suggest that we can. And it’s particularly bad 
business if it’s being read by any corporation from the United 
States, because I have found in the past a certain 
misunderstanding as to how our system works and as to 
whether or not the Crown can be bound without any possible 
recourse by the Crown to abrogate a contract which already 
exists. So I don’t think we should do that,  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1911 
 

and, as I say, we don’t need to. 
 
I therefore find this legislation unwise on at least two counts: 
the one dealing with this, as I say, admittedly confusing 
provision in section 3 of the Bill, which is designed, I believe, 
to state that forest management licences shall be of more force 
and effect than regulations and future changes in the Act; and 
the second provision which, as I say, on all land which has 
merchantable timber at least seeks to exclude the application of 
The Planning and Development Act and all similar legislation. 
 
I think that those are unwise provisions. I think the Bill 
therefore is unbalanced, unwise. I’ve indicated that I do not 
quarrel with the thrust of another provision limiting the 
exemptions of the Crown from legal actions. Other provisions 
which propose to repeal section 22, I will not deal with at this 
time, but will deal with it in committee. 
 
I find myself, therefore, Mr. Speaker, in opposition to the 
proposal in the Bill and will be voting against the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure today to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, a group 
of 23 grade 7 and 8 students from the community of Glenavon 
in the Indian Head-Wolseley constituency. I’m doing this on 
behalf of my colleague, the Minister of Health, who’s unable to 
be with us today. I want to introduce these students and wish 
them well in their visit to Regina. 
 
They’re accompanied here today by their teacher, Robert 
Fournier, their chaperons, Florence Psiurski, Ray Muchowski, 
and Jim Scott. I will be meeting with them in a few moments – I 
believe in about half an hour – and will be willing to answer 
questions about whatever topics you might like to raise. 
 
The reason I had agreed with the Minister of Health that I 
would like to introduce this group, Mr. Speaker, is that some 
number of years ago, I guess before these young people were 
born, I spent some time in Glenavon working for 
Interprovincial Pipe Line, whom you will know because it’s a 
company that’s a major company in your community. And we 
can talk a little bit about that and about some of the family 
names and so on, and I know it at that time was a very, very 
friendly community. Those people made myself, and others 
who came there to work, very welcome, and I would say that 
we’ll try to do the same for you here in the legislature today. I 
would ask all member to join with me in welcoming the group 
from Glenavon this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may, Mr. 
Speaker, prior to getting into my remarks, I too would like to 
pass a word of welcome to the students from  

Glenavon and Mr. Fournier, whom I had the pleasure of 
meeting a year or two ago when I was guest speaker at 
graduation there. Nice to see you; welcome to Regina; have a 
safe trip home. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s rather difficult in 
rising to close debate to address, obviously, all of the questions 
which were raised by the opposition. Naturally I don’t agree 
with all of the points put forward by the member from 
Athabasca or the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
However, I will concede that indeed there were one or two good 
points made, and some points that will need addressing 
specifically in committee of the whole when we examine it 
clause by clause. There are some questions that I feel I can 
more fully address and perhaps allay some of the fears of the 
members of the opposition as to the precise intent of this Bill. 
There is certainly no intent to be greasing the wheels of timber 
industries or any one company in particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did in fact meet with all of the timber companies 
in the province and have discussions with them prior to the 
introduction of the Bill in the legislature. I will say, Mr. 
Speaker, I also had several meetings with members of the 
Saskatchewan Council of Independent Forest Industries. I met 
with them many times last year, and I met again with them last 
week. It was primarily at their instigation that I gave some 
thought to taking a look at proposed amendments to The Forest 
Act. 
 
And when I looked at some of the provisions – specifically I 
believe the Leader of the Opposition referred to section 22 – I 
realized that in fact I did have some very sweeping powers, 
powers which may not have been invoked in the past but which 
are hanging in the background and could in fact preclude 
business deals with other companies who may be interested in 
coming into the province. 
 
I believe there’s also a clause, a provision in the Act, which 
took away allocations from some small operators in the 1970s 
to provide increased or better or more allocation to the current 
corporations. And I just feel, Mr. Speaker, that any provision 
which gives me unilateral, sweeping rights not only to alter a 
forest management licence agreement after it has been signed, 
not only to alter it but to cancel it altogether, and furthermore 
pay no compensation to the affected companies, is a somewhat 
odious clause. And I think it is one that I made no apology for 
proposing to repeal under these new amendments. 
 
(1530) 
 
The member from Athabasca did bring up some points about 
consultation, about the forest management plan. Any time a 
forest management licence agreement is negotiated, Mr. 
Speaker, there is provision with that for a forest management 
plan. The forest management plan will be presented to those 
local jurisdictions to which the  



 
June 12, 1986 

1912 
 
 

hon. member referred, and they will have a chance to be 
consulted. In fact, this morning, when I was going through 
some of the provisions of this Act, I specifically directed my 
officials that under no circumstances will the forest 
management plan be approved prior to consultation taking place 
with local jurisdictions. So that will be happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governments currently could make forestry 
agreements one day and then unilaterally and arbitrarily break 
them the next day without any redress whatsoever to the injured 
party. I don’t believe that that is a good basis for attracting 
multi-million dollar investments which are required to put the 
Saskatchewan wood industry on a profitable footing and to 
elicit industrial investments and proper forest management and 
utilization. 
 
Another major thrust of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to remove any 
uncertainty as to which Act governs the harvesting of timber 
and other related forest activities on provincial forest lands. 
Industry cannot be expected to feel secure and confident in an 
environment in which it is not clear as to who they must work 
with to pursue their corporate interests regarding wood supply 
and forest management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that these amendments reflect current 
government thinking and will provide an increased level of 
security of fibre base in tenure to the forest industry. I’m also 
very hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that those small operators who were 
forced out of the industry in the 1970s will find a warm 
welcome back into the forest industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, obviously I will be supporting the 
amendment as proposed in its entirety. And I’ll be pleased to 
get into further discussion in a question-and-answer nature in 
committee of the whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague, the Attorney General, the member from P.A.-Duck 
Lake, there’s 70 grade 7 students in the west gallery; the 
teacher, Miss Thorpe – hi Betty; chaperons, Mrs. Kaufenberg, 
Miss Davis, Miss Isbiester, and Carl Folvik – the printing isn’t 
very good on this. 
 
But anyway, I would ask all members to . . . I’m sorry. They’re 
from Queen Mary elementary school, Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan, which is part of the Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
constituency within the city of Prince Albert. 
 
I would like all members to greet the students here. And I wish 
them an enjoyable time in Regina and a safe trip home, and I’ll 
be meeting with them at 4 o’clock for pictures and drinks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 – An Act respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit 

Mr. Chairman: — Perhaps the minister in charge would like to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have the deputy minister 
of Agriculture, Mr. Wayne Holt, who is an economist with the 
department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
livestock facilities tax credit – I suppose the purpose of the Bill 
is to encourage livestock numbers in the cattle industry in 
general in Saskatchewan. Could you tell me about what the cow 
population was in Saskatchewan when you took office and what 
that is today? Have you numbers like that with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I don’t have the exact numbers, Mr. 
Chairman, but, ballpark, it’s moved from 850,000 to about 
780,000 head, give or take a thousand. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I don’t have the precise numbers either, and you 
never ask a question unless you know the answer – I suppose is 
a good rule – but press reports and statements I’ve heard around 
is that the cattle population, the cow production population, is 
the lowest in close to a 20-year history. 
 
And I’m wondering if you still feel like you did yesterday that 
the thrust you have in your department – and I’m not going to 
take a long time with this Bill because the general principles 
can be discussed later today when we get into your 
department’s estimates. But I’ve been criticizing you for your 
philosophy of shoring up the wealthy and the rich rather than 
putting some money into building livestock facilities and 
helping young people and farmers getting started, expanding, or 
even buying an existing facility. That, I think, would encourage 
livestock numbers more than giving tax benefits to wealthy 
people that are building livestock facilities and that don’t 
necessarily have to be bona fide farmers. 
 
I read by your remarks you made when you introduced the Bill 
that you were hoping that that would even encourage people 
from outside of Saskatchewan, and I’m wondering if the tax 
credit would just apply to people that pay a Saskatchewan 
income tax. I presume that was part of the aspect. So I’m not 
sure how that relates to the words you used, that this was going 
to be such a great Bill to encourage others to come into 
Saskatchewan, to outside corporations – Safeways or something 
like that – to build a big facility to have a factory to go into a 
commercial production of cattle. 
 
So I think, number one, what I’m saying is that your programs 
have been ineffective as far as encouraging the cattle industry, 
as far as encouraging new people to get into it; and number two, 
that the drain on the purse is going to affect us more than it does 
you, because it’ll be close to three years down the road before 
they have to provide that they’re in the industry, or something, 
that the tax credits apply . . . 
 
You’re spending the next government’s money, is basically 
what you’re doing, not your own, by allowing a  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1913 
 

tax credit that doesn’t encourage somebody today. You’re 
making us pick up the heavy tab of this aspect. 
 
So I’m kind of worried about what kind of load you’re leaving 
us and how tough an assignment we’ll have there. But basically 
a comment on how you feel this is going to encourage the cattle 
populations by allowing a tax credit, rather than putting the 
same amount of dollars up front like the old farmstart program 
did – and you didn’t like it when I referred some of Ross 
Thatcher’s programs before, but he was one of the originators 
of the farmstart that I can remember when I had relatives get 
into cattle production. 
 
If the legislation was in place, if they were in so long, they got 
help with their interest and recoveries on their interest. And we 
carried on and expanded on that program even further . . . that 
up to the first eight years in business. And during those first 
eight years in business, the person actually got a reduction in 
his payments from the farmstart, which is now the 
Saskatchewan credit corporation’s money that they are paying 
back. 
 
This one here kicks in after that. The business that’s making 
money and a business that’s in there from a good, well-heeled 
financial operation will then get a tax credit for building a 
facility on the income tax he pays. And to me that sounds like 
you’re trying to do a favour for a friend rather than encourage a 
business. You’re creating another tax loophole. 
 
I’m wondering what the position is of the cattlemen, the official 
positions. I understand in Carlyle you got beat up just slightly 
from your good friends, an association that basically has been 
supporters of your party and, in general terms, should have been 
a comfortable setting for you to speak at, rather than coming out 
with newspaper stories and resolutions questioning you. 
 
But I’m wondering why you chose this route to try and 
encourage the cattle industry when the numbers are the lowest 
they’ve been in 20 years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, the cattle 
numbers across western Canada are down. They’re down for a 
couple of reason. They’re down in Alberta, down in Manitoba, 
and down in Saskatchewan, in terms of the cow population. 
They’re down because prices were down and farmers 
responded, so that they marketed more cows than they normally 
would. 
 
Secondly, they’re down in Saskatchewan as a result of drought, 
and you know that, and because of the difficulties with respect 
to feed in southern Saskatchewan. And so, rather than keep as 
many cows, they culled more cows during times when there 
was a shortage of feed. 
 
With respect to our incentives and if they worked, we have 
approximately 100,000 more head on feed than we previously 
did. So our incentives to encourage the livestock feeding 
business has worked significantly. In fact, it’s gone against the 
grain across Canada. Where others were going down, 
Saskatchewan has gone up because of the incentives that we’ve 
provided. 

With respect to the tax break, as I pointed out yesterday, the 
livestock investment tax credit, where you write off $25 a head 
and so forth, the majority of that goes to very small operators – 
70 per cent of it went to people who sold less than 50 head, and 
49 per cent went to those that sold 20 head or less. So it was 
precisely targeted at those individuals that were getting into the 
livestock business or had small operations and small incomes. 
 
So I’m not sure whether you’re going to vote for or against this, 
but it is an incentive, an encouragement, to build new facilities 
by people who are starting or people who want to expand, or 
both. So if you’re against it, I mean, we might as well get right 
at it and say, all right, you’ll vote one way and I’ll vote another. 
 
But it’s something that the industry has recommended to me. 
The livestock producers would like to see a tax credit for new 
facilities. And because they can run 15 per cent credit over a 
number of years, it encourages the expansion of facilities. And 
like I said, we have 100,000 more cattle on feed than we 
previously did, we we’ve not only gone against the grain 
nationally but even against the trend in Saskatchewan because 
of the drought. 
 
So it’s working. People are investing. We’re in fact short of 
feeder cattle because of the incentives and the venture capital 
corporations and the other packages we put together to feed 
livestock. So it’s moving in the right direction. 
 
It’s value-added; it’s processing. It’s the kind of thing that we 
should have been doing so we’re not just haulers . . . or hewers 
of wood and drawers of water. We want to process as much as 
possible. It increases jobs in other sectors. As a result we’re 
going to be packing more meat, processing it, and so forth, 
whether it’s in pork or in beef. 
 
(1545) 
 
So it’s a livestock tax investment credit to encourage young 
people, new people, expansions of others. And as I pointed out 
with our tax credit previously, it applied primarily – primarily – 
to the smaller producer, which is excellent. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
was particularly concerned about the training farms in Green 
Lake, Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse. We have the farms 
that have been established in those communities. I was wanting 
to raise a question with respect to the status of the farming 
community in the training aspects, and their hiring and 
employment aspects of those farms. Would you have 
information related to the status of those farms that I’ve 
mentioned, the one in Cumberland House, the Silver Lake farm 
in Green Lake, the Central farm in Green Lake, the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse farm in Ile-a-la-Crosse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the farms are doing  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1914 
 
 

well in a general sense. I would be glad to get a little more 
detail when I get into my general estimates. It really has nothing 
to do with this Bill, but generally they’re doing well and the 
training programs are working. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Okay. That’s very good. 
 
Mr. Engel: — There’s only one other question I’ve had . . . I 
see that in the last four or five issues that “as prescribed by 
regulations.” Can you give us some copy or something in 
writing so we know what you expect the regulations might be, 
or have you the regulations already? “As prescribed in the 
regulations,” or “pursuant to regulations,” and so on. The Bill 
really gives you the right to go ahead with offering a facilities 
tax credit, but how are you going to do it? Who is determining 
what the regulations include? We don’t have that information. I 
was wondering if you could make some material available as to 
what the regulations will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Of course, we’ll provide . . . The 
regulations haven’t been through the Regulations Committee, 
but when they are, we’ll certainly make them available to you 
or anybody. 
 
Mr. Engel: — When do you expect that? Have you a time 
limit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In the near future – shortly. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 12 then has an amendment, a house 
amendment which reads as follows:  
 

To amend section 12 of the printed Bill by renumbering it as 
subsection (1) and by adding the following subsection: 
 
(2) Notwithstanding any other Act or law, any regulations 
made pursuant to this Act may be made retroactive to a day 
not earlier than January 1, 1986. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could just ask one question on the 
coming into force on section 13. At this time do you know how 
many projects will fall into that category for the first months of 
the year up till now? Have you got a list, or do you know how 
many there will be that will fall into that category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I don’t. Individuals will have to 
apply and when they apply, if they’ve started some new 
facilities, then they can make the application once the 
legislation is passed, and this allows us to be retroactive until 
the beginning of the year. So I don’t know until the applications 
come in. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Any magic about January 1st of ’86 as 
opposed to November of ’85? Are there some projects that you 
want to fit into that time period, or what is the reasoning? The 
other point that I wanted to raise too is on your amendment to 
section 12 – I didn’t quite get clear – but it would make the 
regulations retroactive as well to January 1st of ’86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — January 1st is usually the beginning of a 
tax year for most people and that’s why we make it retroactive 
for 1986. So for everything in 1986, if they’re starting a new 
hog barn or a new cattle feeding facility in 1986, which covers 
most of their tax year, they can apply. And the regulations will 
be applicable to the beginning of the year as well, so that 
everything is in gear for 1986. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Livestock Investment 
Tax Credit Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, I made my point on this one in that here 
you are quite strikingly infringing on the next government’s 
term by extending it beyond when you have a mandate to ’87, 
’88, and ’89. And I’m wondering, if you are that confident that 
you’re going to be administering the Department of Agriculture, 
why you didn’t call an election in June, you know, or in April, 
or something like that when your term was up because . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Well you know the date of 
any possible election really has nothing to do with the Bill. It 
has nothing to do with the Bill, so please confine your 
comments to the Bill itself. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If you would have listened to the rest of the 
sentence, my comment just says: The Livestock Investment Tax 
Credit Act extends the time period in which an animal must be 
marketed or slaughtered to obtain a tax credit. And that time 
period is 1987, 1988, 1989. That is our turn; that’s our term in 
office as much as it is yours. And so if you don’t call that time 
break between when the four years is up when you should be 
governing to when the other one should be governing, let’s not 
use the word “election,” but let’s just say you’re infringing on 
the next government’s time frame. And I think there’s no real 
reason to move with this Bill now. That can be done next year 
after the election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the member may not think it’s a 
good idea to extend the livestock investment tax credit, but it is 
very popular, and the livestock industry wants us to do it. With 
respect to projects that are going on now, obviously a project 
like a paper-mill or an upgrader or a power project or others, are 
for years. And when we agree to do them in this legislature, we 
know that. 
 
So, I mean, your argument with respect to the administration of 
the time, or the administration three years from now or five 
years – I mean, it doesn’t make any sense at all. I mean, I don’t 
really understand the argument. We do all kinds of things here 
and agree in the  



 
June 12, 1986 

1915 
 

legislature that we’ll build projects that go for 25 years. And 
what you’re doing 25 years from now, and I am – I mean, you 
may know but I don’t know what you’ll be doing or what I’ll be 
doing. 
 
So we make decisions all the time that last a long time. So if the 
livestock industry wants the continuity, and they believe it will 
encourage investment, and it has so far, so it’s something that’s 
in response to the livestock industry. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 – An Act respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — By leave, I move the Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Livestock Investment 
Tax Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I have the same officials that I had 
yesterday. And if I could begin the discussions, the member 
from Quill Lakes had raised several concerns with respect to the 
production loan that was made available here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I don’t need to reiterate what the gentleman 
said but he was against it because he said that there were some 
people who would not need it and could apply. 
 
When he makes his position that he’s against this type of loan, I 
will have to remind him of three or four facts. One is, the 
Canadian Wheat Board has a cash advance and they’ve had it 
for years, and I suspect most people in Saskatchewan support it. 
And it is not income tested; it is a universal program. When 
farmers want to get access to cash, they can get it at zero per 
cent interest rate, whether  

they are farming a great deal of land or whether they have 
money in the bank or whether they don’t have money in the 
bank, and that’s been the case. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Chairman, we introduced a livestock cash 
advance, and it is universal. So people in the livestock industry, 
whether they have two cows or whether they have 10 cows or 
150 cows, or whether they have money in the bank or not, can 
apply for the livestock cash advance, and it’s universal. And 
I’m surprised the members opposite are against universal 
programs that you can have access to credit to plant your crop 
or to go to the wheat board or to go to the livestock industry or 
so forth. 
 
Third point that I would like to make, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool recommended and passed 
resolutions that the farmers in this province have access to 7 per 
cent money and credit. And they didn’t say for three or for four 
or for others; they just said that everybody should have access. 
That was supported by the National Farmers Union. And I 
haven’t heard a commodity group any place in Saskatchewan 
who didn’t think we should have access to long-term, low 
interest rate money to allow people to put in their crops or 
otherwise. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Chairman, we have universal health care. You 
can be a millionaire and you have access to those programs. So 
if you go through to the wheat board, if you go through to the 
livestock cash advance which is supported by both sides of the 
House, if you look at the recommendations of farm 
organizations, they wanted people to have access, everybody to 
have access to that kind of money, pay it back – as you do the 
wheat board and as you do the agricultural credit corporation, as 
you have been, universal health care, universal education. 
 
So not only is the opposition clearly stating that they’re against 
the production loan program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They said it. I mean, the member from Quill Lakes said that he 
found it offensive and he found it unfair. Well, I just point out 
that what he’s saying is that he’s not only against that program 
but he’s against the very same program that applies to the cash 
advance for the wheat board, the cash advance for the livestock, 
the recommendations by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the 
farmers’ union and every other commodity group that I know. 
Or elevator company, who said we should have access – 
universal access – to credit at reasonable, long-term interest 
rates to put in the crop. 
 
So, one, he’s against that: two, he’s against the universal 
concept. Universality is here. I guess what he would like to see 
is income testing. Or he would like to see boundaries – some 
people can receive it but in this area they can’t; and some 
people can receive this and some people can’t. We went 
through that several times. So I just raise the point that if he is 
against 6 per cent money for agriculture, then he’s against all 
the programs that we’ve had in this province for years, and the 
new ones we’ve introduced. 
 
He also raised the point that not everybody had access to the 6 
per cent money and he said that we misled the public. I want to 
make it very, very clear – 99.62 per cent  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1916 
 
 

of everybody that applied for the 6 per cent money got it. Less 
than one-half of 1 per cent, 0.38 per cent did not get it; 99.62 
per cent of the people, the applicants, received their loan. 
 
So if you’re in the ballpark of 99.62 per cent of those that 
applied, I think that’s reasonably everybody, for all intents and 
purposes. For some who owe a great deal of money to the 
government, we’ve written off their expenses and said it’s a loss 
we’ll accept. They still owe us, but we’ve written it off and 
said, fine, you go see if you can farm, and so forth. It’s an 
amount of 0.38 per cent. We have said, If you can make your 
payments, if you can get back in and resolve those kinds of 
problems, we’ll look at the other 0.38 per cent. So I just make 
the point that 99.62 per cent of those that applied have received 
it; the applicants have received their money. 
 
So I put the concept out there that, if you’re against universal 
credit for farmers, then I want to make sure it’s very clear. I 
know that you’re very much in favour of the land bank system 
over low interest money, and you made that clear; the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did the other day. If you’re also 
against universal programs – fair enough. And I’ll understand 
that and let it be well-known that in agriculture, you are much 
more in favour of the land bank, and you’re in favour of income 
testing and only helping regions or helping certain kinds of 
people, against the concepts of universality that’s in the wheat 
board, in the livestock cash advance system, and the 
recommendations of every agriculture group I know. That’s a 
position that was clearly stated by the member from Quills -–
fair enough. 
 
And there is a difference in philosophy, and I point out: the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said that they were not 
going to reintroduce, necessarily, the land bank system, and he 
wasn’t going to support it. Last Friday in Langenburg, the 
former minister of Agriculture, president of the Saltcoats NDP 
Association, introduced a resolution: 
 

Members resolved that (the) NDP government institute a 
land transfer mechanism whereby a beginning farmer could 
obtain a land (lease) by means of . . . long term guaranteed 
lease with the option to purchase. 

 
He said that it was an excellent . . . went on to say: 
 

(Mr.) Kaeding said the resolution stems from a problem 
with the old Land Bank (system) set up under the NDP . . . 
in power. He said it was an excellent program except (this) 
not enough land was available for distribution and that the 
land had to be leased for five years before it could be 
purchased. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that clearly says it all. There’s a former 
minister of Agriculture who says the only problem with land 
bank is, they didn’t have enough of it; and that they are going to 
reintroduce it, and it’s passed as a resolution. And here is a 
former member of Executive council, former cabinet minister. 
And as I said the other day, I know in the heart of hearts that a 
democratic socialist wants to own the farm. And that was the 
land bank  

program, and I understand that – fair enough. 
 
And what the people are saying: you keep going around and 
say, we have changed our ways; oh, we’ve learned and we’ll 
introduce something else. But in your heart of hearts, they know 
that you want to do this. It passes at resolutions with the former 
minister of Agriculture. That’s the policy that you like. And all 
you want to be able to do is get back in – and we will own the 
land for the government, and we can lease it to people – and it’s 
brought up time and time again. 
 
And you . . . I mean, your heart of heart and your soul and the 
things that you believe philosophically come right out to the 
fore. And it was documented Friday in a resolution passed by 
the NDP, chaired by the former minister of Agriculture. 
 
So I know the policies; I understand them; I understand why 
people threw them out. And they know also that it’s not a 
hidden agenda. You can’t even disguise it. It is there, that you 
want to introduce the land bank, only you want more land in it 
so you can control more. And there’s only one way to do that – 
that means you’ve got to buy more land. You’ve got to buy 
more land for agriculture so the government can own it and then 
you can lease it out. It’s not only passed in a resolution; it was 
raised by the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in his 
discussion of his philosophy versus mine. 
 
Well I go back to the 6 per cent money. I would much rather 
provide low interest loans for people to buy land or operate 
their farm, on a universal basis, then I would where the 
government owns the land and the people are into a lease 
position. And whether it’s this resolution or whether it’s your 
agenda, just as long as the public knows the difference. And 
you raised it. There’s a difference in philosophy; you’re 
absolutely correct, and it’s nice to have it clear. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 6 per cent money, I believe 
in universal programs as they apply, like the Canadian Wheat 
Board, the livestock cash advance. I support the resolutions by 
the major farm organizations that asked for it. And if . . . The 
hon. member from Quill Lakes said the following: that farmers 
cannot be trusted and they won’t pay it back. That’s an attitude 
and a difference in philosophy. 
 
I trust farmers. I trust them to take a cash advance in the wheat 
board system; I trust them to take a cash advance in the 
livestock system; and I trust them to get 6 per cent money to put 
in their crop. And when he said that there’s going to be large 
numbers of farmers who will not pay it back, what he is saying 
is that he doesn’t trust the farmers. 
 
He wants to pick and choose the farmers that he wants to give 
the money to, which is the same old philosophy, the same old 
system that was universally rejected across rural Saskatchewan. 
So back to philosophy. I trust them. I will lend them the money, 
and I will help them and I will protect them against low interest 
rates. And I have no intention, no intention at all, to buying 
farm land. 
 
In fact, the land sales have set records from the government to 
the people during difficult times. During  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1917 
 

difficult times we have sold millions and millions and millions 
of dollars of Crown land to young people all across this 
province, and we’ve helped them with low interest loans to own 
their own farm. 
 
Now that’s a difference in philosophy, and it’s important. And 
It’s important politically, economically, socially, and for the 
history of the province and the future of the province. And we 
might as well get right into it and find out that it’s a clear 
distinction between the kinds of things that we will do and have 
done in agriculture versus what the member from Quill talked 
about and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was 
defending and in terms of what the former minister of 
Agriculture has passed as a resolution that the NDP do if they 
ever got back into power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the 
Premier this question. Prior to the meeting of western premiers 
in Manitoba, did you at any time formally request from the 
federal government deficiency payments for Saskatchewan 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I met prior to the western premiers’ 
conference, as Minister of Agriculture, with my counterparts 
across Canada and with the federal minister, John Wise. I also 
met with other cabinet ministers in Ottawa. And I said to them 
directly, and I said at the agriculture ministers’ meeting, that we 
have to be able to bargain with the same kinds of ammunition 
that the United States is using with respect to the farm Bill. 
 
I raised it with my colleagues there and said . . . And it was 
raised by, I believe, the Minister of Agriculture. Certainly we 
talked about it, the new Minister of Agriculture in P.E.I., the 
Minister of Agriculture from Manitoba, other ministers of 
Agriculture, and said, we have to look at money that we can 
place in the hands of farmers here – call it deficiency payments, 
call it an export grain subsidy, corresponding tool for 
bargaining, if you will. 
 
So I raised it in advance of the western premiers’ conference, 
and obviously I raised it there. I was the one that initiated it at 
the western premiers’ conference. And I got unanimity, saying 
that we should have a billion dollars up to the table, on the 
table, because that’s about what we need to compare to the 
export subsidy – not just the farm Bill, but the export subsidies 
the United States is into. 
 
And if they continue to go more, if they subsidize others, then 
we’ve got to be in a position where we are prepared to put up 
comparable amounts of money so that we bargain with the same 
kind of ammunition to defend farmers here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, we heard that long 
statement, and nowhere was there a statement that you formally 
asked the federal government for deficiency payments, and you 
didn’t say that because you never have. 
 
Farm organizations all across this province have been saying, 
we need deficiency payments. The wheat pool has said it. Have 
you supported the wheat pool’s statement? You have not. The 
old Palliser, your old  

organization, the Palliser, even they are saying we need 
deficiency payments. And are you saying, I agree with them? 
You’re not – not a single public statement in support of what 
our farm organizations have been saying about deficiency 
payments. 
 
Now it is very, very clear, Mr. Premier, that western Canada 
needs deficiency payments. It is very clear that the existing 
payments for crop insurance and for western grain stabilization 
and the other federal-provincial and federal programs moving 
money to farmers are moving far, far less to Canadian farmers 
and prairie farmers than American federal government 
payments are moving to U.S. farmers, than the European 
governments are moving to their farmers. And yet we hear 
nothing from you saying we need deficiency payments. We 
don’t hear it. 
 
In the last few weeks we’ve heard some suggestion – some 
suggestion – that we might come up with something less than a 
billion dollars for all of western Canada for export subsidies, 
but, Mr. Premier, you know that that’s a far cry, even when 
coupled with all the other payments, it’s a far cry from what 
American farmers are getting and the European farmers are 
getting. 
 
And I say to you that it’s time you stood up and said to the 
federal government, we need for Canadian farmers as many 
dollars per bushel, the same amount of money – calculated U.S. 
dollars, Canadian dollars; I don’t care how you calculate it – but 
the same amount of money as U.S. farmers are getting. We 
know we still won’t be getting as much as the European farmers 
are getting, but we need that kind of money, and we need it 
from our federal government. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I say to you that you haven’t asked for that. I say to you 
that no public statement you have made amounts to that. And if 
you can refer me to the public statement – don’t tell me what 
you’ve said to Wise in the back room or what you’ve said to 
Mulroney in the back room. Tell me what public statement you 
have made which backs up the wheat pool, which backs up the 
western wheat growers, which backs up the UGG (United Grain 
growers), which backs up the NFU (National Farmers Union), 
and says, we need deficiency payments – we need deficiency 
payments – which, possible when coupled with other payments, 
will equal $2 billion. 
 
We haven’t heard that from you. We haven’t heard that from 
you because you are unwilling to stand up to the Mulroney 
government. You are unwilling to take them on. You haven’t 
done it. You haven’t done it like other political leaders have 
done. You haven’t done it in support of our farm movements – 
and it’s all of them, right from the western Canada wheat 
growers on the one hand of the political spectrum to the NFU 
on the other. They’re all saying the same thing. And you still 
can’t find yourself in agreement with what they are saying that 
we need deficiency payments. And we need deficiency 
payments to bring up the income of western wheat growers, 
western grain growers, up to the level which they would get 
from the United States. You haven’t said that. 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1918 
 
 

And as I say, if you can refer me . . . I’ve been looking through 
the clippings. I just cannot find the clippings which says, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan is calling for deficiency payments to 
bring the income of Canadian farmers up to the level of the 
income of U.S. farmers. I haven’t seen that. And if you can, just 
give me the date and the paper. 
 
I don’t need a big, long speech. You can correct me very easily, 
but if you can’t refer me to the clipping, don’t bother telling me 
what you said to John Wise in the back room because it’s high 
time, it seems to me, Mr. Premier, that you stood up for 
Saskatchewan farmers and said, we stand four-square beside 
Saskatchewan farm organizations in their call for deficiency 
payments, and deficiency payments which will bring their 
position in the export market up to the position of U.S. farmers 
in the export market. Will you give me the date on which this 
statement is supposed to have been made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I find that the Leader of the 
Opposition is trying very hard to impress somebody that he is 
going to defend the farmers. 
 
I will give him the date. At the western premiers’ conference we 
just finished in Swan River, all four western premiers are on 
record – and it’s published and it’s all over Canada – that we 
asked for a billion dollar deficiency payment to compete with 
the export subsidies in the United States, and we recommended 
that if more money is needed, because of the United States farm 
Bill and others, that the federal government is going to have to 
bargain that way. 
 
I will get you the communiqué, and you can read the 
communiqué and it says that. I am the Premier of Saskatchewan 
and I signed that, and all four premiers have said that. So it’s on 
the record; so let there be no doubt about it. 
 
And with respect to the back rooms in Ottawa, this was not a 
back room. All ministers of Canada were there – ministers of 
Agriculture – and we had officials and we had everybody else. 
We had all political parties, as I mentioned, and the new 
Minister of Agriculture from P.E.I. and every place else. And 
they heard the discussion, and they heard me lead the discussion 
with respect to money for farmers here as we bargained with 
respect to the United States. 
 
If you want to say – and you can try – that we have not been 
able to get sufficient funds or funds or assistance for 
Saskatchewan agriculture out of the federal government, I can 
go back through the record, and I can show you the hundreds of 
millions and billions of dollars that have been delivered into the 
province of Saskatchewan as a result of the negotiations that 
have taken place. And it will absolutely put to shame anything 
that you or your party ever got out of the federal government – 
ever, ever, ever – for agriculture, in terms of grasshopper 
assistance or drought assistance or farm fuel assistance or tax 
breaks or incentives or cash or interest rate protection or the 
whole combination that you want to go back. No comparison. 
Absolutely none whatsoever. 
 
So you can stand and you can holler a little bit and say,  

well boy, you’re really on the side of the farmers, but they don’t 
believe it. They didn’t believe it in ’82; you had a difficult time 
before that with respect to farmers and they didn’t believe it. 
They don’t believe it now. They believe that the co-operation 
with the feds in getting the kind of money we have with respect 
to fuel prices and what prices. 
 
When did you ever see an agreement to get higher domestic 
prices and have it jump that high? Or for even the western 
premiers to agree when you were involved to see that we’re 
going to have a billion dollars come out here? Or with respect 
to freezing of freight rates or elevator tariffs? Or a western grain 
stabilization payment that was the highest interim payment 
ever? – and we never did have interim payments until we 
started to request them. So we’re looking at billions of dollars 
coming out here, on the record, in the public, in the news, that 
I’ve been involved in, and that this province has been involved 
in as a result of the homework we’ve done in agriculture. 
 
I mean, you can holler and make some noise. But I’ll go back to 
the 6 per cent money. I think it would be fair you could at least 
acknowledge that we adopted the recommendations of the 
wheat pool and others, to say we should have 6 per cent money. 
And we did it. In fact they asked for 7 and we provided 6, 
because we felt it was in line with what a reasonable rate should 
be. 
 
And we have put together a request for $1 billion, signed and 
sealed it, and convinced the other premiers that we should do it. 
We did it in Ottawa in front of the premiers, and the first 
minister, with the Prime Minister, saying you’ve got to put 
money on the table. I said it in front of every premier that was 
there: you’ve got to have $1 billion there now to at least 
compete with that export money. I said it there. I said it to the 
ministers of Agriculture. I signed and sealed with the western 
premiers. So it’s no secret. You may not know about it, but it’s 
no secret in public. It’s no secret across Canada and to the 
farmers of this province. 
 
I spoke to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He said 
that I did not get a very good reception in Carlyle. Well if three 
standing ovations is not a good reception, then I’ll take that any 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said the same thing to the dairy 
producers when I met them in Prince Albert. They received that 
information the very same way. I’ve spoken to agriculture 
groups right across this province, and commodity groups, and 
they are excited about the kinds of things that we’re doing in 
agriculture despite the difficult times. And if you put it together 
and look at just the livestock industry – the livestock on feed is 
going up as a result of these programs; wheat prices are 
increasing domestically as a result of them. 
 
So we will be staying the course, and listening to farmers. Not 
trying to buy their farm, but listening to farmers and responding 
to their calls, and responding significantly and quickly to make 
sure that agriculture stays strong in western Canada. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1919 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, 
I thank you for that statement. I thank you for the statement that 
you are anchoring your call for deficiency payments on what 
came out of the western premiers’ conference at Swan River. I 
heard it; I know that the figure talked about when you came 
back was $900,000. That’s what you talked about when you 
were here. If you’ve raised it to a million at Swan River, fine. I 
won’t quibble about the difference between $900 million and a 
billion. 
 
I do say this, Mr. Premier: if you believe that a payment of $900 
million or $1 billion is going to bring Saskatchewan farmers 
income up to what U.S. farmers are getting, then I want to see 
those calculations – I want to see those calculations. 
 
It seems to me that if you’re talking about 30 million tonnes a 
year at 38 bushels a tonne, whatever . . . 36 bushels a tonne. We 
are talking about 1 billion bushels of grain. Mr. Premier, you 
will know that the world price of grain has dropped about $1 a 
bushel, and the initial payment has dropped 80 cents a bushel. 
Now you’re telling me that a payment of $1 a bushel is 
somehow going to bring Saskatchewan farmers up to the level 
of U.S. farmers. Well I’ll tell you that your calculations are 
different than mine. 
 
It seems to me that my figures indicate that U.S. farmers are 
getting about $6.25 Canadian per bushel. You can argue as a 
nickel or a dime, but it’s over $6. I say to you that a deficiency 
payment of 900 million or $1 billion will bring Saskatchewan 
farmers nowhere near that figure. And we know now that that’s 
what you’re calling for. We know now that that’s the deficiency 
payment that you’re calling for. And I say, Mr. Premier, that 
that’s not going to do it. 
 
I say, Mr. Premier, that what you are now admitting you’re 
calling for, a deficiency payment of $1 billion for all western 
agriculture, is not going to bring Saskatchewan farmers or 
prairie farmers up to the level of U.S. farmers or within a dollar 
of it; it’s going to be a good deal less. 
 
And I say that you are misleading Saskatchewan farmers if you 
are saying to them that you are calling – and in the same breath 
– I am calling for deficiency payments which will bring 
Saskatchewan farmers’ income up to the level of U.S. farmers, 
and I am calling for deficiency payments of $1 billion. Because 
it won’t do it. And you know, Mr. Premier, it won’t do it. You 
know it won’t do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come back to reality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And members are saying, come back 
to reality. I say, come back to the reality that Saskatchewan 
farmers are competing with U.S. farmers who are getting 
massive subsidies. And the reality is that our federal 
government has got to step up and back our farmers the way the 
U.S. federal government is stepping up and backing their 
farmers. That’s the reality. 
 
And I say to members opposite that we probably will not  

be able to induce the federal government to stand up for our 
farmers the way the European governments are standing up for 
their farmers. And perhaps it’s not reasonable to say so. Perhaps 
that’s not reasonable. But I say that to ask our government to 
assist our farmers to the same extent that the U.S. government is 
assisting their farmers is not unreasonable. 
 
Now I want to say to the Premier at the outset that I’m not 
saying it all should necessarily be called deficiency payments. It 
could be called western grain stabilization. But once you stack 
them all up, it has got to be at the level that U.S. farmers are 
getting, or within that range. And it’s not there now and it wont’ 
be there with a deficiency payment of a billion dollars. 
 
And I ask you flat, Mr. Premier: are you saying that a 
deficiency payment of $1 billion for western farmers will bring 
their income per bushel up to the level that U.S. farmers are 
getting per bushel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I go back and I’m 
reading from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, May 30th. And it 
says, the headlines, “$1-billion aid program for farmers sought 
by Premier Devine.” It quotes, it says: 
 

We’re into an international poker game and we’ve got to 
show that we’re quite prepared to play with the same high 
stakes. 

 
It’s been in the media that I’ve asked for that. It was 
well-reported. 
 
When you look at the combinations of things, as the hon. 
member was talking about; when you add up the packages and 
that you look at higher domestic-priced wheat – and it can run 
anywhere from 60 cents to 90 cents a bushel, depending on how 
much we sell here. If you look at $800 million or, say, $580 
million interim payment, another 150 to 250 final payment with 
respect to the western grains stabilization program — $800 
million – you’re looking at another dollar a bushel. 
 
If you’re looking at a deficiency payment of another billion 
dollars, you’re looking at a neighbourhood of another dollar a 
bushel. If you add up the rest of the package with respect to the 
hundreds of millions of dollars put together, you can come up to 
$3.2 billion. If you look at a billion dollars out in credit at 6 per 
cent money – I mean, you want to stack them all up; that’s 
something that we can look at and you can add it up any way 
you like. 
 
What I said and what this newspaper article says is, that 
whatever is necessary to compete with the United States, the 
federal government should be prepared to put the money up so 
that we can compete with them. And we said, on the export 
basis it was at least a billion dollars; and that’s what the 
headline says. Plus your grains stabilization payments, plus 
your higher domestic-price wheat, plus freezing the elevator 
tariffs and lowering the cost, providing 6 per cent money and so 
on and so forth – now you can add them up and add them up 
and add them up. We said, whatever is necessary at the end of 
the day, the federal should be prepared to put it up. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1920 
 
 

(1630) 
 
I’ve said that clearly. It says so in the newspaper, and we have 
come at it several ways, and you agree to that. You come at it 
from every way you can to cut the cost and raise the prices. So 
we’ve got the domestic price up to $10, at least the 
recommendation. We’ve got an export equivalent there in terms 
of the subsidies down there of a billion dollars on the table. We 
are looking at western grains stabilization payments that could 
run anywhere from $600 million to a billion, and that’s worth 
anywhere from 50 cents to $1 a bushel. I mean, so you’re 
looking at 1, 2, $3 a bushel; well on the interim payment is $3 
and 70-some cents – what is it, $3.50? Now you add a dollar for 
this and a dollar for that and a dollar for this . . . 
 
In Canada on the equivalent basis . . . Now when you get into 
the United States, you’re into an operation LIFT. I’m sure that 
you don’t want to recommend that, where farmers are setting 
aside acreage to reseed, this fancy little package in the United 
States. 
 
Now LIFT and deficiency payment mechanisms that go hand in 
hand are very unpopular in Saskatchewan; and Otto Lang and 
others that supported it, or thought they did, found out that. “Set 
Aside” may work in the United States, and you may con the 
farmer there by saying, you take your acres out of production 
and we’ll pay you $6 a bushel. What we’ve got here is close to 
that without taking a single acre out of production, and that’s 
very, very important. And if your party is saying that you 
believe that we should be encouraging Saskatchewan people or 
Canadian farmers to start taking grain out of production or land 
out of production and get into a U.S. system, that is a very, very 
slippery slope, not only economically but politically and 
socially and everything else. 
 
So I believe that the western grains stabilization mechanism – 
the stabilization mechanism – has many more economic 
advantages over the U.S. farm Bill. And I wouldn’t recommend 
the U.S. farm Bill to any country. In fact next week I’m going 
to a governors’ meeting in Ohio and I will be recommending 
and describing, at their request, the stabilization mechanisms 
we have in Canada versus the farm Bill they have there. Our 
mechanisms do not wreck the prices but they can protect the 
farmers. 
 
Their system, there’s two things wrong with it: one, you force 
people to cut back on the acreage they use; and secondly, it 
wrecks the world price – it wrecks it. And the European system 
and the American system need to be changed, and they need to 
follow more on the lines of the kinds of things that we do. 
 
So I have no problem; if you like, I’ll agree with you. We 
should compete as we go through this trade war and farm Bill 
war and so forth, have the same kind of money on this side of 
the table as there is on that side of the table. And we have asked 
that; it says so clearly in the papers. 
 
Our system adds up differently than theirs because we have 
grain stabilization and others that they don’t have. I believe our 
system is much better and sounder. It doesn’t wreck the price. 
People can allocate their resources, based on their best 
decisions to grow this grain or that  

grain or this oil seed or whatever it is. So it has many 
advantages over the U.S. 
 
So I would not recommend LIFT. If you’re recommending that, 
I certainly wouldn’t agree with you. I would not recommend the 
kind of system in the United States. I will say, as I said with the 
western premiers and the first ministers as well as the 
agriculture ministers: the approach we are taking in Canada 
makes more sense than the United States; we have to have the 
same amount of money on the table and we have to be prepared 
to compete. 
 
We have made a good start, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
money that is coming forward. I can add up here in the 
neighbourhood of $1.1 billion in the recent changes by the 
federal government; a billion dollars out in terms of 6 per cent 
money; a higher-priced domestic wheat, which is going to be 3, 
4, $500 million; a billion dollars on the table with respect to the 
export negotiations that are going on, a deficiency payment, if 
you’d like to put that there; and whatever else is necessary to 
allow us to compete. So you’ve got several billion, at least $3 
billion on the table with more to come, on a competitive basis, 
with complete unanimity across the country. So I don’t know 
. . . I mean, every premier has said this. 
 
The first minister agreed with the Prime Minister, and we’re all 
on record. So the position is quite clear. And it cut across 
political lines. It said we should bargain with the same strength 
as any American farmer, and we have to be prepared to do that. 
That’s what we have done; the record will show that. And I will 
just say that I endorsed it. 
 
I agreed in the legislature – maybe this would help. When it was 
raised here, I believe the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
raised it, and he said, would I consider a deficiency payment. 
And I said unequivocally, yes, right here in the legislature, and 
that was weeks ago or months ago, as any sort of cash. And I 
said, I don’t like the U.S. system, but you can call it anything 
you like, but if we’ve got to get cash out here, then I would 
endorse it, and I did, and I’m sure that you’ll find it in the 
record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A couple of comments, Mr. Premier. 
First, it may be that you endorse it; I don’t know, we may find 
something which suggests that somehow you endorse 
deficiency payments. Your colleagues certainly don’t. On May 
2nd, their recorded vote – that’s the unfortunate thing about 
recorded votes is that they’re here to haunt you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sure. That’s right . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, I will indeed read the whole resolution, and I will read: 
 

That this Assembly . . . 
 

And I will read . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — All of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All right. All of it, they’re shouting. I 
will read all of it then: 
 

That this Assembly endorses the Prime Minister in his 
successful efforts to bring the agricultural problems facing 
Canada to the attention of world  



 
June 12, 1986 

1921 
 

leaders through his introduction of agriculture to the Tokyo 
Economic Summit, and further, that this Assembly 
congratulates the Prime Minister and the federal government on 
its initiative to provide financial assistance to western farmers. 

 
And to which an amendment was moved, and this is what it 
says: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Mulroney government 
has refused to agree to a federal deficiency payment to grain 
farmers, despite the urging of Saskatchewan farmers and 
farm organizations, and despite the severe impact of low 
grain prices on Saskatchewan farmers, small business, and 
working families. 

 
On that last one, we had a vote – we had a vote. And do you 
know how they voted? Well, the following voted against the 
deficiency payment portion of that resolution, and they are here 
listed: Messrs – and I will read from the record – Messrs. Tusa 
and McLeod and Taylor and Schoenhals and Duncan and 
Pickering and Myers and Hepworth and Dirks and Klein and 
Currie and Martens and Maxwell and Mr. Smith from Moose 
Jaw South and Hodgins and Morin and McLaren and Rousseau 
and Parker and Rybchuk and Caswell and Domotor and 
Meagher and Muller and Sauder and Zazelenchuk and Gerich 
and Petersen and Swenson. Now those people voted against the 
proposition that we regretted that Mr. Mulroney had not agreed 
to deficiency payments. 
 
Now it may well be that somewhere else you’re in favour of 
deficiency payments, but that list of people is not in favour of it, 
and the record is there on May the 2nd – Hansard of May 2nd. 
 
The other point I want to make . . . And the Premier always 
goes through this long list of figures which he doesn’t ever 
calculate too carefully. I am talking about money for farmers 
that they don't have to pay back. And I therefore think that loan 
money and money they get from selling their crop and western 
grain stabilization money isn’t all the same. If you’ve got to pay 
it back, it’s not quite the same as not paying it back. So 
therefore I say that if we’re talking about what income 
Saskatchewan farmers are getting, I don’t include money they 
borrowed. 
 
The Premier does. We just heard him go through all this and 
say, we’re going to see that Saskatchewan farmers get $6.25 a 
bushel, the same as American farmers. Now some of it of 
course will be loan money that they have to pay back, but that 
doesn’t matter. I think it does matter. I think it does matter, and 
therefore I don’t include in the list of what the farmer is getting 
for when he sells his crop, I don’t include the money he has to 
borrow. The Premier does. We just heard him do it. But I don’t 
think that’s fair. 
 
I don’t think it’s fair to claim that an American farmer who gets 
6.25 without any strings attached – not loan money but in 
exchange for his crop – don’t think it’s the same as the 
Saskatchewan farmer who has to borrow some money in order 
to get his yield up to that same figure. I hope that’s what the 
Premier was doing with all that list of figures. I don’t know 
what else it was meant to do, because that’s what we were 
discussing. 

One other thing I want to raise with him. We heard him say that 
the increase in the domestic price from $7 to $10 a bushel was 
worth 60 cents to 90 cents a bushel. I’d like to know what 
calculations yields that. I’d like to know what calculations 
yields that. 
 
Mr. Premier, an extra $3 a bushel for wheat sold into the 
domestic market will apply on about 10 per cent of wheat – 
about 10 per cent of wheat and zero per cent of barley and zero 
per cent of other grains. So if it’s true as I say it is, Mr. Premier, 
and I’d like you to deny it if you will, that about 10 per cent of 
western wheat moves into the Canadian market, then simple 
arithmetic tells me that if they’re getting an extra $3 a bushel on 
10 per cent of the wheat, then on the average they’re getting 30 
cents on the rest of it. And that’s about right. The increase in 
domestic prices will yield on the average about 30 cents a 
bushel on all the wheat grown for human consumption in 
Canada. That doesn’t get us out of the woods because it looks 
like the Ontario producers of soft wheats may get a much 
greater proportionate share of that. We don’t know that yet. So 
I’m not going to presume that. 
 
But presume that we get our pro rata share here in 
Saskatchewan, that’s about 30 cents a bushel on wheat and zero 
cents a bushel on barley and zero cents a bushel on other grains. 
So it’s not hard to see how you get up to $6 and 6.25 when 
you’re giving to the farmer – you’re saying the farmer is going 
to get 60 or 90 cents a bushel out of that increase in domestic 
prices of $3. I say, Mr. Premier, I don’t believe it and I don’t 
believe the farmers believe it. We’ve been through that many 
times. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, when your minister appeared before the 
House of commons committee on the pricing of domestic wheat 
he did not take the opportunity to urge deficiency payments; he 
did not take the opportunity to urge any Canadian action with 
respect to an international grains agreement. And with respect 
to the narrow subject of domestic wheat he, I believe, 
acknowledged – and you can check his submission — that an 
increase of $3 a bushel in the price of domestic wheat would 
yield approximately 30 cents a bushel to all farmers if it was 
distributed evenly to all people who produce wheat in Canada. 
 
There was obviously some possibility of argument with respect 
to feed wheat and the rest, but by and large 30 cent sit is. I say 
when you’re saying it’s going to be 60 cents, or 90 cents, you’re 
misleading the farmers. They are not misled because they know. 
But you’re misleading others who believe that somehow all of 
this collection of figures is going to put Saskatchewan farmers 
in the same shape as U.S. farmers. I say it isn’t true. And the 
way you’re getting it is this fancy mathematics that you just did 
with respect to domestic wheat prices, which has no basis in 
fact. It is just another bit of flimflam that we have come to 
expect, all too often I fear, from the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that if you 
look at about a billion dollars payment, any way you want to 
shake it – whether it’s in a western grain stabilization payment 
or whether it’s in a deficiency payment – it’s worth about $1 a 
bushel. Okay. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1922 
 
 

So if we are looking at a billion dollars on, say, a deficiency 
payment that we’ve recommended, that’s $1. If you look at 
western grain stabilization payments, $580 million, and looking 
forward to perhaps another 100 to $200 million, you could be 
up in the neighbourhood of 70 to 80 cents a bushel. Well that’s 
a $1 or $1.70, $1.80. If you’re looking at $400 million on $10 
wheat, at 75 million bushels you’re looking at approximately 50 
cents a bushel. 
 
So if we’re looking at . . . And depending on how we settle on 
it, if we just look at milling wheat, if we look at domestic 
wheat, if we look at a pool that includes all wheat, there’s quite 
a bit of variability there. That’s why I said there’s a range, and 
there could be a range. 
 
And I’m not sure, nor are you, nor is anybody, where it will 
exactly end. But you’ve got in the neighbourhood there of 
$2.20, $2.30, and could be as high as $2.50 a bushel as a result 
of western grain stabilization payments, deficiency payments, 
and higher-priced wheat, depending on how they carve it out. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well, if we’re looking at $3.50 now as an initial payment, not 
the final but the initial, and $2 and anything — $2 and 30, 40, 
50 cents – certainly 2.50 would give you $6 a bushel. Now I’m 
not sure where those will end up. But as I pointed out earlier, 
when you add up all the programs, that gets you in the 
neighbourhood of 5.50, if you will, to $6 a bushel. 
 
Now that doesn’t include $80 million on farm fuel. It doesn’t 
include $0 million on freezing freight rates, $10 million on 
elevator tariffs. It doesn’t include the help with respect to 6 per 
cent money. It’s cash. They get that in their pocket, their net 
benefit. It doesn’t include the capital gains tax removal, which 
is about 40 to $50 million. It doesn’t include drought payments 
and flood payments, which never were paid back. 
 
So, I mean, if you add up the things that have been paid out in 
cash that don’t have to be paid back, just straight fuel, freight 
rates, elevator tariffs, interest rate protection, and flood 
payments, and drought payments—all net, no pay-back – plus 
western grain stabilization, which is no pay-back, and you add 
on dollars a bushel, we can add up – any way you want to look 
at it – in excess of $2 a bushel, in a conservative manner — $2. 
It could be as high as 2.50. It could even be over that in terms of 
dollars a bushel. 
 
Now if you want to add up all the benefits that we’re looking at, 
it’s a considerable amount of money. When we get money paid 
out here in terms of western grains stabilization programs, and 
you add them up, it’s worth a considerable amount on an annual 
basis. 
 
If I could just go back to the hon. member in terms of 
resolutions here in the House. I mean you’re talking a little bit 
of House politics there, when we have a resolution that says: we 
regret the Prime Minister did this or that. You may regret the 
Prime Minister; I happen not to regret the Prime Minister, and 
we get into the little battles that go on in here in terms of the 
wording. 

Obviously if the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of the 
province is in favour of deficiency payments and signs and 
seals it, that’s the policy of the province, and that’s the policy of 
the government. That’s exactly what’s been the case, so you can 
squabble about that and this. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
suppose I’d just like a bottom line from you on this whole 
question of the deficiency payment. I appreciate the fact that 
you came in in the past few short weeks saying that we don’t 
need a penny for farmers, nothing, to the place where you’re 
now suggesting maybe a dollar, but I want to ask you this, Mr. 
Premier – if I can have your attention. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s listening, don’t worry about it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’m worrying about it, I’m very concerned. I 
talked to a mutual friend of both mine and yours on the 
weekend, Mr. Premier, that’s going to a conference in Brussels, 
and he had the speech he was using at the Brussels food 
conference that he was going to attend. And the numbers this 
economist used – and maybe I should give you his name – but 
the numbers he used, Mr. Premier, was this: that taken all in, 
taking the subsidy that he considers is a subsidy on freight, 
taking all in, the amount that’s into the stabilization plan 
presently – and over the average – this year the total subsidy to 
Canadians – the total, the total that’s there now – with the 
7-something domestic price of wheat at $7, and the subsidy 
there, his numbers are that’s 85 cents total, that Canadians with 
their fuel, their freight rates, the stabilization subsidies, the total 
package he put together, had Canada in at 85 cents. 
 
United States was in at $3.5, and the U.S. Common Market in 
excess of $4, but it isn’t the same all over. And on that 
comparison you could throw in the kitchen sink, and you’re not 
going to come anywhere near by raising the domestic price on 8 
to 10 per cent of the wheat we consume, from $7 to $10, isn’t 
going to add 30 cents. It’s going to be less than 30 cents in my 
numbers. 
 
The stabilization – and the point I want to share with you, Mr. 
Premier – when I get a stabilization, a third of that is my own 
money that I’ve contributed; a third of that is the insurance we 
bought; and we put in a buck and the federals match it $2. So 
when you take in the whole stabilization money and say this is 
part of a subsidy, that isn’t, because a third of it is the farmers’ 
own money, that program he bought into. 
 
And so by feeling that a dollar is good enough for a deficiency 
payment, that a dollar is good enough, Mr. Premier, how many 
farmers do you expect, in your analogy, how many farmers do 
you expect – you’re satisfied, as Minister of Agriculture, and 
you’ve done your job – how many farmers do you expect will 
fall by the wayside and aren’t going to survive this year with 
the announcement of 85 cents a bushel or 80 cents a bushel less 
– 80 cents if it’s number 1, but it could go up higher on some of 
the other grades of grain, the initial price now coming on – how 
many farmers do you expect will not survive? 
 
As the Department of Agriculture you have some very  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1923 
 

good statisticians in the field and sitting right there with you. 
You must have a clue on those that are in very serious financial 
difficulty at this time. How many do you expect will have to 
go? 
 
You know, we’re facing a crisis in agriculture – things are 
serious. And I know the tenacity of most farmers and their 
ability to hang on, but they’ve scraped, they’ve scratched – you 
said only less than 3 per cent, you were saying, couldn’t get 
your loan. I suppose maybe if you consider that most of them 
that are having the trouble are in the south-west, and that I’ve 
gotten more calls than 3 per cent. I figured that number was 
higher . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 0.3, okay. You’ve written 
those off. 
 
How many more do you think . . . I could go into some press 
releases and some statements that have been made by other 
economists and so on that, how many they think are in very 
serious financial trouble with this kind of package of saying, let 
say all things work out just like we expect. You ask for a billion 
dollars; friend Brian’s going to come across with that. We’re 
going to get a balance of our payment under the stabilization 
fund which will bring it up to a billion dollars. Let’s take the 
maximum on all those premises at $4.50 wheat, how many 
farmers do you think are going to fall by the wayside and 
decide to sell out and get out prematurely? I’m not talking about 
farmers in their 60s and 65 age group and up that decide to 
retire. I’m wondering how many of them are going to be selling 
out and getting out of the industry. Have you a number – a 
ballpark number – that we can expect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are looking at 
perhaps one of the best crops we’ve had in years in the province 
of Saskatchewan. I mean, it’s a good catch, good subsoil 
moisture, better than we’ve seen any place, and it’s generally 
right across the province. So we’re looking at – at least 
optimistic climatic conditions – climatic conditions that could 
result in a very good crop in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in terms of the price of grain, I make two observations. 
One, we said to the federal government that you put up 
whatever you have to compete with the U.S., but if you look at 
a billion dollars as a deficiency payment, it’s worth $1 a bushel. 
And if you look at domestic-price wheat going from $7 up to 
$10 . . . and for all I know it might even be 11. Maybe the 
Prime Minister will go 11. So let’s saw it off and say that it’s 
worth somewhere in the neighbourhood of 50 cents. You take 
the Crow payment, it’s $650 million. That’s worth 65 cents a 
bushel. All right? You put that together, you’ve got yourself 
$3.15 a bushel. That doesn’t include farm fuel. It doesn’t 
include the freight rates or the elevator tariffs or the 6 per cent 
money, or any of the advantages there with respect to interest 
rate protection. 
 
So I mean . . . I think, we’ve got to look at it fairly and say, as 
your leader did, he says you’ve got to add them all up. Okay. So 
we add them all up and that’s what we’re trying to do to make 
sure that we can provide a comparable  

amount of money for Canadian farmers vis-à-vis Americans 
when we’re into debating and negotiating and trying to get them 
to change the farm Bill and their export subsidies. 
 
So we’ve got a combination of some pretty significant moves so 
far. We’ve got higher domestic-priced wheat recognized. We’ve 
got $1 billion on the table in a deficiency payment. We’ve got a 
very big western grains stabilization payment already in the 
mill. We know we’ve got a $650 million Crow payment that’s 
coming down. And whether it’s to producers or railroads or 
whatever, I mean it’s obviously something that’s . . . It’s a large 
amount of money. And we know that we got farm fuel taxes 
removed. We know we’ve got rebates there. 
 
We know we’ve got freight rates and elevator tariffs frozen, 
which is a big help. We know now we’ve got 6 per cent money 
out all over western Canada, from the province of 
Saskatchewan, and now from the Farm Credit Corporation. We 
know we’ve had big payments with respect to drought and 
flood. And, obviously, the capital gains tax removed. If you 
want to put that in terms of bushels, we can do it on an annual 
basis, but you’ve got to add up these things that have changed 
in the last 12 months and the last 18 months, and they are 
significant. 
 
And on top of all that, we said to the Prime Minister: when 
you’re negotiating with the United States, make sure we have 
the equivalent amount of money here in the pockets of farmers 
as they do down there so that we’re not shooting at a moving 
target, and that we can compete on a favourable basis. So when 
you add up all these things, I mean, we’ve never seen the like of 
it in terms of action and cash and activity – provincially and 
federally – to make sure that we can compete plus more, 
because in terms of the ammunition with other people, we 
believe that we’ve got to have the same amount of dollars here 
on the table and to be prepared to spend with them as anybody 
else. 
 
So, I mean, there’s differences in the system. The U.S. system 
has set aside and they have operation LIFT down there where 
you have to take land out of production, and then you have to 
sign up all these things to be able to get access to their money. 
Here we don’t set land aside and I believe that’s a good idea. 
You may support LIFT, but we don’t. 
 
We look at these other programs that are along stabilization, 
and just in terms of those four things, just the four things – the 
$10 wheat, the western grains stabilization payments, the 
deficiency payments, and the Crow – you’re looking at 
something in the neighbourhood of $3 a bushel. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, you’re a super little cheer-leader. I 
think you’re overly optimistic. If you’re going to convince 
farmers that we’ve never had it so good – we’ve never had it so 
good – you’re talking to different farmers than I am. You’re up 
there on cloud nine visiting with that small few that spend their 
winters likely in Florida and are investing their $100,000 and 
clippings the coupons and making the money. 
 
But the people I’m rubbing shoulders with said that things  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1924 
 
 

have never been this tough. And they give us the message that 
Tory times really are tough times, and things have never been 
so tough as far as scraping and making ends meet, and denying 
their children things that other children should normally have. 
Farmers are facing a real crunch. 
 
And the point I was trying to make and the question I wanted 
you to answer – and I don’t need a pep talk and a cheer-leader; I 
want some numbers and some facts – I asked you how many 
farmers do you think are not going to survive this year. You 
must have a notion in mind because when you were a professor, 
I read some of the articles that you were trying to jam down the 
throats of my relatives and nephews, and you said that 20 per 
cent of the farmers can do the job—20 per cent can do it. That 
was your notion. How soon do you expect to get to that 
number? 
 
I hope your philosophy will change because I think I’d like to 
see 120 per cent people out there instead of 20 per cent. I’d like 
to see more farmers here. I’d like to see that number back up to 
80,000 farmers instead of down to 60,000 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I think we did. I think you’ve got to have 
programs in place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You know, if 
you can’t get any order from your goon that’s sitting there, Mr. 
Chairman, this is ridiculous, trying to compete with all the 
hollering that’s going on. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


