


















































June 19, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 19, 1986 
 
 

2127 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you, and through the 
House and the whole Assembly, another group of children from 
my constituency. Actually it’s a rather large group, I think it’s 
probably the biggest on record. I would have to check Hansard on 
that. There are 94 students. They take up the entire west gallery 
and part of the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are from 
Confederation Park School; they’re grade 8 students, and they’re 
accompanied by Mrs. Donna Hrytzak, Mr. Ford Mantyka, Mr. 
Rob Smith-Windsor, and Mr. Rick Wakeman. 
 
I would like to indicate that I will be meeting with you for pictures 
and refreshment at 3 o’clock. And at that time I’m willing to take 
and entertain any questions you may have about the proceedings 
or anything to do with the operation of the legislature or the 
parliamentary system. I would ask the members of the House to 
please greet my students in the formal and normal fashion. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members of the Assembly, 21 grade 4 students from Pense 
Elementary School in my constituency. They are located in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They’re accompanied today by their teacher 
Debbie Quinlan, and their bus driver Bonnie Lax. I’ve had the 
pleasure of meeting with the students already, and tried to inform 
them of some of the things which they might see in the Chamber 
today. I hope that the proceedings are interesting to them and that 
they learn from their stay in the Assembly. I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 66 —An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 (No. 2) be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have spoken on this Bill 
briefly yesterday, and I have just some additional comments that I 
would like to add to my comments of yesterday with reference to 
Bill 66, an amendment to The Urban Municipality Act, which 
deals with the matter of the extension of evening store hours. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that over the past several 
months this government opposite has seen a problem emerge and 
they did nothing about it. And finally, Mr. Speaker, the 
government itself became part of that problem, and still they did 
nothing about it. Simply  

put, the problem was this: the government was refusing to assist 
municipal councils to enforce local store hour by-laws. This Bill 
does nothing about that even now, the Bill that we are considering. 
 
I think, as someone mentioned to me yesterday in a telephone call 
when they phoned to express their opinion about the legislation, 
never has a mountain laboured so much to produce such a mouse. 
 
And so we had corporations openly defying the law, openly and 
brazenly defying the law of this province. A government that not 
only allows that sort of open defiance of the law is not only 
cynical, it is undermining the basic structure of our democratic 
society in which the laws should be obeyed by all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main feature of the Bill now before us is the 
proposal to permit stores to remain open six nights a week. In 
essence, that is what this Bill is about. Municipalities have asked 
on numerous occasions for an additional day, and for days, to deal 
with special events such as the Farm Progress Show which is 
taking place here in Regina at the present time. 
 
We can all acknowledge that there is a considerable support, 
especially in our cities, and especially from larger retail 
corporations, for some extensions of present shopping hours. And 
there is indeed some public support. But there are some problems  
— some very significant problems. And I submit, Mr. speaker, 
that this Devine government has failed to recognize these 
problems and has totally failed to resolve them or even attempt to 
resolve them. Let there be no mistake. They are very serious 
problems, and this Bill will not resolve them; it will make them 
worse. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, there is the problem of smaller rural 
communities and the problems that they will face. As everyone in 
Saskatchewan knows, over the years as automobiles have gotten 
larger and more comfortable, as our provincial highway system 
has become better and safer  — except, of course, with the 
deterioration which we’ve seen in the last four years  — 
consumers may drive further and further to shop. Gradually that 
has taken its toll on our smaller communities. And I know the 
members opposite groan because they don’t like to have people 
talk about the state of the roads and the disrepair that they’re in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us today with its wide-open, 
six-nights-a-week shopping, which I submit will lead to seven 
nights a week and seven days, in spite of what the minister said, 
this will deal yet another blow to the health and vigour of small 
business in small communities across the province. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill may be of great benefit to the 
larger chain stores and the larger corporations, the large 
national/international retail chains; but on the whole it will be a 
hardship for small family businesses, especially to the family 
businesses  — a benefit to the large retail chains, but a hardship to 
Saskatchewan’s small businesses. 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2128 
 
 

If small-business people ever had any doubt that this government 
was favouring the larger chains and the larger corporations at the 
expense of the small-business community, there is no longer any 
doubt, Mr. Speaker. The backbone of Main Street, Saskatchewan, 
is what the small-business community is. Small business is the 
largest employer in this province. These are people who work 12 
to 14 hours a day under the present legislation and the present 
arrangements, and the government opposite is saying to them they 
are now going to make it even more difficult for the 
small-business man and woman. 
 
Let there be no doubt about this, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Urban Affairs in this government has said to many small 
businesses in Saskatchewan that they are going to have to shut 
down. And times may have changed, and I will agree with the 
minister when he says that time have changed; but the importance 
of the small-business community, the importance of 
small-business operations to this province’s economy, has not 
changed. We recognize that in our caucus. The government 
opposite has obviously chosen to ignore that. 
 
Another very important fact, Mr. Speaker, of this Bill is that it is a 
serious threat to working people and working families. More night 
shopping does not, and cannot, increase the total volume of retail 
sales; it just means that the same number of dollars will be spread 
more thinly over more open hours. That means fewer full-time 
jobs, more part-time jobs, more split shifts, and more family 
disruption  — in short, a great disservice, a great hardship on the 
working people and the working families who will have to pay the 
social cost of this. And I urge the minister, because of this 
concern, to consider those human and social costs on the families 
that will be affected. 
 
While there are, of course, some in the labour force who prefer 
part-time work, and there always will be, most people want a 
full-time job. This Bill will simply accelerate a trend that this PC 
government has already established  — more growth in part-time 
jobs than in full-time jobs. In fact, Statistics Canada reports that 
over the past four years, that is, between 1982 and 1985, the 
number of part-time jobs in Saskatchewan has increased three and 
a half times as fast as the number of full-time jobs  — three and a 
half times. And this Bill will simply accelerate that regrettable 
trend, and it is working people and working families who pay the 
price. 
 
And that impact needs to be understood, and it needs to be 
resolved. And so I therefore ask the minister, what studies has 
your government done on the adverse impacts of extended store 
hours on working people and working families? And I will ask 
you now that he table those studies in the Assembly, if not 
forthwith, when we get to the committee, and that at least in his 
concluding remarks in this debate today he answer that question. 
 
I further ask the minister this: is he prepared to introduce today 
parallel legislation to accompany this Bill, parallel legislation 
which could effectively protect the interests of working people? I 
ask the minister to indicate that when he closes debate on this Bill, 
to introduce parallel legislation, Mr. Speaker, in the form of, let’s 
say, to The Labour Standards Act, which would effectively protect 

 workers and their families. 
 
Has the government even considered, for example, such things as 
improvements; such as limiting the proportion of part-time 
workers to full-time workers; requiring that a split-shift premium 
be paid to those in very disruptive split-shift schedules; shift 
differentials for those required to work odd shift work hours? Has 
the government considered measures to ensure that part-time 
workers get the same employment benefits, on a prorated basis, as 
full-time workers? 
 
So I urge, Mr. Speaker, I urge the minister, not only to consider 
such measures, but to urge his cabinet to introduce them in the 
Assembly today as a parallel or comparison measures to the Bill 
before us. And I say today, because they’ve had many months to 
consider this matter. And I hope that this was not a last minute 
decision that was made, as has been the case with many other 
things that this government has introduced into this Assembly. To 
fail to do so will be yet one more indication of this government’s 
callous disregard for working people and working families. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, some extension of shopping hours 
as proposed in this Bill is clearly desired by many consumers. We 
don’t object to that; we understand that. But neither has there been 
a demand, from people who will be affected, that there be a wide 
opening, as the minister is proposing. 
 
I have asked today for the minister to table certain studies that 
hopefully the government has undertook. I have asked him to 
consider the three areas of concern which I have outlined in the 
House. And I say that we favour extended hours because it is, in 
the opinion of most people, something that is necessary. 
 
But this Bill proposes, as the Bill reads, six days of evening 
shopping  — six days  — before there has been any consultation 
with anyone. A very dramatic and a very drastic move, Mr. 
Speaker. What would have been wrong with going at this slowly. 
Add another day, plus a suitable number of days to look after 
special events, such as Agribition and so many days before 
Christmas and so on, and then, if at some future time there was a 
need shown to government, bring legislation in again and extend 
the time period further. 
 
And so I want to serve notice, Mr. Speaker, so that the minister is 
aware, that in committee we will be proposing an amendment. 
And our amendment will be to provide an additional day of 
shopping. And we’re not concerned about taking responsibility for 
that, as the government should not be concerned about taking 
responsibility for this issue. What they have done instead is shirk 
their responsibility and passed it on to municipalities because they 
don’t want to deal with the political problem. 
 
And so, although we support the principle of extended evening 
shopping, we think it should begin with a day extension as has 
been the request by most. We will introduce the amendment . . . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the Minister or Urban Affairs 
says, never. If the government is not prepared to consider an 
amendment, then I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that on third reading 
we  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2129 
 
 

will feel that we will have to oppose the Bill. 
 
(1415) 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 30 grade 5 
and 6 students from Thompson Elementary School that are 
situated in the good constituency of Regina Victoria. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Morris Dolman, the principal, Mrs. 
Anthony, and Mrs. Moore. They are seated in the east gallery, and 
I will be looking forward to meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures 
and refreshments. I wish them an educational and a pleasant stay 
here in the legislature, and I ask all members to welcome them in 
their usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few 
closing remarks on this very important piece of legislation before 
it goes to committee. I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that what we 
have seen from the NDP critic on this particular Bill is nothing 
different than what one would expect from the NDP, and that is 
that we want to regulate, we want to control, we want to determine 
the destiny of people’s lives. Don’t let people at the local level 
determine their own destiny. Don’t let families determine their 
own destiny. Don’t let small businesses determine their own 
destiny. We will control their destiny. That is what the NDP is all 
about. We have seen that time and time again in this session in this 
legislature, and we see it again today on second reading of this 
Bill. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the mayor of Saskatoon 
opposes what the NDP just stand for. The mayor of Saskatoon has 
said, we like this Bill. We want the power to determine what store 
hours should be at Saskatoon. We want that in our hands; we don’t 
want the NDP government. Mayor Wright from Saskatoon has 
said that we support this particular Bill. 
 
The mayor from Moose Jaw says, we support this particular Bill. 
We want to see the authority for store hours to be devolved to the 
municipal level. That’s exactly where it should be. 
 
Now in addition to two of the mayors from the most important 
cities of the province, who else supports this piece of legislation? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we find that the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association . . . And the president of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association has just said on 
the media  — the president has said that this is exactly what 
should be happening. The authority to determine store hours 
should be given to the local level. I have discussed that personally 
. . . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I have discussed that personally with the 
president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
And a number of years ago they, in fact, indeed had a resolution at 
their particular convention in that particular regard. 
 
So we see various mayors. We see the president of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, in addition, Mr. 
Speaker. We see the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce  — the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, which represents 
commercial activity around the province. The Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce has said, we would like to see the 
authority for the determination of store hours at the local 
municipal council level  — not in the hands of provincial 
government, which is where the NDP want it to be, but at the local 
level. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we see the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Independent Business saying that the minister has walked the 
tightrope appropriately. He has said that Sunday will stay as it is, a 
common day of rest, at which time only convenience stores will be 
allowed to remain open, but that the remainder of the store hours 
issue should be decided at the local level. The Saskatchewan 
Federation of Independent Business says that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we have found, Mr. Speaker, is that the majority of 
organizations in the province concerned about this kind of issue 
are in favour of the initiatives undertaken in this Bill. I have said, 
Mr. Speaker, that this Bill strikes a fair balance between the 
interests and the concerns of consumers who want to see more 
opportunity for night shopping; working women who want to see 
more opportunity for night shopping; families win which both 
husband and wife are working and want to see more opportunities 
for night shopping. 
 
It strikes a fair balance for municipalities who want the 
opportunity to say, we’ve going to leave it right where it is, one 
night of shopping, or we may extend it to two nights of shopping 
or perhaps more, but we want to be able to make that 
determination ourselves. And that seems to be a reasonable kind of 
thing to give to the municipalities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite suggested that somehow 
this Bill is not going to help municipalities in their problems with 
the enforcement of by-laws. Well that, in fact, is not the case. We 
have substantially tightened up definitions; we have, in fact, 
substantially increased the fine sanctions that can be brought 
against violators of the by-law. 
 
The member opposite has suggested that in fact this particular Bill 
is nothing but seven-nights-a-week, wide-open shopping. Well 
nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. What we 
have seen are a large number of organizations who have said, we 
want municipalities to be able to make the choice whether or not 
they are going to have no nights, one night, two nights, or however 
many. That is their particular decision. We have seen the Regina 
city council saying that “we will very likely go to two nights a 
week”  — not seven, two. 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2130 
 
 

So the member opposite is entirely incorrect in his assessment of 
this particular Bill. This Bill is not about six nights of shopping. 
This Bill is about local municipalities being able to establish the 
shopping hours in response to the growing need of consumers and 
working women and working families, to provide more 
opportunity for shopping to enhance the convenience that people 
want to see in their lives. That’s what this Bill is all about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the only people who 
oppose this Bill are the NDP and certain unions. Now I 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the Retail Wholesale & Department 
Store Union is not in favour of this particular Bill. So, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we see the NDP aligning themselves with 
unions; aligning themselves against the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Independent Business; aligning themselves against SUMA; 
aligning themselves against the mayors of some of our important 
cities; aligning themselves against working women; aligning 
themselves against the large number of consumers in this province 
who want to see extended shopping hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to move this province out of the Dark Ages, 
when it comes to shopping, and move it into the modern era where 
it should be. And if the NDP want to see it back in the Dark Ages, 
then that’s fine. We will tell the people that that’s where they want 
to see it. I don’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the NDP, Saskatchewan had among Canada’s most 
restrictive pieces of store hours legislation. Times have changed. 
Economic and social conditions have changed. Today it is time to 
respond to the requests from municipalities; to respond to the 
requests from working women and working families; to say it’s 
time to change, to modernize Saskatchewan’s store hours 
legislation; and that’s what this Bill will do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 33 
 
Birkbeck McLeod 
Andrew Schmidt 
Folk Myers 
Dirks Sandberg 
Klein Currie 
Martens Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Hodgins Morin 
McLaren Johnson 
Young Weiman 
Rybchuk Caswell 
Meagher Glauser 
Sauder Swenson 
Tchorzewski Thompson 
Engel Lingenfelter 
Koskie Lusney 
Shillington Sveinson 
Hampton  
 

Nays — 0 
 

Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly referred to a 
committee of the whole later this day. 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 24  — An Act respecting the Licensing and Inspection 

of Amusement Rides 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
the deputy of Labour, Phil Richards, the assistant deputy, Henry 
Kutarna, and Jane Sather, solicitor from the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Shillington: —I want to begin by congratulating the minister 
on his good luck  — good luck because this legislation has been 
talked about for some time, needed for some time. It’s your good 
fortune that the disaster occurred in Alberta and not Saskatchewan. 
It might have occurred in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not sure who has the floor, Mr. 
Chairman, whether it’s me or the member from Regina South. 
 
An Hon. Member: — North. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —North, South . . . South, North. Mr. Minister, 
the legislation has been needed for some time. It’s been talked 
about for some years, and it is disappointing that it took you this 
long to bring this legislation forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to express a note of caution about the branch 
of your department which I assume will enforce this. It’s the same 
belaboured safety services division that we talked about the other 
night; the same division that has had its staff cut constantly; the 
same divisions that was badly rocked by the Polly Redhot 
incident. Mr. Minister, you’re now adding an additional load to 
this staff, to this department whose staff was cut. Mr. Minister, I 
can see the look of scorn. I can see your lip curling down from 
here, but I say, Mr. Minister, that I do not see how fewer staff are 
going to do more work, particularly more than they have been 
apparently able to discharge with efficiency in the past. 
 
So Mr. Minister, my comments are not with respect to the Bill. I 
find no particular problem with the Bill itself. I do criticize the 
government for its procrastination on this, as in all other subjects. 
And I do, Mr. Minister, criticize you, as I did in your estimates, for 
the reduction in staff in the safety services division. That division 
doesn’t have a proud record of being overstaffed, and I think you 
are adding to their problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, the province has been fortunate with 
respect to amusement ride safety in that I understand we had one 
fatality in 1977 in Cumberland 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2131 
 
 

House and none since then. There were three reported injuries in 
1981 at North Battleford. The province has been fortunate, and I 
hope that run of luck continues. 
 
But with respect to the fund of these matters, the information I can 
gather is that in 1981 your government proposed this type of 
legislation, and as a B budget item your minister of Finance turned 
you down as there not being sufficient funds, or else there being 
other priorities. 
 
So we have pushed this matter ahead, even in a time when the 
province’s finances are strained. We’ve decided to go ahead with 
this, and our department will be starting inspections this summer. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation 

Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: —I have with me Mr. Jack Drew, the deputy 
minister for Agriculture, and Neil Petreny, regulatory project 
co-ordinator for the livestock branch of Saskatchewan Agriculture. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I have many questions of the minister, but I 
wonder if you could outline what the changes actually do? Could 
you just give me in a brief outline . . . I think it was indicated in 
second reading that it just changes from allowing betting 
in-province to including it for all of Canada, or is it for anywhere? 
That’s basically the question I have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: —Mr. Chairman, all of Act does is allow for 
the taxation of betting  — off-track betting  — and it’s already 
taking place within the province, and it equalizes that with live 
betting that’s taking place so that there’s not an advantage from 
the bettor’s point of view, and so that we’re getting some tax 
revenue that we’re not now getting. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what does that amount to? How much 
money are you going to receive, and what will it do to the deficit 
of the province? The increase on taxing gambling, I guess, is what 
basically you’re doing; trying to run the province off the avails of 
gambling and betting is what you see to be doing here. How much 
money will that bring in to the people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: —Well it’s interesting, Mr. Chairman. He said 
we’re living off the avails of gambling. It’s too bad he didn’t talk 
about prostitution; that’s something that that party knows a lot 
about with their resolutions. We’re . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morin: —He suggests that I identify the party and I’ll 
certainly do that. We all know about their resolutions. We’re 
looking at taking in roughly a half a million dollars as a result of 
this tax. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I know that you will want to 
get into the fight after the great win you had last night in not 
knowing the conditions under which you hired your executive 
assistant, but I won’t lower myself to get into a fight with you by 
getting political, because I just want to make the point that 
$500,000 off of people who are already betting on horse-races  — 
I think we wonder what kind of a province we’re getting to be 
when the biggest growth industry in this province, as has been 
indicated in the press, is gambling. And that’s the biggest growth 
industry  — that and food banks. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether you can believe it or not, but 
food banks and gambling, the growth industries in this province 
under open-for-business and the free traders opposite, and I just 
think that it’s a terrible situation that we’re now into with a $2 
billion deficit, and this is the ultimate of it. We’re now stooping to 
getting in a half million dollars from off of horse-racing. 
 
And so here we are, we’re in the depths of a depression with the 
Devine government, and we have to stoop to raising a few 
hundred thousand dollars from the horse-racing and gambling and 
that sort of thing, because we can’t do it by taking our fair share of 
our resources. But I think that that’s where we should be looking 
at it. However, if you feel this is necessary, so be it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: —Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting that the 
member would make those comments when the NDP party are 
funding their operations by running a lottery and by sponsoring 
bingos. You know, I mean, they’re into lotteries and bingos, and 
they’re against the taxation of horse-racing. I mean, this activity is 
taking place in the province whether we like it or not. I don’t 
propose to condone this activity nor do I condemn it. I simply say 
it’s taking place, and we have the choice of either taxing it or not 
taxing it. And from my position as the provincial Minister of 
Revenue, the tax collector for the province, I say we should tax it. 
If the members opposite are opposed to the taxation of this sort of 
activity, if they believe that this sort of activity should take place 
tax free and be allowed to run rampant with no controls, then they 
have the opportunity to stand up and put their case to the public. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —I was just going to suggest that I find this an 
illicitly contrived little tax again. I’m not sure that people going to 
the horse track are going to know that the provincial government 
is taking a part of their . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Dipping into their pockets. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — into their pockets while they are at the wicket. I 
think that certainly the people that do attend these . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Kindersley suggests that I must 
have lost some money at the track. 
 
I find horse-racing very entertaining, but I would suggest, find it a 
little bit less than attractive if I knew the provincial  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2132 
 
 

government  — the Tory government  — again, had contrived an 
illicit little tax to pick my pocket at the horse-races. There’s 
enough people out there picking your pocket that I think the 
provincial government could stay out of it. 
 
I’ll support this tax, but I think there should be possibly a sticker 
on the way into the horse track suggesting that a portion of each 
bet is going to the provincial government who certainly requires 
funding, there’s no question. With the deficit this government has 
raised in the last four years, I suggest that I would be happy if 
they’d tax prostitution at the same time. I mean, let’s face it, 
there’s income out there, and I think you should check all sources, 
not just the horse track. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I’m tempted to, I guess . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t be tempted; be nice to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I’ll be nice. I won’t consider that, no. I don’t 
support the legalization of prostitution; as you suggested it’s out 
there, and maybe we should tax it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, no, I know. I’m not suggesting you support it. You say it’s out 
there; we should tax it. I don’t support it, period, so I don’t support 
the taxation of it. I think we should do what we can to eradicate it. 
 
But in terms of your comments, I want to make it clear to you and 
your colleague in the WCC (Western Canada Concept Party) that 
what we’re doing here is equalizing the situation between separate 
pool wagering which is, for example, wagering on  — I believe 
the name of the track in Winnipeg is Assiniboia Downs. If they are 
going to the race-track and betting on a race at Assiniboia Downs, 
they do not now pay tax. If they are going to a race  — and I don’t 
know what they call the name of the track; I think there’s one here 
in Regina  — and they go to watch a live race, they pay tax. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is equalize that so that they’re paying 
tax on racing regardless of where the race is held. And in the past, 
what we’ve done . . . And that tax, I might add, has been in place 
for years and years and years on live racing. 
 
(1445) 
 
One, we’re trying to equalize that situation. Secondly, what we 
have done in the past in order to help the horse-race industry, those 
people to be viable, is to provide a grant back to them of the tax 
collected, of $4.5 million. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 60  — An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits to or 

on behalf of Certain Senior Citizens 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Will the minister introduce his officials? 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m pleased to introduce Art Uhren from 
Social Services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, as I indicated when we 
discussed this in second reading, we support the Bill, but I have 
some questions which I would like to get some answers for. First 
of all, what will be the total cost on an annual basis with the 
increases which are outlined for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it depends when an increase would take 
place. Suppose it was January 1. It would be 1.4 million if it was 
January 1. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, how much would the cost be 
from April 1 to March 31st, fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if we implemented it April 1 of next 
year and then it ran for one full year, it would be 4.358. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, $4.358 million is what you 
would need in a full year, but obviously we are now in June. So 
unless you made it retroactive, which would not be a bad 
consideration, considering that these are people who obviously are 
in need of supplementing their income, but because you’re not 
doing it for a full year, what would the cost be, Mr. Minister, if 
you implemented it on, let’s say July 1st, and then finished off the 
fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it would be three-quarters of 4.3 
million; you’re talking about nine months of the year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do your officials have a number on that? 
That’s what I asked for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Approximately 3.2 million. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that’s $3.2 million which you 
would need if you implemented on July 1st. 
 
Can I ask you: where have you budgeted for this money in the 
present budget which we are considering? I must say that, having 
searched the Estimates from cover to cover, there is no indication 
of where the money is provided. We have here a Bill  — which is 
a good Bill  — but no money to pay for the cost of it. In fact, 
under the Saskatchewan income plan subvote, there is a reduction 
in money this year over last year. So my question is: where have 
you budgeted the $3.2 million which you’re going to need to pay 
these benefits to senior citizens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it depends when one decides to go 
ahead and implement it. If that determination is made to do so this 
year, then obviously it’s going to come from the provincial 
coffers. And the Minister of Finance, I believe, in his estimates 
indicated that $5 million had been set aside for the Saskatchewan 
pension plan package. This is considered to be part of the overall 
pension plan package for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
whether or not all of that $5 million would be used up on the 
Saskatchewan pension plan this year, part of it might be used for 
this; that’s quite possible. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2133 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Very unusual, Mr. Minister. Why, since 
there is a provision in your department for Saskatchewan income 
plan benefits, a subvote for which this legislature votes money . . . 
If you knew that you were going to introduce this Bill when you 
were putting your budget together, why wouldn’t you have put 
money into the normal subvote instead of putting it somewhere . . . 
This is probably the first time in the history of this province where 
you have not put money that’s designated for a program in the 
subvote under which the program is being paid. 
 
Now can you explain why you would have not put the specific 
amount that you would need  — and then if you were short, you 
could obviously have had a supplement  — why wouldn’t you 
have put it into the Saskatchewan income plan if you had decided 
prior to the budget that you were going to have this increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the member misses the point. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, he doesn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Oh yes, he does. He misses the point. In fact 
he hasn’t even talked about the point of the Bill at all in 
committee. 
 
The point of this Bill is to put into a separate statute the 
Saskatchewan income plan, which previously only operated under 
regulations. And any government if it so chose, simply by 
regulation could have done away with the Saskatchewan income 
plan. We believe this is a very important piece of income security 
for senior citizens; consequently, we believe that it should be 
enfolded into the legislation of this province so that it becomes a 
permanent fixture of the income for senior citizens. 
 
Previously it wasn’t. Your government, if it chose to, could have 
done away with it by regulation. There was no Bill for SIP. It was 
under the regulations under the Saskatchewan assistance plan. So 
that in fact what we are doing is, we’re saying this should be a 
permanent plan; that’s why this particular Bill is here today. 
 
In terms of the funding of the Saskatchewan income plan: the 
determination as to how the befits would be provided to senior 
citizens, as it relates to the new Saskatchewan pension plan or any 
other configuration of benefits that would be alongside that 
particular plan, was made, and the determination was to go with 
this particular kind of a package. We could have gone with a 
different package where all of the benefits would have come under 
the Saskatchewan pension plan. That’s quite possible. But we in 
fact decided to go with this particular kind of a configuration 
because we though it was more appropriate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you know, and so does the 
public know, that you’re just playing with words in the same way 
as you’ve been playing with the lives of senior citizens, and that’s 
disgraceful. Whether it was a separate Bill, or not before is 
irrelevant; it’s totally irrelevant. This Bill does what you say it 
does  — there’s no arguing about that. But the fact is that 
payments were made under the Saskatchewan income plan out of 
a  

subvote. We’re talking about the subvotes from which you will 
pay for what you are saying this law will require. There was a 
subvote in your Department of Social Services under the 
Saskatchewan income plan. In that subvote is where the 
government will ask this legislature to allocate some money to 
pay. You did not ask this Legislative Assembly in your estimates 
for a specific amount to pay for what you are legislating  — only 
for part of it. But the additional benefits you did not ask for, Mr. 
Minister, which leads only to one conclusion: that you had no 
intention of having this legislation. 
 
I’m glad you finally had this afterthought. Maybe we should keep 
delaying this election for a long period of time, because there may 
be a lot of afterthoughts on the part of this government that may 
result in a few good things. You had no intention of having this 
Bill in. You brought it in later because you knew you were in 
political trouble. I’m glad you brought it in; and I’m sure that the 
senior citizens who are listening, and who will know when they 
get their cheques, are happy that you brought it in. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why didn’t you bring it in? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We did; we brought the program in. Who 
do you think introduced this program, Mr. Minister? This program 
was introduced before 1982. All you’re doing is increasing the 
amounts. And I will say, Mr. Minister, that before we introduced 
the program there was no Saskatchewan income plan at all. It’s 
one of the few things that you haven’t destroyed, and I’m sure that 
we will be grateful for that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the fact is this: you did not provide money for 
this, and you will have to have a special warrant throughout the 
year to pay for it. And that’s fine; that can be done. But don’t try 
to deceive people in your usual way, and don’t try to deceive the 
senior citizens. You’re going to be $3.2 million short if you start it 
in July.  
 
But nobody knows when you’re going to start it. So I think, in 
order to really deal fairly with this legislation, you ought to report 
to this committee and to the public: when do you propose to 
implement this program? The increases  — will they start in July 
or August or September or October? I suspect they will at least 
begin before October, but do you have a timetable for the initiation 
of these increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, a determination for the 
start-up date has not been made yet. But I want to indicate to the 
members of the Assembly exactly what the position of the NDP 
was with regards to the Saskatchewan income plan. Previously the 
Saskatchewan income plan was not under a separate piece of 
legislation. So any government by regulation could have done 
away with it and the senior citizens would not have had an 
opportunity to have that matter debated in the legislature. That’s 
the first point. 
 
The second and most important point, though, since the member 
wants to talk about money: under the NDP the Saskatchewan 
income plan was increased once in seven years by $5, for the 
benefit of the member from Shaunavon. You were so concerned 
about senior citizens, you increased the befits once by $5 in seven  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2134 
 
 

years. Now that was during that period of time when revenues 
were flowing into government coffers from wherever, and you 
decided to take that money and spend it on uranium mine, potash 
mines, land bank for the government land. You had absolutely no 
interest of attempting to assist senior citizens substantially. 
 
So what you had was a seven-year period of time where you 
increased it once by $5. When the Progressive Conservative 
government came to power, it increased it from 25 to $50. Now 
we are talking about putting a Bill in place which will make sure 
that this plan is a permanent fixture of the income security systems 
for seniors, and we have also decided to double the benefits again 
over the next four years. So you did not have a permanent fixture 
for senior citizens in legislation, and you had a paltry increase of 
$5 in seven years. And when you compare that to the record of 
this government, I think you’d have to agree that certainly we have 
attacked the problem of low income for senior citizens far more so 
than you did. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re not a very good 
one to argue what you’ve done for senior citizens because you 
have done very little. I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, what you’ve 
done. You’ve done here the introducing of a Bill, but you’ve 
provided no money to pay for the cost of the Bill, which tells you 
only one thing, that you introduced this Bill late in the session, you 
had no intention of doing it, and now you’re introducing it because 
you know you’ve got to shore up your political support. And that’s 
fine, except I wish you would stop doing this on the backs of 
people out there who should not deserve to have that done by any 
government. 
 
Under the New Democratic Party government, Mr. Minister, we 
introduced the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) 
program. We introduced this program, where seniors were getting 
nothing, and it was introduced under an NDP government, and all 
you’re doing is making some increases  — fine. 
 
Here’s what you did to those senior citizens to whom you’re going 
to provide some increase. You have taken away twice as much as 
what you’re going to give them, and you’ve done that consistently. 
Nursing home rates in 1982, Mr. Minister, were $390 a month, 
and the member for Moosomin will agree . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .  
 
I ask the member for Moosomin what the nursing home rates are 
now? They are almost $500 a month. In fact, in some cases they’re 
over $500 a month now. 
 
Now the minister says . . . Mr. Chairman, will you call the 
members of the government to order. I’m having trouble being 
heard . . . listen to the member for Moosomin. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please! Let’s have order 
so we can get through the business of the day as expeditiously as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, now the minister will be 
able to hear what I say. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that four and a half years . . . you  

say that during a previous government, this was not in legislation. 
Well I say to you, for the last four and a half years this was not in 
legislation. Where were you? Why was your playing politics not 
important then, but is only important four and a half years later. 
We’re not going to argue about the legislation. I don’t think we are 
arguing about that  — you are not, and I am not. I simply want to 
make the point because  — and here is another reason why I want 
to make the point. The Minister of Finance, when he responded in 
his estimates, Mr. Minister, said the total cost of this program will 
be $2.5 million. You are saying it’s going to be $4.35 million. 
Now that’s a 200 per cent increase. Now is the Minister of Finance 
misleading this House, or are you misleading the House? 
 
Now will you tell us: is the Minister of Finance’s figure correct, 
and he should know  — he puts the money in the budget  — or is 
your figure correct? I think that’s important to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if you introduce the program half-way 
through the year, it’s going to cost you half of the money. If you 
introduce it for a full year, which is the question you asked me 
initially, then naturally it’s going to cost you the full sum of 
money for the year. You know, half of one is half. And I would 
think that you would understand that. I’m surprised that you would 
ask that kind of a question. 
 
But when it comes to programs for seniors  — and you talked 
about assisting seniors  — and this is an example of a program, the 
Saskatchewan income plan that assists seniors. You talk about the 
seniors’ heritage grant, which we implemented, which 
substantially increase benefits for low income seniors. 
 
We have the SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) program. You 
brought it in in 1975 and started it off at $20 a month, and then 
you increased it once, 1978, up to $25 a month. And then you 
didn’t touch it again. So in seven years you took it from 20 to $25  
— a $5 increase. 
 
Well we took it from 25 to $50 a month. Doubled it from 25 to 50. 
Now we’re going to double it again, from 50 to 100, over a 
four-year period of time. So then when you compare your 
seven-year record of increasing it $5 a month, to our proposed 
seven-year record of increasing it $75 a month, I’m sure the 
seniors would rather have the $75 increase under a Progressive 
Conservative government than a $5 increase under an NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will answer it this way. The problem is 
that with this increase the minister opposite talks about is that this 
government is going to tax it away with the flat tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Oh, come on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, you know it. There is no age 
exemption allowed under the flat tax. And this government, as I 
said, has taken twice as much away as it has given. And that is the 
difference. 
 
Mr. Minister . . .  
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2135 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Could we have 
some order, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Glad you called 
the government members to order. No one can hear what’s going 
on in here. They only one that’s quiet over there is the member 
from Maple Creek. I’m glad to see that. 
 
Mr. Minister, will people between the ages of 60 and 65 get any 
benefit under this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The member suggests that . . . He’s admitted 
now that we are substantially increasing benefits to seniors in 
comparison to what the NDP did. They increased it $5; we’re 
going to increase it $75. 
 
And then he says: but you’re going to tax it back from them. Well 
these are low-income people that don’t pay tax. They don’t pay 
tax. The majority of people who are eligible for the Saskatchewan 
income plan, they don’t even file an income tax return; how can 
they pay tax? 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I think that my comments have laid to rest 
the arguments of the member opposite, that somehow this 
government is not doing substantially more for low-income 
seniors than an NDP government did. 
 
As it relates to the 60 to 65 age category, the program today is the 
same as it was when you were in power, in terms of eligibility. 
People over 65 are eligible for it  — those are senior citizens  — in 
the same way that they are eligible for old age security, guaranteed 
income supplement coming from the federal government;; they 
are eligible for the SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) coming from 
the provincial government. So the criteria have not changed in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that all people 
who qualified for the heritage grant are not going to pay any tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We’re talking about the SIP . . . This is a Bill 
entitled the Saskatchewan income plan. If you want to talk about 
the heritage grant, I’d love to talk about the heritage grant. But if 
you want to talk about the heritage grant, I’m sure the chairman 
wouldn’t want us to because that’s not on the Bill. But the heritage 
grant under the Progressive Conservative government 
substantially increased benefits from seniors compared to the old 
property improvement grant under your government. We’re not 
talking about that, though; we’re talking about the increased 
benefits under the Saskatchewan income plan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree we shouldn’t talk about the heritage 
grant, but it’s the minister who raised it, if you will remember, Mr. 
Chairman  — who raised it in his remarks earlier. And I simply, 
when I referred to taxation, was referring to those benefits, 
including the heritage grant, which the minister opposite talked 
about. And he will not admit in this House that in fact that heritage 
grant is going to be taxed under the flat tax because there is no age 
exemption, as will other kind of benefits that seniors get who are 
in a tax category. 
 

But, Mr. Minister, I guess we’ve  — and this is my last question 
on this Bill  — but we have established one thing: your 
government is still not prepared to do anything to help those 
people between the ages of 60 and 65 who find themselves in dire 
straits. Many of them are ill or handicapped or are widowed, and 
therefore they do not have adequate income. But neither the 
government’s pension plan, which is a way to get money so that 
the government can help to pay for its deficit, or this Bill, is going 
to help the people between the ages of 60 and 65. 
 
The only help that those people will get is under the program of a 
New Democratic Party in which we say we will provide an 
adequate income for that category of people who find themselves 
in need, so that they don’t have to go on welfare. This Bill doesn’t 
do that, and neither does nay other program or legislation you 
have in your government will do that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions. The thing that concerns 
me still, and has, is that we have a Bill here; there is no money in 
the budget for it. That is unfortunate. I’m sure the government will 
come forward with supplementary estimates. But I say a 
government that manages well will know the kind of money it will 
need, and it should not have to go through this kind of a process. 
We are, in conclusion, as I said earlier, supporting the Bill itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’m pleased to hear that the members 
opposite are going to support this very significant Bill which will 
help senior citizens: which will make a permanent fixture of their 
income security, the Saskatchewan income plan; which will see 
benefits increase under this administration from $25 a month to 
$100 a month  — a substantial, substantial increase over what the 
former administration was offering to low income seniors. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’d be pleased to, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Garnet Wells, president of the Crown Management Board; 
behind Mr. Wells is Larry Kyle, legal counsel from the firm of 
Balfour Moss Milliken Laschuk & Kyle; and directly behind me, 
Mr. Chairman, is Ian Ellis, director of special projects for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions to ask, Mr. Minister. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2136 
 
 

Our leader last Friday spoke on seconding reading and brought out 
a good number of concerns that we had. And of course I have 
expressed my concerns on the fact that the type of money was 
used for the expansion and, as you indicate, for the creation of jobs 
in the forest industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, first of all, if you would 
comment as to . . . Do you not feel that you could have 
accomplished the same amount, or the same amount of jobs that 
are going to be created, by leaving everything the way it was in the 
hands of the Saskatchewan government as far as the chemical 
plant is concerned and the Big River sawmill and as far as PAPCO 
is concerned? Could we have not accomplished the same amount 
of jobs, had everything been left as it was and no sale taking 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just a few comments 
with regards to the question. 
 
First of all, Mr. Chairman, what the member is suggesting, if I 
understand him properly, what he’s suggesting, and what the NDP 
would do in this circumstance with the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company, the mill that is there at present a mill which in the 
market-place in this day and age will not make it without 
integration  — and what we’ve talked about . . . Your leader, in 
fact, has agreed that that’s what will make a pulp-mill go in these 
days, is integration with the manufacture of paper. 
 
I think in this province one of the things we’ve looked for for an 
awful long time in any industry, and certainly in the forest 
industry, but through agriculture and everything else, is to get to 
the stage where you can manufacture finished products from our 
resources here n our own province. What the development of a 
paper-mill provides is just that. 
 
Now if we were to say, as the member for Athabasca suggests, he 
says: why would the provincial government not try to accomplish 
this integration themselves. And what I would ask the member is 
. . . Then you’re suggesting that the $250 million which it costs to 
build a paper-mill should be put up by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, if that’s what I understand you to say  — $250 
million put up by the taxpayers. We reject such a notion. I believe, 
from the comments of your leader the other day, that he rejects 
such a notion, but I’m not sure of that. 
 
(1515) 
 
What we have there, Mr. Chairman, is the following: we have an 
investment of $187 million of provincial money now in the 
present pulp-mill installation at Prince Albert  — $187 million 
investment  — which investment has been losing money over a 
period of years. And so what you would suggest is that this is a 
bad deal. 
 
I would say to you, I believe everyone in the province will see the 
benefits of this in terms of the jobs created. Those jobs will only 
be created in that industry through the integration of sawmills into 
pulp-mills and into the manufacture of paper. That integration is 
extremely important. 
 

Then the other factor here which should not be lost on you, and I 
know it’s not, anyone who comes from our area of the province  
— our area, I’m speaking here of those of us from the northern 
part of the province  — that this is not lost on us in terms of the 
use of aspen and the integration of the use of aspen with softwood 
in the processing, whether it be in pulp or ultimately into paper. 
 
So I reject your suggestion, the premise that you started from, and 
would say to you that when you can have a major investor come 
into the province, such as the Weyerhaeuser company is, to create 
those jobs  — and not only create new jobs in a new enterprise, 
but to maintain the viability of jobs which are now in place at the 
pulp-mill  — I think it’s a good deal for Saskatchewan and 
certainly a good deal for the northern part of Saskatchewan and an 
excellent deal for the forest industry here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Just one short question before I get into it. Do 
you feel that Weyerhaeuser was the firm that could handle this 
best? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, there were several 
companies who had expressed an interest. No other company was 
interested in the integration of aspen, or the use of aspen. So the 
type of paper that they wanted to make made use of the aspen 
resource which we have, and I want to emphasize that one more 
time. 
 
And the other thing about the Weyerhaeuser Company, 
Weyerhaeuser Canada and just Weyerhaeuser Corporation on a 
world-wide basis, is that they’re recognized in the forest industry  
— and no one will deny this  — they’re recognized in the forest 
industry everywhere for their forest management; for their 
silviculture; for their management practices; and there’s no 
question as well that that augurs very, very well for the 
management of our forests here in the northern part of the 
province, and it’s obviously a heritage that we to take very 
seriously. 
 
In government, it doesn’t matter who the government is, it’s just 
something that you . . . it’s a responsibility that we have, and when 
you’re looking at this, you must take it seriously. We in this 
government have taken that seriously, and we feel very, very good 
about the fact that we were able to come to terms with a company 
such as Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate how much 
money Weyerhaeuser put up for this deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We put up two-thirds of the cost of the 
paper-mill which is estimated to be a $250 million project. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I guess I have to . . . you didn’t understand the 
question right. Of the $248 million that Weyerhaeuser has paid for 
the Prince Albert Pulp Company, the Big River sawmill, and the 
bush operations, plus a chemical plant in Saskatoon, of the $248 
million, how much a price tag . . . how much money did 
Weyerhaeuser put out? 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2137 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the answer in the $248 million is that 
there’s no cash up front. Okay? But I made that point in second 
reading as well, and I just remind the member of this. I remind the 
member that the other companies, and the ones that I referred to 
earlier in this debate  — the other companies who had approached 
us about the possibility of integrating this pulp-mill with the paper 
operation  — would not agree in any way, shape, or form, with an 
integration of the two in the sense that, in the finance . . . and in 
other words they said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. In 
answer to the member over there, I do want to understand the 
questions, and I will make every attempt to answer them. 
 
What they wanted to do is isolate the pulp-mill, the present 
installation, isolate that out and talk about that in terms of today’s 
market value of pulp-mills. And if you look anywhere in the 
industry, you’ll find that the market value of pulp-mills, given 
today’s prices in the projections of prices of pulp, could almost be 
a negative value. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I find that quite interesting, Mr. 
Minister. You just got up here a few minutes ago and you said that 
if we were to create new jobs in the forest industry, and if we were 
to have an expansion of the Prince Albert pulp-mill, and if we 
were to integrate the paper-mill with the pulp-mill, that the 
taxpayers would have to put up certain sums of money. And you 
said that the taxpayers of this province wouldn’t stand for that. 
 
But yet you stand up here and you indicate that Weyerhaeuser has 
taken over all the assets for $248 million and hasn’t put up one red 
cent. And you sell it to Weyerhaeuser Ltd., and you indicate that 
Weyerhaeuser is a company that has all the expertise and is the 
kind of company that you want to come in and pay them to take 
over our resources. 
 
I want to quote what Weyerhaeuser is doing right now in the 
United States. They have 7,500 of their employees who are on 
strike right now in the United States. And why are the 7,500 on 
strike? They’re on strike because Weyerhaeuser Canada wants to 
drop their wages $4 an hour. They want to drop the wages $4 an 
hour on the 7,500 employees that they have in the United States 
that are on strike right now. That’s the kind of corporate citizen 
that you have paid $248 million of the taxpayers’ money to come 
into this province and take over our assets. 
 
I also want to say that this is, and I’m quoting what Weyerhaeuser 
is saying: 
 

Weyerhaeuser has said the wage cuts are needed if it is to 
remain competitive in an unstable market. 

 
That’s what Weyerhaeuser is saying. And that’s why they’ve got 
7,500 of their workers on strike, and they’re trying to lower their 
wages by $4 an hour because we’re in an unstable market in the 
forest industry. 
 
Now you want to give this corporation $248 million. You want to 
give them all our assets. And then you say, well, but that’s not all 
of it. They’re going to put an expansion onto the present pulp-mill, 
and they are going to build a new paper-mill. 
 

And the Government of Saskatchewan, over and above the $248 
million you’ve already give them, you’re going to sign another 
promissory note for $83 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now that’s not true. The member from Prince Albert said that’s 
not true. I’m going to sit down and ask the minister: is that not true 
that the Saskatchewan government is going to sign a promissory 
note for $83 million for the expansion of the paper-mill and the 
renovations that are going to take place to the present mill? 
 
Also, Weyerhaeuser Canada is going to sign a note for another 
$83 million, and there’s going to be another $83 million that is 
going to be guaranteed by Weyerhaeuser Canada. And do you 
know where they’re going to get their money from for the 
expansion and the renovations of the present pulp-mill and the 
expansion of the paper-mill? They’re going to get the $83 million 
from the promissory note that the government is signing. They’re 
going to borrow on the assets that we have paid them to take. So 
really they put up absolutely no money, and they take all our 
assets. 
 
I think this is one of the worst displays that I have ever seen in this 
province, where we have assets with no details, that this provincial 
government is putting up all the money, and Weyerhaeuser is 
putting up not one red cent, not for the assets nor for the 
expansions. They’re not putting up one red cent. It’s all coming 
from the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, that’s why this government has got this 
province so far in debt because they’re guaranteeing all these loans 
to Weyerhaeuser and the Peter Pocklingtons. And as long as they 
keep guaranteeing this money, this money will continually go in 
debt. The province is just so far in debt today, you’ve actually 
borrowed more money against the province of Saskatchewan than 
the province’s assets are worth. 
 
Not only that, you tell Weyerhaeuser Canada: we will sign the 
$248 million note; you take our assets, our pulp-mill, our Big 
River sawmill, our chemical plant in Saskatoon, and all the rights 
to the forest, and you pay us back if you make any profits. Now 
that is what the deal is  — you pay back the money if you make 
profits. If you don’t make any profits  — and I’m sure there isn’t 
very few members over there that don’t realize that  — the 
member from Battleford is shaking his head; he understands that  
— if you don’t make profits, you don’t pay one cent back. 
 
What has taken place, Mr. Chairman, is the citizens of 
Saskatchewan have lost five major assets, and we have paid an 
outside-the-province firm to take over the bush from PAPCO, the 
bush from Big River, the Big River sawmill, the Prince Albert 
paper-mill, and the chemical plant in Saskatoon, and we have paid 
them to take it. We have paid them to take it, and we have said to 
this firm: if you make a profit, then you pay us back; but if you 
don’t make a profit . . .  
 
And when we go back and we take a look at what the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation is saying, one just has to think: now, 
are they going to make a profit? Because Weyerhaeuser 
themselves said, he said, the wage cuts are 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2138 
 
 

needed if it is to remain competitive in an unstable market. So he 
admits, Weyerhaeuser admits, that we are dealing in an unstable 
market, but yet you pay him to take over our assets and pay us 
back in profits. 
 
If Weyerhaeuser is going to come in here and treat his employees 
the same way as the employees are treated down in the States, and 
they’re going to be cut back $4 an hour, just imagine what the 
workers in Big River, and the chemical plant in Saskatoon, and the 
bush operators and everything that are supplying the logs and the 
pulp for Prince Albert are saying. They’re worried. And they 
phoned up, and I talked to an individual in P.A., not more than an 
hour ago, who is very concerned because this is a bad deal for this 
province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you’ve made a deal where 
Weyerhaeuser has not put up one red cent. And I also say that the 
expansion, if it goes ahead, not one cent of theirs will be used, 
either. And you can comment . . . The member from Prince Albert 
says that the provincial government is not going to guarantee $83 
million for the expansion and the renovations. And I ask you, Mr. 
Minister: is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well you asked me several things, hon. 
member, and I’ll just try to respond to some of them. You say that 
Weyerhaeuser has committed nothing for the assets of this 
pulp-mill. What I say to you is that what is committed, and what is 
extremely important to the operation of that pulp-mill, is the 
continued viability of the pulp-mill, and that continued viability is 
a lot closer to being assured by the integration with the paper-mill. 
There’s no question about that, and anybody in the industry will 
admit that. 
 
You talk about the other thing that they’ve committed, is to spend 
millions of dollars on the construction of a paper-mill which we 
have not had n this province before. We do not have a paper-mill. 
For you to stand and say we’ve give this, and a paper-mill  — 
there is no paper-mill in Saskatchewan. And without a deal such 
as this, there is no likelihood of a paper-mill in Saskatchewan. So 
we will have the added installation of a paper-mill. 
 
The curious point in the remarks of the hon. member, when he 
gets up and talks about the financial deal, is that it’s in stark 
contrast to exactly what was said by his leader the other day. It is 
in absolute contrast. 
 
The questions are fine if you’re dealing with a principle. What 
your leader says, Mr. Chairman . . .  
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Could we get some order in the House 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What the Leader of the Opposition said, in 
Hansard on page 2037 . . . I quote the Leader of the Opposition 
now to the hon. member: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have no objection, and my colleagues have no 
objection . . .  

 

Presumably I would think when he said “my colleagues,” he’s 
referring to the band of seven, or eight. 
 

 . . . I have no objection, and my colleagues have no 
objection to the financing of industrial projects this way; we 
have no objection in principle. The method whereby the 
Government of Saskatchewan has either provided money by 
way of mortgage, or guaranteed money which others 
provided by way of mortgage for major industrial projects in 
this province, is now well established. 

 
That’s what he said, and yet in your questioning you suggest that 
that’s not the proper way to go. And what I’m trying to figure out 
is, what is the position of the NDP opposition? What is the 
position? So that’s what I . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: —You’ll find out in a minute. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, we’ll find out in a minute, says the 
member from Shaunavon. That’s good. And once again I quote 
the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

I want to state that I have no objection in principle to the 
guaranteeing of the money for the construction of a 
paper-mill adjacent to the pulp-mill at Prince Albert. 

 
And we went into some debate in second reading about the 
integration and the positive aspects of integration of sawmill with 
pulp-mill, and with paper-mill, which integrates the total forest 
industry and which can be nothing but positive for that area of the 
province and for the province in general. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is: is the provincial government signing a promissory 
note for $83 million for the expansion and the building of the new 
paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A loan guarantee, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Can you explain what the difference of that 
is? That’s not a guarantee the same as the promissory note that 
was signed for the 248 million. The member from Prince Albert 
thinks that it’s different. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, the difference is, Mr. Chairman, if it’s 
a promissory note it means that whoever is . . . like if we signed a 
promissory note it would mean that we would pay it. And what a 
guarantee is, that we’re guaranteeing the debt of someone else, and 
if it isn’t paid at that stage, it will be paid. But we have every 
belief that it will be paid and that the province will not be at risk. 
But certainly the loan guarantee is there and, as your leader has 
said, that he doesn’t object to that method of operation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, either way, it is a 
guarantee to pay the $83 million if it’s not paid, if it’s a default. If 
the $248 million would be the same thing, you would either take 
back the assets, but then you will get down to that later. 
 
But I want to quote here also, that if you want to start  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2139 
 
 

quoting from what our leader has indicated on Friday, he says: 
 

That is a highly unusual sale. One would seek long and hard 
to find any other pulp-mill in Canada that’s been sold on 
those terms. 

 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, you are breaking new ground, and 
you are committing this province to a tremendous amount of 
money to give away our assets. And now I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
could you indicate how much money is going to be spent on 
renovations on the Prince Albert pulp-mill this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify the other 
point  — the $83 million. What that guarantee will be tied to  — it 
will be tied to the asset of a paper-mill which will be worth about 
$250 million, of which two -thirds will be equity from the 
company. Now that asset will be there and constructed on site 
adjacent to the pulp-mill. It’s tied to that asset; the asset is theirs 
like a mortgage on your house, so to speak. Now you tell me how 
you would suggest that somebody will pick up the paper-mill and 
move it. They won’t take it somewhere. The asset is there and it’s 
tied to that, so it’s very well secured. That’s the point that I want to 
make. 
 
You suggest that we’re breaking some new ground because you 
won’t find a deal like this anywhere else. Well I’ll agree with you 
100 per cent owned by the government. If you want to talk about 
breaking new ground, you boys broke brand-new ground when 
you exercised your right of first refusal to buy PAPCO (Prince 
Albert Pulp Company) when another company was negotiating to 
buy it. And you broke new ground when you took those assets 
over totally by the Government of Saskatchewan with little debate  
— in fact with no debate and with no information to anyone. So 
you did that  — no consultation  — you did it; you took it over. 
And we can get into that debate at another time, and there was 
some stated reason at that time about FMLAs (forestry 
management licensing agreement), and I’d like to get into that as 
well. 
 
So new ground was broken when it was taken over by a 
government, and certainly new ground will be broken when 
you’re attempting to integrate that facility and dispose of it from a 
government-owned asset to a privately owned asset. We have to 
break new ground because we’re the only government owning 
such a facility. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you tell me how much money is going 
to be spent this summer on renovations? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The amount, I’m informed, is about $25 
million or thereabouts in the renovations to the wood room and 
some other things which will help for the integration to take place 
for the new paper-mill. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. And when will the start on the new 
paper-mill commence? Could you give us the date of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the process . . . The company  

is committed, as would anybody, to going through an 
environmental impact study and so on  — that will be under way. 
And it’s anticipated that construction will begin this fall. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Are you indicating that there has to be an 
environmental impact study taken and presented to the 
Department of the Environment before any construction can 
proceed on that new paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, what I’m saying is that the normal 
process according to the environment Act, and I’m not sure of 
exactly what those requirements are, but that will get under way 
and I know that technical discussions have been under way for 
some time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could give us 
. . . What the government is doing is signing a note for $248 
million to start off with; could you give us the interest rate on that 
note? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, we’re not signing a note first of all, 
but it’s an income debenture and the interest rate, as I said in 
seconding reading, will be 8.2 per cent, to which I might add, Mr. 
chairman, for the member’s benefit, when I indicated that in 
second reading, your leader nodded his head in the affirmative  — 
thought it was an excellent rate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, under the terms of the 
agreement there’s 20 years for the pay-back. Could you indicate if 
there is any clause in there that no portion of the assets that they’re 
purchasing can be sold to any other group in that 20-year period? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod — I’m informed that there would be no 
possibility of a negative exposure for the government, even if they 
were to sell some asset, which we don’t anticipate happening. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well you don’t anticipate, and I’m suggesting 
that if they do sell, that the agreement would continue on with the 
new group, and you agree with that. But there is no agreement, or 
nothing within the agreement, that states that they could not sell 
off the chemical plant in Saskatoon, or nothing says that they 
could not sell off the Big River sawmill. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I suppose in theory that would be true. I 
mean there would be nothing in the agreement that says you can’t 
sell this or that, but as I’ve said, if anything was sold, it would not 
put . . . the way in which the agreement is structured, or would be 
structured, is that there’ll be no negative for the government and 
the government’s position. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I think, Mr. Minister, when you take a 
look at what Weyerhaeuser is doing in the United States and the 
statements that Weyerhaeuser is making, that it’s an unstable 
market that we’re in right now, and if Weyerhaeuser decided  — 
and the chemical plant in Saskatoon, I might add, is a 
money-maker; the chemical plant is making money  — and if they 
decided that they wanted to go ahead this year with the expansion 
of the pulp-mill or the paper-mill, and they wanted to sell of the 
chemical plant  — and let me tell you, their profit and loss  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2140 
 
 

would look fairly good to them this fall, or in the years to come, 
because they would not be making any profits  — and if they were 
to sell off the Big River mill to somebody who didn’t know how 
to operate a mill  — maybe the agreement still goes there  — but 
they run that mill into the ground, and what happens to the town of 
Big River and what happens to all the individuals who are 
working? 
 
What has been created through the sale, or this proposed sale, is a 
lot of uneasiness with the employees that are working in the 
chemical plant in Saskatoon, and the employees in Prince Albert 
and Big River, and the bush operators who had billions of dollars 
invested in bush operations. Everything can change because we 
see what Weyerhaeuser has said, we see what Weyerhaeuser has 
done, and we see what you have given Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And I might say that the climate in the forest industry . . . I also 
might add that I think it’s a dark, dark day in the forest industry in 
Saskatchewan when the government of the day would pay a 
corporation the type of money that they have paid to take over 
virtually of the forest assets that we have in this province, and I 
say that that is a bad deal. 
 
And there should be something in there that says that they cannot 
sell, because if that chemical plant is sold, and that Big River mill 
is sold, or not, or if the Big River mill is moved . . . Mr. Minister, I 
would like to know if that Big River mill can be moved, and is 
there any clause in the agreement that says that the Big River mill 
cannot be moved from the Bodmin site? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s just go back a 
little bit, and I know the member knows it well, the Big River 
being a home area for him. The reason that the Big River, the 
Bodmin sawmill, which is a very . . . at the present time and 
operating in its present structure, as was suggested by your leader 
and was agreed to by myself  — and I’m sure you agree as well  
— was a marginal operation as it operated as a stand-alone 
sawmill. There’s no question about that. 
 
What this transaction will provide, will increase the viability of the 
Bodmin sawmill in the following way. 
 
The area near Bodmin, the forested area near Bodmin, has a 
preponderance of aspen. Because it has a preponderance of aspen, 
and aspen moving into the pulp-mill and eventually into the 
production of paper, we then have the opportunity for a two-way 
haul which makes that haul viable; a two-way haul, which means 
saw logs from the core area, which is something that has been 
tried in the industry for a long time and which has not been 
accomplished, in the sense that we’re using saw logs from the core 
area in the sawmill and using aspen . . . or having another haul 
coming back towards the pulp-mill. And what you have . . . That 
makes it viable, or at least a lot more viable than what’s there now. 
 
(1545) 
 
So what I say to the member is, that’s what has been . . . that was 
what the attraction of that area for the government, and certainly 
it’s one of those cases where it’s a win-win situation. It’s an 
excellent situation for the integration, as I’ve said before, of the 
total operation of  

forest to sawmill to pulp-mill to paper-mill. And it’s an excellent 
thing for the Government of Saskatchewan in the management of 
the forest, which has to be the concern of all of us as legislators. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Is there any clause in the agreement that states 
that the Big River sawmill cannot be moved? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, I don’t know what you mean. I 
mean, I don’t think they’d . . . No, there’s not a clause that says 
you can’t move them, but I think it’s not the kind of a thing that 
one would say . . . An operation like the Bodmin sawmill, as my 
colleague from Prince Albert says, he doesn’t think there’ll be 
skids big enough in the area for it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I think that’s the type of approach that we’re 
dealing with. That’s the type of mentality that we’re dealing with 
here. You know, the member from Prince Albert sits there and 
laughs, and he says he doesn’t think that there’s skids big enough 
to move the Big River sawmill. Well let me tell you, that Big 
River sawmill was put together, and it can be taken apart and put 
together again in Prince Albert, and we don’t have to talk about 
skids. 
 
And when we talk about a two-way haul, you know, I know what 
we’re talking about here. And I think the mentality that I’ve seen 
here today, where you . . . And as I said, it’s a black, black day in 
the forest industry in this province. And I’ll tell you it’s going to 
prove . . . You watch out in the next six months to the two years, 
and you’ll see that I’m right. 
 
And I tell you that that Big River sawmill can be moved as easy as 
any elevator can be moved down the highway, which you see 
moved. And a lot easier, because they would just take it apart and 
rebuild it. 
 
You talk about two-way hauls, and I don’t want to get into these 
silly arguments, but two-way hauls, the Big River . . . I don’t know 
where you get the two-way haul with the Big River sawmill 
because the trucks were either bringing in aspen or bringing in 
spruce. They unload the spruce at Big River, and if they’ve got 
aspen, they go all the way to Prince Albert. So I don’t know where 
you get this two-way haul stuff. It doesn’t make any sense. 
 
But let me tell you, it can be moved. And I say, is there a clause? 
And if there’s no clause in there, there should be a clause that says 
that the Big River sawmill cannot be moved. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. Mr. Chairman, you know, I say the 
thing about skids in a facetious way, and that’s fair. But what I 
would say to the member is this, and you didn’t understand what I 
meant when I talked about the viability of a haul going both ways, 
and I’m talking about the core area which is north of Prince 
Albert; so we’ll say, for sake of argument, the Prince Albert 
region, and the Big River region as it relates to the Bodmin 
sawmill. 
 
And what I was talking about in increasing viability is the 
following. Aspen, which grows in preponderance in the Big River 
region, which it now goes to waste and which is now not used in 
the forest industry, and I know you’ll  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2141 
 
 

admit that. That aspen will be going to Prince Albert to the 
pulp-mill. Okay? 
 
An Hon. Member: —It’s poplar. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Poplar. It will be going to Prince Albert to 
the pulp-mill. This is where the two-way haul comes in. Saw logs. 
Spruce logs which are saw-log size can now come from the Prince 
Albert area back because the trucks will not be going either way 
empty. That makes it a viable operation. 
 
And what I’m saying to you is that makes economic sense. You 
can fill a truck both ways. It makes sense to anyone, and it makes 
sense to people who understand the forest industry. I submit to 
you. You say that this deal will be a black day in Saskatchewan  
— I heard that quote before. That quote was widely used across 
the northern forested area and in Prince Albert, I’ll tell you. 
 
And I would just say one more thing, Mr. Chairman, as it relates 
to the member’s concerns  — and they’re valid concerns, you 
know, when a member raises concerns as it relates to workers, and 
it relates to people working at jobs available. But what I’d say to 
you and where you’re wrong is this: Weyerhaeuser Company 
representatives have been meeting with the people of Big River, 
with the employees at Bodmin, with the employees at Prince 
Albert. And I would say to you, Mr. Member from Athabasca, and 
to you, Chairman, and the committee, that the people in the 
industry, who work in the industry and who understand the 
industry and understand the reputation of Weyerhaeuser, which 
I’ll get into in a minute  — the reputation of Weyerhaeuser in this 
industry  — are pleased with the transaction. They are pleased 
with the transaction, and I’ll stand on that anywhere. 
 
Now I hear you say that it’s a black day when this sort of a 
transaction takes place. You and I will agree to disagree on that. I 
will say to you that it’s an absolutely great day for Saskatchewan 
when this transaction is closed  — a great day for forestry, a great 
day for the production of paper, and for the integration of an 
industry that should have been integrated a good long time ago, an 
industry which you people had some control over, more so than 
any government ever should have had, for a long time, and did 
nothing toward the integration of that industry  — nothing. Zero. 
 
And I would say to you that in a four-year term this government 
has been able to accomplish something which your people and Mr. 
Messer, who was once the minister of forestry and so on in this 
province, used to state; Mr. Cowley, who was formerly the 
minister at the time of take-over of PAPCO by the government ; 
that time when I talked about, with little consultation, he stated at 
the time that the reason was for the rationalization of forest 
management lease arrangements. There was nothing done toward 
that end by your government. 
 
There has been a significant amount done in this one term of office 
by this government. And I would say to you, and I know that 
people in the industry appreciate that very much  — many of them 
have been only impatient that it’s taken this long to do, but I don’t 
apologize for that either because it takes some time to get it done. 
But you had a  

good 11 years to do it; you did not do it. We have had four years 
to do it; we have done it, and I would say that it’s good, and it’s far 
from being a black day for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to basically start back a 
little ways. My colleague from Athabasca has done a good job of 
bringing us up to the point of where he is expressing concern for 
some of the cutters and contractors in that area. 
 
I want to start out by asking you if you could give me  — and this 
may be repetitious, but I want to start out and develop a line of 
thought here  — but can you tell me what we’re selling in this 
process to Weyerhaeuser? What are the basic components of the 
sale, and what is the value of each one, and what is the location? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, the assets are the following: the 
PAPCO assets that were purchased by the government back in 
whatever year it was were the pulp-mill at Prince Albert, the 
chemical plant at Saskatoon, and the sawmill at Meadow Lake. 
That was the assets at that time. The assets which are now being 
sold to Weyerhaeuser are the pulp-mill at Prince Albert, the 
chemical plant at Saskatoon, and the Bodmin sawmill, which up 
until . . . well until the closing of this deal is an asset of the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, another corporation of 
this government. 
 
At the time of sale, the assets of Prince Albert pulp  — which were 
a pulp-mill, a chemical plant, and a sawmill  — were purchased by 
the provincial government of Saskatchewan, your government, for 
$187 million. And we are selling these assets to Weyerhaeuser for 
$248 million, ongoing viability, and the commitment to spend 
$250 million in the building of a paper-mill which is, as I said, 
significant for the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister would just confirm 
this: we’re then selling to Weyerhaeuser a pulp-mill at P.A., a 
chemical plant, I believe, at Saskatoon, and the Bodmin mill at 
Big River. I wonder, can you now break down the value of each of 
those facilities? And also, is there not a good deal of forest rights 
or cutting rights that go with this; and if there are, can you give me 
the number of acres or hectares that would be involved in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the sale was made on a package of 
the three things and the integration which, as I’ve said, is 
important. And the sale was made on those bases, upon which the 
value was placed. So it’s really hard to break down and say, well 
this is what Bodmin, this is what the chemical plant, and so on. 
 
In terms of the amount of forest area and so on, the forest area that 
will be part of the forest management lease arrangement with the 
Weyerhaeuser Company will be a smaller area; the core area will 
be a smaller area than what was in PAPCO before. The area which 
goes to this company that once was in the, what we’ll call the 
Bodmin supply area, is now smaller. The Bodmin supply area is 
now smaller than it was. I don’t have the acres or hectares  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2142 
 
 

or whatever, I don’t think, but I’ll try to get that, and I’ll send it 
over you. 
 
Those questions, Mr. Chairman, I think were addressed  — I 
wouldn’t want to be held to this  — but I believe they were 
discussed in the forestry amendments with my colleague, the 
Minister of Parks and Resources, during his Bill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get the forest rights acreage or the 
number of hectares, depending on what form you’re using there, 
but you must know what you sold because obviously they have 
value. 
 
You say you didn’t break them down  — the pulp-mill, the 
chemical plant, the sawmill at Big River and the forest rights. That 
seems a little strange that when you’re selling a major operation 
that you wouldn’t have it broken down. I mean, even a used care 
salesman, when they sell an automobile, would break down the 
cost of the operation. And if you’re buying a new automobile you 
would have . . . We’re talking about a $20,000 piece of equipment 
is broken down into the different areas. 
 
What I would want to know, and I find it hard to believe that you 
haven’t got that broken down, but the appraisal that was done 
before the sale, can you give me the name of the company or 
companies that did the appraisal of each of these facilities and 
what their appraisal for each of the items  — the pulp-mill, the 
chemical plant, the sawmill and the forest rights  — what was the 
appraisal and who did the appraisal for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The land just in terms of the number of 
hectares, if I understand your question right, is as follows. It 
breaks out into two different areas: one is called the core area, 
which we’ll call the core area relating to Prince Albert. I know the 
member from Athabasca has seen those maps and knows how that 
works  — 1,722,495 hectares, and that’s what’s called productive 
land. 
 
And in the reserve area number 1  — both of these reserve areas, 
on e is to the north and west and adjacent to the core area; and one 
is to the north and east and adjacent to the core area, if I recall the 
map properly. Reserve area number 1 is 408,392 hectares 
productive land; and reserve area number 2 is 397,656 hectares of 
productive land. So in reserve, the total of those two reserve areas, 
806,048 hectares of productive land, and add that to the core area, 
1,722,495 hectares of productive land. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get back to my original question of 
what the appraisal was on each of the items because you 
conveniently left that out, but you say this is a reduction in area 
from what it was before. What was the area in the original 
agreement when it was originally sold? You say it has been 
decreased. Tell me where the decrease occurred? Was it in the 
core area or was it in the reserve area 1 to the north-west or the 
reserve area 2 to the north-east? Which areas were reduced and by 
how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I can give you . . . I need the forestry  

officials here to give us that, but I will give you this. There’s been 
a reduction in the two reserve areas that I refer to here, that I 
referred to in my last answer  — a slight reduction as I understand 
it. And there’s also been a reduction in what is at present the 
Bodmin supply area, and that reduction is on the north-west of the 
Bodmin supply area in the Sled Lake-Dore Lake area, which the 
member from Athabasca is familiar with, that area. 
 
That is reduced off of what will be the Weyerhaeuser area, and the 
reason for that is because it goes back to that back-haul that I 
talked about with the member from Athabasca a few moments 
ago. With the soft wood available to Bodmin sawmill coming 
from Prince Albert, coming from the core area, in other words saw 
logs coming from the East to Bodmin, which did not happen 
before. It was the necessity for that much softwood in that area, 
and we were able to reduce that area. And that area will be 
dedicated to moving to the West rather than to the East. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to get one thing straight here. 
You said the forest rights originally included a core area of 1.7 
million and two reserve areas for a total of 806,000 hectares. And 
now you’re talking about an area around the Big River mill. Now 
there’s another area that you didn’t give me . . . Well can you give 
me the number of hectares that would have gone with the Big 
River mill, because that one I don’t have. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t have that, Mr. Chairman, and as I 
say, that’s a forestry . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: —Yes, but it’s part of the sale. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I understand that. You know, I’m not 
trying to be confrontational. What I’ll give you is . . . I will get you 
the information on that. What I was giving you in general terms is 
that the Bodmin supply area has been reduced by . . . and I’m not 
sure. I don’t want to put out a number because I’m not sure of the 
numbers. I have heard it before in negotiations and so on. I will get 
that for you and provide it to the member from Shaunavon. 
 
So it’s how much it’s been reduced, and what Bodmin supply area 
has been  — at present under Sask Forest Products. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The one other side issue on the Bodmin area 
is it’s been reduced. That Sled Lake area, as I understand it, has 
been left out of the deal. Where is that now? Who’s got the cutting 
rights on that area that you’ve left out of the deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That area . . . The mills that are in that 
area, one of them is a small mill which is at Green Lake. So what 
I’m saying is that wood can now be dedicated to moving west 
rather than east. And there’s the mill at Green Lake and there’s a 
sawmill at Meadow Lake which is at present under PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company) and which will be still operated by 
the Crown Management Board because it’s not part of this deal. 
So there’s a stud-mill at Meadow Lake and this wood that’s in that 
present area can now be moved to the west rather than to the east. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2143 
 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get to the issue of who has the 
area, the cutting rights on that area that’s been left out of this deal. 
Who has the cutting rights on that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’m telling you is that there’s no . . . 
The forest management agreements have not been signed. What 
I’m saying is that when the . . . It’s like a domino effect. When the 
Weyerhaeuser deal is signed with a limiting of that area, there will 
be an area which up until now has always been dedicated to 
Bodmin which will not now be dedicated to the Bodmin sawmill, 
and which will be open for the signing of an FMLA (forestry 
management licensing agreement) with, I would suggest to you, 
Sask Forest Products who has jurisdiction over the Green Lake 
mill, and with Meadow Lake Sawmill Limited which will have 
jurisdiction over the Meadow Lake sawmill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So then the idea is that the area, that Sled 
Lake area or the area that’s not included in the forest management 
with Weyerhaeuser, will then be up for cutting rights to be given 
to another existing plant or sawmill, and that could be Meadow 
Lake or the other one you mentioned. 
 
I want to get back to the issue of the appraisal, which is the main 
issue of debate here. I want to know the company that did the 
appraisal on the pulp-mill, on the chemical plant, on the 
Bodmin-Big River sawmill, and the forest rights, because we’re 
talking about almost 3 million hectares of cutting rights. And they 
certainly have value as lease land or any other property that you 
may be able to lease. 
 
What I want to ask you is: who did the appraisal on these four 
main areas, and what did that appraisal indicate in terms of value 
that you should be getting or these four main properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, there’s several ways in 
which an appraisal could have been done on a situation like this  
— several ways in which it could have been done. First of all, it 
could have been done on the basis of cash-flow from the 
pulp-mill, which would mean that the pulp-mill would have a zero 
value. It could have been done then on the basis of projected 
income, which would in this market, in today’s market and the 
market over the past several years, would have put it at a negative 
value. Or it could have been done in terms of going to the 
market-place. 
 
And we did it by going to the market-place, and we negotiated 
with . . . We have made no secret of the fact that the pulp-mill, 
which you people decided to buy, would be for sale  — made no 
secret of that. And we said that the . . . and by going to the 
market-place we said, here it is and let’s talk about the best deal 
for the people of Saskatchewan. And we had approximately 10 
companies express some interest, none of them as serious or with 
any kind of a . . . Oh I shouldn’t say, as serious; I’m sure all of 
them were serious to a varying degree, but certainly none of them 
with an offer that we have from the Weyerhaeuser Company here. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get one point clear, because it isn’t 
at this point. You say that it could have been done  

in, I believe, three different ways: cash flow, projected income, 
and the market-place. What I’m asking you and your officials: 
isn’t it normal that all three would  — when you’re selling an asset 
of what might be worth 250 or $500 million  — that all three 
would be applied? That you would do an appraisal, one; that you 
would check the cash flow projections; and that you would use the 
market. Wouldn’t it be the normal private sector theory of selling a 
major asset that you would use all three? 
 
I want to ask you again, are you telling the committee that no 
appraisal was done on these assets that we’re talking about selling 
for a quarter of a billion dollars that may have been worth half a 
billion? God knows what they might have been worth. Are you 
saying that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the officials can 
smile about it, but I’ll tell you that if you’re saying to this 
committee that no appraisal was done on a major asset of the 
public of Saskatchewan  — no appraisal was done  — and you 
people talk about open for business and good management and 
business-like management, I’ll tell you there are many people in 
the province who will doubt whether or not you can carry on. 
Because I’ll tell you this is a major issue. 
 
And if you watch other forest arrangements, whether it’s in 
Manitoba under the Duff Roblin government, one that still isn’t 
settled because of the give-aways that occurred at that point in 
time, or whether it’s Ross Thatcher and the Parsons and 
Whittemore deal that occurred, I’ll tell you you’re not going to get 
off that lightly of coming to this committee and saying, we didn’t 
do an appraisal  — that we didn’t do an appraisal. Because that is 
unbelievable. 
 
I want you to confirm to the committee and to the people of the 
province that you’re telling us that no appraisal was done before 
the sale occurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well let’s get to what the issue is here. 
First of all, Mr. Chairman, an appraisal would be done on the basis 
of what the market is out there. I mean, no mills have been selling, 
as I said. No pulp-mills have sold for quite some time. An 
appraisal would be done by any appraising company, but on the 
basis of what have mills sold for and what does today’s 
market-place talk about. 
 
I’ll say to you as I said to your leader and to the member from 
Athabasca before, the attraction for Weyerhaeuser coming here, 
and the fact that we’re even able to get a paper-mill, and the fact 
that we’re even able to make this sale at all  — it relates to the 
forest mix of Saskatchewan and the use of aspen. That’s the only 
thing, because of the technology available; that comes and that’s 
what it is. 
 
So I would say to you that the market-place out there . . . We went 
to the market-place and the market-place dictates what the price is. 
And I’ll say to you that we made the deal that you cannot dispute 
in any kind of conscience. How can you possibly dispute this in 
conscience when you . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
You tell me about Manitoba. I’ll tell you that the demand for 
Manitoba forest products, or whatever, their paper-mill that makes 
. . . I just read a thing here in the paper the other day that 
something in the order of $31  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2144 
 
 

million lost last year. Now you tell me what the appraisal would 
be . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . You tell me what the appraisal 
on that mill would be to try to lose it now. You tell me the 
appraisal on that mill and who would want to buy it. Who would 
buy it? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’m telling you is that you birds over 
there bought the pulp-mill. You bought this pulp-mill. You 
exercised your right of first refusal on one premise, and that was a 
reasonably stated premise by your former minister, Mr. Cowley, 
who said that, we will rationalize the forest management lease 
arrangements and then sell this mill, get it out of the hands of 
government. That was a reasonable suggestion. But the only thing 
that did not happen was that there was no effort made for 
rationalization of the forest management lease arrangements  — 
none whatever  — and no evidence of any attempts at that when 
we took over government, no evidence of any attempts to 
rationalize the forest management lease arrangements. You were 
carrying on with exactly the same ridiculous ad hoc system of 
forest management that you had done before, and that’s where it 
was very, very wrong. 
 
That’s where we have changed it. And this deal, as I’ve said to 
you before, this deal . . . And I should point out, it’s not only this 
deal with Weyerhaeuser; but other companies who operate in the 
forest, including small operators, are very pleased to see the way 
this is coming down and to see the way in which forest 
management will be conducted, not only by this corporation, but 
by other companies under the guide-lines set forward by this 
government and the Minister of Parks and Resources. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to know that 
your example of Duff Roblin’s mismanagement of the forest in 
Manitoba is exactly what is happening here today  — exactly 
what’s happening here today. 
 
Now you use the argument that the pulp-mills aren’t making 
money, that pulp-mills aren’t making money, and that there are no 
sales. These are the two arguments you use for not doing an 
appraisal and basically give it away. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well I’ll tell you, what would farmers do, for example in my area, 
when the farm today isn’t making money and there have been no 
land sales? Does that mean the land isn’t worth anything? Of 
course not. It’s worth 10 times what it was in 1971, even though 
there’s no money being made on the farm and there’s been no land 
sales. It’s still appraised at 10 times what it was in 1971. 
 
And what I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, is that if you did not do 
an appraisal of these major assets  — the pulp-mill, the chemical 
plant, the Big River mill, and the forest rights of about 3 million 
hectares of cutting rights  — then there’s something wrong with 
the way you people operate. There’s something wrong with the 
way you operate, because I want to tell you that an appraisal is a 
normal  

business standard in making a sale. 
 
So you did no appraisal. We don’t accept that; we don’t think it’s 
good business practice not to do appraisals. But what I want to ask 
you is, what down payment  — you’re selling a major asset, 250 
million  — what cash, what new money did this company bring 
into the province of Saskatchewan? What was the down payment 
of cash that they brought in and injected into the economy of the 
province that wasn’t either borrowed from the government or set 
up by the provincial taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well let’s go back a little bit, Mr. 
Chairman. When the former government bought the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company, when they bought it, the only appraisal they had 
was that they were exercising a right of first refusal, and they paid 
according to what was offered by Canfor, a private company. 
Canfor was offering to buy from Prince Albert Pulp Company, 
which was owned at that time by Parsons & Whittemore, and they 
offered a price. Your government did no appraisal. What you did 
was, you went in and paid according to what the market-place 
dictated at that day  — and that’s what it did, and that’s what it 
dictated. 
 
And Parsons & Whittemore and Canfor had a deal. And your 
government could not stand to see anything go into private hands 
when there was an opportunity for government to own it. And you 
went in and said, government has to own this thing, and no 
appraisal was done. So don’t tell me about appraisal. And I’ll still 
stand by . . . And I didn’t argue at the time as a member of 
opposition about appraisal. What I say to you today is the 
appraisal on that is dictated by what the market and what price it 
will bring in the market-place. I’ll say to you that it’s lost $44 
million over the past several years in the pulp prices. 
 
One other point that should be made, Mr. Chairman, at the time 
that that government, that party over there  — former government  
— purchased Prince Albert Pulp from Parsons and Whittemore 
after Canfor had made an offer, they purchased that when the 
projections which they had access to for pulp markets and so on 
were on a downward trend. Those projections were going 
downward, and they still made that purchase with taxpayers’ 
dollars in this province. And what we’re saying to you is, we are 
building on the forest base and not putting taxpayers’ dollars at 
risk as they did. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the question to the minister was: how 
much new money did Weyerhaeuser bring into the province that 
was neither guaranteed by the province or put up by the province? 
How many new dollars did they bring in? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — $166.8 million. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What will that money be used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It will be used to build a paper-mill, an 
installation which would never be in this province without this 
kind of an integrated deal. So a paper-mill construction in this 
province, I will impress upon the member from Shaunavon, is 
extremely important to the northern part of this province, 
extremely important to the  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2145 
 
 

forest industry, and extremely important to jobs and development 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We’re talking about a pulp-mill, a chemical 
plant, a sawmill at Big River and the forest rights. That’s what 
we’re talking about that’s there. There is no paper-mill there, Mr. 
Minister. You haven’t even done the environmental impact study. 
 
What we’re talking about is the sale of four major items: the 
pulp-mill, the chemical plant, the sawmill and the forest rights. 
How many new dollars did they bring in when they purchased 
those existing facilities? How many dollars did they bring with 
them in their cheque-book or in a suitcase or in their pocket? How 
many dollars did they bring to buy to buy that? Did they bring any 
money? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, first of all there’ll be . . . there’s no 
deal close in the absence of the environmental impact study going 
through the process, as legislation will dictate. So no deal with 
close with that. Okay? That’s number one. I didn’t get the other 
section of your question, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I asked you how many dollars of new 
money did they bring in to buy the existing facilities? How many 
new dollars of American money, or how many dollars did they 
bring to the province that wasn’t either guaranteed by the province 
or put up by the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well as I said to you before, it’s an 
integrated thing. There is no paper-mill in this province without 
the existence of a pulp-mill, and there is no viable pulp-mill in this 
province without a paper-mill integrated to it, as I’ve said to you 
before. There’s no viability of a pulp-mill. 
 
There is no deal closed without the agreement to build a 
paper-mill. The paper-mill will be built or the deal won’t be 
closed. I mean, that’s the agreement in the deal, to build a 
paper-mill. So it will be built, and it will be integrated with the 
pulp-mill, and there will be renovations to the pulp-mill which will 
provide for that integration to take place, which I’ve talked about 
in some detail before  — about the renovations of the wood room 
and so on. 
 
So $166.8 million, I believe it was  — money committed by this 
company to invest in this province, for jobs in this province and 
for the further development of forest industry here. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well obviously there was no down payment 
put by the company, Weyerhaeuser, when they came in and 
picked up a pulp-mill and a chemical plant and a sawmill and the 
forest rights on 3 million hectares. Not 1 cent; not 1 red cent did 
this company bring with them, not one. Not 1 cent was brought, 
and they now own it. They now have it, and they didn’t bring any 
money. 
 
Now in terms of the loan or the debentures, as you call it  — but a 
loan that we put up for them  — how is the repayment schedule? 
You had mentioned 8.5 per cent on $250 million, and if you work 
out the going rate of  

interest, maybe 11 per cent  — 11.5 per cent. Let’s say 3 per cent 
that they’re saving by having that written down; 3 per cent on 
$250 million is a saving of $7.5 million every year. That’s how 
much they’re saving on the interest. That’s on one item. That’s 
what it’s costing the taxpayers, the savings on their interest  — 7.5 
million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
The prime rate is one thing, but you have to realize that what 
they’re charging at the banks, they had to go on the market to 
borrow it. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you can tell me: what are 
the arrangements for the repayment of that debenture by the 
company? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the money will be 
repaid from the profits of the integrated facility. And as it relates 
to the interest rate, you say 8.5 per cent, and it wouldn’t matter 
what we would say, you would say that’s not an appropriate 
interest rate: 8.5 per cent is an appropriate interest rate for this 
deal. And as I indicated, your leader did not disagree with that. 
Your leader did not disagree with that when he spoke here the 
other day. He did not disagree with that. In fact he was quite 
surprised that it was as high as it is. 
 
The second thing is this, and I’ll just remind the member who’s 
asking the questions who was a member of a former government, 
at a time of 21 and 22 per cent interest rates, you guys entered into 
an interest rate of nine and five-eighths per cent with a Toronto 
developer so you could build a shopping centre  — nine and 
five-eighths. That was sweetheart interest rates. Eight and one-half 
per cent in today’s market is a reasonable and an excellent interest 
rate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder whether the minister could deal 
with the question, and that is: what is the repayment schedule? 
What is the repayment schedule of the 250 million? Can you tell 
the committee what the arrangement is for the repayment of the 
money? I mean, of course when you borrow money from the 
taxpayers, from the people who have to pay more taxes in flat 
taxes and that sort of thing, there must be a repayment schedule, 
and what is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The repayment will be over a period of an 
estimated 20 years based on forecasts in the industry, in the paper 
industry, coming from the profits of the integrated facility, which 
I’ve said is the integration of the pulp-mill with a new paper-mill 
.(inaudible. interjection) . . . Yes, I do like the word “integration” 
because it’s what’s important in forestry, for the member from 
Regina North West. 
 
And the other benefit which has not been mentioned and which I 
would like to take this opportunity to mention  — $586.7 million 
projected over the period of that 20 years in provincial income tax 
accruing to the province of Saskatchewan, which will not accrue 
to the province owned by government. so $586.7 million in 
provincial income tax projected. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well you must have more than an 
approximation of the repayment schedule. You say  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2146 
 
 

approximately 20 years. Can the minister, at this time, table the 
agreement for the repayment of that debt to the taxpayers of the 
province? 
 
We’ve spent a quarter of a billion dollars; we’ve put up a quarter 
of a billion dollars for this American company. Can you table the 
agreement for the repayment schedule? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have a document 
which I’ll send over to the member. It’s a schedule to the 
principles of agreement dated in March of ‘86, and it has the 
debenture terms, which I will send over to the member for him to 
. . . and I want you to understand that this is not the agreement 
itself. These are the principles upon which the agreement is being 
negotiated, and so on, is just about there. But the basic principles 
are there, and it has the interest and the various things, and I’m 
sure the basic principles upon which it will be based. This is the 
one entered into by the president of Crown Management Board 
and a representative of Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
What I would say to the members is that the actual agreement  — 
the actual agreements  — which have not been signed but which 
will adhere to these principles, I can’t provide now, but I will 
undertake to provide them. I will give the agreement to the Leader 
of the Opposition at the time of closing of the deal, and I give you 
that undertaking, and I don’t think there’s a . . .  
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that the paper 
that he sent across is not the final agreement, and one would 
wonder what relevance it will have other than the interest rate. But 
I wonder if you can tell me, and for the committee’s benefit, the 
debenture that is being repaid over approximately 20 years, as you 
put it, what is it? Is it based on a certain amount per year, interest 
plus one-twentieth of the principal? Is it that kind of an agreement 
for repayment? Or is it based on profitability of the company, or a 
combination of both? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s based on profitability, and it’s all set 
out in the document which I’ve just sent to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And the minister indicates now, that if 
there’s no profit, there’s no payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s right. It’s based on profit. But I just 
would add for the member that, let’s say this deal did not go 
forward and we were in the present circumstance of the 
Government of Saskatchewan owning a pulp-mill. If there was a 
situation where there could be no profit, the government, the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan would be in a position of debt 
financing major, major losses  — and I say, major losses  — in 
that operation. So we’re a winner both ways. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get it clear here because I think 
this is important, and you didn’t make it clear. But if there is no 
profit, if the company breaks even, there’s no payment, and the 
interest for that year is forgiven? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if there’s no profit, 
there’s no payment. But the interest carries  

forward, you know, to be paid out of the profits of another year. 
So there’s no forgiveness. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister had indicated that the  — and I 
want to get clear on this  — that the interest portion, if there’s no 
profit made, that that will be added on to the 250 million. And I’ll 
use the example of a year where there’s no profit. The total debt is 
250 million. You’re then saying that 8.5 per cent of the 250 
million will be added on to principal owing? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, I’m informed that if there is no 
profit, that amount would go into what would be called pools of 
earned but unpaid interest, and that it would then be paid out of 
future profit. It would be paid out of future profit. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And tell me about if there’s a loss. And in 
paragraph two of the document you sent over, prior to start-up, 
what happens if there’s a deficit in that period? What would 
happen to the deficit portion? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed, Mr. Chairman, that prior to 
the start of the paper-mill, which is the key thing here because the 
profits that we’re talking about and the repayment of the debenture 
are from the integrated pulp and paper operation, so prior to the 
start of the paper-mill we’re in a situation at that pulp-mill that 
would be the same as what it is at the present with out the 
paper-mill. 
 
And so prior to that start of the paper-mill the losses, reduce the 
principal amount of the debenture, which would be exactly the 
same situation that we would be in. We, I mean the people of 
Saskatchewan who now own the pulp-mill, as we are at present. 
So it’s a reasonable deal. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well let me get this straight. Weyerhaeuser 
has a debenture of 250 million or 248 million. If they have a loss 
next year of 40 million, or 20 million  — let’s say 20 million  — at 
the end of the year, they will then owe 230 million, that’s what 
you’re saying. That if they have a loss next year, not only do they 
not pay the interest, but the amount of their debt next year is taken 
off of the principal owing, and that rather than owing $250 million 
to the people of the province they would owe 230. 
 
Now how in the world can you people act as a banker for a 
company that has a massive incentive to lose money, because 
anything they lose they don’t have to pay back. Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, but the way you outline it is in part 
right. When you say, let’s say it was a $20 million loss, the debt 
would then be $230 million. What I say to you is  — and that’s 
what the basis of this is all about  — until the start- up of the 
paper-mill  — that’s what we talked about  — until the start-up of 
the paper-mill, because what the basic principle behind this whole 
thing is: in order to make the pulp-mill viable, it must be 
integrated with the production of paper. That’s what makes it 
viable. 
 
Let’s say that there is no paper-mill. We, in Saskatchewan, would 
own a paper-mill which is  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2147 
 
 

non-viable. And if that $20 million loss that you refer to for the 
sake of argument, that $20 million loss would then be a liability on 
the public of Saskatchewan which we would have to pay out in 
cash in that year, which we would have to pay out in cash in that 
year, which we would pay out in cash that next year, which is 
what you referred to. 
 
Now you’re coming more and more and more in your arguments 
about being against the whole operation of a paper-mill. And I’m 
really pleased to hear that because that’s exactly the position I was 
hoping you’d be at, but I didn’t believe that you would be. But 
now I see that you’re coming against the operation of a paper-mill 
in Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to hear that  — I’m pleased to hear 
that  — and I know my colleagues and I will be pleased to inform 
people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the non-existent paper-mill is part of 
it, that’s right. There’s no paper-mill there now. You’re saying 
there’s going to be. What date will the completion occur? What’s 
the deadline that you’ve set for the company? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I have said, it’s expected 
that the paper-mill construction will being this fall and that it will 
be constructed in the next couple of years. The deadline the way 
the documents are set out is that we would absorb the losses that 
you refer to, if there were losses on the pulp-mill, which there are 
likely to be. Nobody denies that, because without the integration 
there wouldn’t . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: —Pulp-mills are all losing money. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — But this one will turn around with the 
integration; that’s my point. The member from Regina Centre says 
pulp-mills are all losing money; I agree. And that’s why this is a 
good deal for the Saskatchewan government and the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, to no longer be an owner of a 
money-losing proposition. 
 
So what I say to you . . . And the key date there is December 31st, 
I believe, of 1989, is the last date upon which there would be any 
losses absorbed. But the expectation is that the pulp-mill will be 
completed and in operation well before that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what you’re saying is that there is no 
deadline for the completion of the paper-mill. We’ve now got that, 
that there is no deadline by which time this paper-mill has to be 
built. What you’re saying is that it could be built any time in the 
future. And if it’s not built by 1989, then this forgiveness of deficit 
being put against the principal would end. 
 
But that’s not included in the document you sent. It’s not there. 
What it says is that you will reduce the total debt by the amount of 
the deficit each year until start-up. In this document it says that, if 
they have deficits every year until the loan disappears, they’ll owe 
nothing on the plant. 
 
I’ll tell you that there’s not a great deal of incentive for this 
company to make money. They haven’t put any money into it. 
They haven’t put a cent into it. Every cent they lose will be written 
off against the principal. And if they lose 250 million in 10 years, 
they will own the plant and not  

owe any money, and it will be debt-free. 
 
And there’s no guarantee that the paper-mill will ever be built. 
You’ve just indicated that to the committee, that there’s no 
deadline. Well table the documents that say when it will be built. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman, I contradict the 
member on the . . . Clause 13 at the bottom of page 8 of the 
document which I sent to you says: 
 

“Start-up” as used herein shall mean the earlier of December 
31, 1989 and the day when the paper-mill begins commercial 
production of paper for inventory and sale. 

 
So the earlier of that. So that date that I gave you is a key date 
there. 
 
And as I said to you before, that we are  — “optimistic” is 
probably not the proper word, but we believe that if everything 
that . . . We believe that it’ll be operational before ‘89. But it’s the 
first date of those two. So it can’t go on in the scenario that you 
outlined  — 10 years or whatever. So that’s not possible. And It’s 
a valid question if that date wasn’t there, but the date is there. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So what we’re doing is limiting it to about 
two and a half years’ loss. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Three years. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Or three years. So what we’re saying is: if 
they lost money for each of those three years at 20 million a year, 
their debt would be reduced by 60 million; or they would then 
owe, rather than 250 million, 190 million; and there’s no 
guarantee that the paper-mill will be built. There’s no written 
document that guarantees the construction of the paper-mill. 
Otherwise you wouldn’t have the 1989 clause in there. I mean, if 
there was a guarantee that the paper-mill would be built by the end 
of 1987, obviously that other clause wouldn’t be necessary. 
 
What we have here is the forgiveness of debt against the principal 
owing for three years. And I say to you, what is the incentive of 
Weyerhaeuser to make any money? Why would they be stupid 
enough to make money when everything they lose is written off 
against the principal? What company in their right mind would 
show a profit? 
 
And I say to you, you’re great people to talk about incentives to 
produce and incentives to make money when you talk about 
people at one end of the spectrum. When you’re talking about 
people at the top, their incentive is to lose money; then they don’t 
owe as much money. 
 
And I say to you that this deal looks worse and worse and worse. 
Weyerhaeuser is not putting one cent into it. They’re not giving 
one ounce of commitment in writing that they’re going to build a 
paper-mill. And the more money they lose in the next three years, 
the less they owe. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2148 
 
 

penalty is for this company if, for example, they were to shut it 
down? If they shut it down for next year and for the three years 
coming up, how much money would they lose? How much money 
would they have at risk between now and 1989 if they closed the 
pulp-mill in P.A. down? What is their risk exposure on the project 
if they were to shut it down and protect their markets in the United 
States? How much have they got at risk there? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member will say, 
at least if I understand him right, that the NDP’s position is that 
they believe that Weyerhaeuser will have an incentive to lose 
money. That’s what he says. And what I say to the member is that 
the Weyerhaeuser corporation has not shown great skills anywhere 
in the world at the art of losing money  — they make money. And 
what I’m saying to the member is: the alternative he suggests by 
going against this deal, the alternative he suggests is that it 
continue to be a government-run operation. 
 
And I’ll say to you: even though I know you believe that 
government-run operations have shown great skills at making 
money, I say to you that they don’t, and that the government 
operation and a government-run pulp-mill will not make money. 
An integrated operation of pulp and paper in Prince Albert will 
make money. Weyerhaeuser corporation will be in here for the 
long term; they’ll be corporate citizens of which all citizens of this 
province can be proud, and they’ll be proud to be here. 
 
All I can say to the member is that he and I will agree to disagree 
for some good long period of time on the benefits of having 
Weyerhaeuser here as a corporate citizen in our province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to say that Weyerhaeuser will 
not lose money on this deal. I never made the statement that they 
would lose money. They’re going to make money by losing 
money. With this agreement that you have give to us here, they 
made 20 million by losing 20 million because it reduces the 
principal by that amount. 
 
The question I asked you, Mr. Minister, is: if Weyerhaeuser shut 
down the plant in P.A. to cut down competition in the American 
market, what would be their penalty? Now as I understand it, if 
they were to shut it down, they would lose a good number of 
millions of dollars for the next three years; that would reduce their 
principal by that amount. How could they lose by shutting down 
the plant up there? What could they possibly lose? What is their 
penalty for not producing up there? 
 
I’ll tell you, the boardroom of Weyerhaeuser would be howling 
with laughter at you people in negotiations that you’ve done with 
this document you’ve given to us. Any time a company of this 
magnitude can come into a jurisdiction, sign a deal where the 
people of the province pick up all the risk . 
 
An Hon. Member: —In an unstable market. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . as you say, in an unstable market;  

and the company is paid to use money; and by closing it down 
they would take away competition in the American market; I’ll tell 
you, the boardrooms must be howling with laughter at Grant 
Devine’s government. Premier Devine’s government, and you as 
the minister in charge of this Bill, because they can’t lose. In fact, 
the more they lose, the more they make. And this is a weird, 
bloody way for free-enterprisers  — if that’s what you call 
yourself  — to operate, unless someone’s filling their pockets. 
 
And I say to you that these next three years, you’ll be guaranteed 
that Weyerhaeuser will not make money. Why would they? 
They’re penalized if they make money; they’re rewarded if they 
lose. And the more they lose, the more they’re rewarded. 
 
Now this is a strange, new theory of capitalism that you birds are 
operating under. This is a strange, competitive market that you 
work under. And the agreement says, and I’ll read you from clause 
1 of the debenture terms: 
 

In the event that earnings as determined in accordance with 
paragraph 2 below are negative for any year, including 
stump periods, prior to start-up (that’s before the paper-mill 
is built) the principal amount of the debenture shall be 
extinguished to the extent of such negative amount. 

 
That is incredible. That is incredible that a major, multinational 
corporation would come into Saskatchewan, not bring one cent of 
money  — not one cent did they put into the purchase of this 
operation  — and every cent they lose will reduce the amount they 
owe the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: —Vote against it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we will vote against it. Clearly we’re 
going to vote against this major give-away. I mean, this is 
ridiculous. This is the height of stupidity that you people are 
involved in, and I’ll tell you why. This Bill was never intended to 
get before the people of the province before the next election. This 
was never to be made public before the election which was 
supposed to occur in April or June of this year. That’s why we’re 
dealing with it in the dying days of this session, in an attempt to 
ram it through without the proper scrutiny. 
 
I’ll tell you that it’s a major, massive give-away to a multinational 
corporation. And in the process we risk all of the jobs that are 
presently employed in that area, because the company makes more 
money if they lay them off and shut the plants down. That’s what 
this agreement says. That’s what it says. 
 
And I don’t blame Weyerhaeuser for doing it. Their incentive is to 
do that  — to get rid of jobs, to shut the plant down, to lose more 
money  — because that reduces their debt. And it also takes that 
company up there out of competition with their American 
producing plants that aren’t running at full capacity. 
 
And I’ll tell you, those boy sin the boardroom are howling with 
laughter at you, Mr. Minister, who are incredibly naive enough, 
along with Premier Devine, to get into this 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

2149 
 
 

type of an agreement. And you say that you challenge us to vote 
against a deal like this. Well I’ll tell you, we’re not naive enough 
to vote in favour of it. We’re not naive enough, even at a cursory 
glance, a cursory glance of five minutes, to see what kind of a deal 
it is. 
 
I want to say again that, in paragraph 1(b), that this reducing the 
debt owed by the amount of the deficit each year for three years 
means that the company will lose money intentionally . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well sure they’re going to lose money. 
They’ll be enticed to lose more money and more money, because 
the more they lose the less they owe. I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, were you personally involved in setting up this 
agreement? Because I’ll tell you, if you were you should resign. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, here’s where the 
NDP are coming from, and let’s make no mistake about this. The 
NDP, Mr. Chairman, are against this deal. The NDP wants the 
status quo . . . and the status quo is the following: a pulp-mill in 
Prince Albert which has been losing money for a number of years. 
Pulp-mills have been losing money all across this world the last 
number of years. These pulp-mills have been losing money. What 
will make this pulp-mill  — and the only thing which will make 
this pulp-mill viable is the integration with a paper plant. 
 
The member from Shaunavon says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Shaunavon does not differentiate between a 
pulp-mill and a paper-mill. He does not differentiate between the 
two. He wants the status quo  — let that be known. The status quo 
is: that there’s a pulp-mill in Prince Albert with no paper-mill 
beside it; that’s now. The deal that we are talking about guarantees 
that a paper-mill will be there. The paper-mill will be there or 
there will be no deal. Okay? That’s what we have said to you and 
that is the case. What the members have in their hands is the 
schedule to the principles of agreement for the repayment of the 
debentures, which is what they asked for and I gave it to them. 
 
Now what they want is the status quo. They say that 
Weyerhaeuser corporation will lose money on the pulp-mill. I say 
to you that Weyerhaeuser corporation will probably lose money 
on the pulp-mill until the paper-mill is integrated with it; and the 
repayment schedule is based on payment from profits of the 
integrated operation. And that’s the only possibility for profit  — 
the only possibility for profit, Mr. Chairman. There isn’t a 
possibility in today’s markets for a stand-alone pulp-mill; that’s 
the point that I’m trying to make to you. 
 
But what the member from Shaunavon wants is the status quo: for 
the people of Saskatchewan to continue to own a money-losing 
pulp-mill, subsidize it with multimillions of dollars a year, 
subsidize it for ever and ever, amen. That’s what he wants. That’s 
what the member from Shaunavon wants. That’s not what his 
leader said the other day, when he said he and his colleagues 
believe it is. But that member, as soon as the leader goes, what 
does he say? He says, we disagree; we do disagree. 
 

Well I’m glad to hear you say you disagree, because you want the 
status quo and the status quo is losing millions of dollars on into 
infinity. You talk about the preservation of jobs in that industry. 
You stand here and you talk about the preservation of jobs in that 
industry. How long do you suppose, under the ownership of 
government or otherwise, that a stand-alone pulp-mill in today’s 
market can continue to operate with viability of jobs in that 
pulp-mill? How long do you suppose that can go on? 
 
And that’s why the employees of that pulp-mill in Prince Albert, 
that’s why the union involved, that’s why the employees at 
Bodmin sawmill who understand the industry and who have  — 
it’s a meat-and-potatoes issue for them. It’s a meat-and-potatoes 
issue for people who work in the mills and in the woodlands. 
 
And they say: we like the operation because we know the 
reputation of Weyerhaeuser, and we know that they’ll make this 
thing operate, and we know that they’re here for the long-term, 
and we know that forest management is important to that 
corporation as it is to us whose livelihoods are dependent directly 
upon forestry. That’s what they say in the northern part of the 
province. 
 
What that member from the plains of Shaunavon says is, number 
one, he doesn’t know a jack pine from a spruce; and number two, 
he’s against development in the forested section of this province. 
And I’ll be pleased to tell everybody across the forested part of the 
province that the member from Shaunavon, the members from 
Regina, the member from Quill Lakes, are against development in 
their portion of the province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


