


















































December 18, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 18, 1986 
 
 

351 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just before resuming the 
debate, the stimulating debate on the Bill which is before the 
House, I wonder if I could ask for leave of the Assembly to 
move three motions which are normally moved somewhere near 
the beginning of a new legislature. I would ask for leave to do 
that now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Membership of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
would move, and seconded by my seat-mate the member from 
Kindersley: 
 

That members Sauder, Duncan, Gardner, Gerich, Koskie, 
McLaren, McLeod, Romanow, and Smart be constituted as a 
continuing select committee with the power to call for 
persons, papers, and records, and to examine witnesses under 
oath, and whose duty it shall be to establish from time to time 
select committees with the power to call for persons, papers, 
and records, and to examine witnesses under oath, and with 
the power to travel and to hear testimony away from the seat 
of government; and that the continuing select committee will 
have the power to set the terms of reference for each select 
committee; and that each select committee shall report 
directly to the Legislative Assembly from time to time. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, by leave of 
the Assembly, and seconded by my colleague the member from 
Kindersley: 
 

That members Anguish, Andrew, Atkinson, Baker, Hagel, 
Hopfner, Koenker, McLaren, Neudorf, and Saxinger be 
constituted a special committee to consider every regulation 
filed with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly pursuant to 
the provisions of The Regulations Act with a view to 
determining whether the special attention of the Assembly 
should be drawn to any of the said regulations on any of the 
following grounds: 
 
(1) that it imposes a charge on the public revenues or 
prescribes a payment to be made to any public authority not 
specifically provided for by statute; 
(2) that it is excluded from challenge in the courts; 
(3) that it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers 
conferred by statute; 
(4) that it purports to have a retrospective effect where the 
parent statute confers no express authority so to provide; 
(5) that it has been insufficiently promulgated; 
(6) that it is not clear in meaning. 

And if they so determine to report to that effect, and that 
the committee have the assistance of legal counsel in 
reviewing the said regulations, and that it be required prior 
to reporting that the special attention of the Assembly be 
drawn to any regulation to inform the government 
department or authority concerned of its intentions so to 
report; and that the committee be empowered to invite any 
regulation-making authority to submit a memorandum 
explaining any regulation which may be under 
consideration by the committee or to invite any 
regulation-making authority to appear before the 
committee as a witness for the purpose of explaining any 
such regulation; and that the committee be empowered to 
review the by-laws of professional associations and 
amendments thereto to determine whether or not they are 
in any way prejudicial to the public interest. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Kindersley, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move: 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto tabled in the last legislature and not 
ratified by the committee and the by-laws and amendments as 
tabled in the current session be referred to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Kindersley, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 5 – An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do tonight 
with respect to Bill 5 is to deal with the provisions in Bill 5 that 
are causing me some difficulty. I want to also look at the 
Manitoba Act, the B.C. Act, the federal Act, and the British 
Act. And I believe it’s relevant to look at those piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, because – and I quote from Hansard, 
December 15 – the hon. member from Souris-Cannington stated 
that Bill 5, speaking about Bill 5, and I quote: 
 

. . . is not a radical departure in our British constitutional 
tradition. Similar legislation has been in place in Great 
Britain since 1946; in  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

352 
 
 

Ottawa since 1970. This Bill is based on The Executive 
Government Organization Act in our neighbouring province 
of Manitoba. 

 
And I beg to differ with the hon. member, Mr. Speaker. This 
Bill is a radical departure from the British law and from the 
federal law, and it’s a departure from the Manitoba law in this 
area. And I will be pointing out to this Assembly tonight what 
those differences are. 
 
I also want to deal with some of the implications of Bill 5, and I 
want to deal with The Regulations Act because there is a 
provision in Bill 5 with respect to The Regulations Act that I 
am unclear about. I am not sure what is intended by it. And I 
think this should be brought to the attention of the members 
opposite. 
 
I would like then to begin my argument, Mr. Speaker, by 
quoting an Ontario county court judge in the case Rex vs. 
Holmes, which is found, Mr. Speaker, in 1943, 1, dominion 
Law Reports, 241 at page 247. The quote is as follows: 
 

One must realize that the government . . . 
 

Well I know the members opposite there are laughing and 
heckling about this, Mr. Speaker, but this is a serious matter. 
We’re talking about a Bill that goes very far . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — . . . beyond legislation and other provinces. 
Beyond legislation federally, and beyond British legislation. It 
is simply a power grab. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — If you like, we could nickname it the Ayatollah 
Khomeini Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the quote is as follows: 
 

One must realize that the Government of Canada cannot go 
on (and this is referring to federal legislation) without the 
delegation of wide legislative authority to the executive. But 
one must also realize that delegation cannot develop to the 
extent that our democratic government blossoms into a 
bureaucracy or dictatorship. 

 
These same principles, Mr. Speaker, apply to this House. The 
delegation of power cannot develop to the extent that the 
powers and function of the legislature is usurped in favour of 
rule by executive, or in other words in favour of statism. 
 
There is no question that the legislature can delegate certain 
laws, law-making powers, as long as they’re restricted to 
routine and ancillary matters. 
 
And I want to quote from various regulation-making provisions 
in other legislation. I want to quote from The Power 
Corporation Superannuation Act, section 51: 
 

The board may with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor 
in council make regulations not 

inconsistent with this Act for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act according to their true intent and such 
regulations shall have the same force and effect as if 
incorporated herein. 

 
The Power Corporation Act, Mr. Speaker, section 61: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations, 
not inconsistent with the spirit of this Act for the purpose of 
carrying out its provisions according to their true intent and 
supplying any deficiency therein. 

 
What that means is that regulation power is originally given for 
the purpose of developing upon a law that’s already been 
established in an Act of the legislature — an ancillary 
provision, if you like, to improve the law as the legislature has 
seen it passed, not to go out and create fundamental basic 
provisions of law. Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, is it considered 
democratic for the legislature to give the executive power to 
legislate basic and fundamental powers outside of the 
Legislative Assembly and away from the scrutinizing eyes of 
the public and the opposition, but that’s what Bill 5 purports to 
do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No it doesn’t. 
 
Ms. Simard: — It does do that. I beg to disagree with the 
member for Souris-Cannington. Bill 5 takes that power on and 
gives it to the executive to establish the objects and purposes of 
a department and to make other substantive changes or 
additions to the law, such as, perhaps, the right of a minister to 
enter on your property and to seize something. And there is 
legislation on the books, Mr. Speaker, that gives the executive 
arm of government or a minister the right to authorize people to 
enter on land and maybe seize or make an entry and seizure or 
search. 
 
How is that legislation going to be affected by Bill 5? Will that 
automatically be repealed when the department is dismantled? 
Will it allow them, by regulation, to create another ancillary 
section, giving them the power to go on and provide for more 
search and seizure? Is this all going to be done behind closed 
doors, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What about the right to create an offence for non-compliance 
with new regulations? What about that? Does this Bill give 
them the power to create offences outside of the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, if it allows them to establish objects and 
purposes, is that not broad enough? Could that not be extended 
to include some more fundamental provisions such as creating 
offences? And isn’t that a dangerous thing, to take that power 
out of the legislature and give it to the executive? This, Mr. 
Speaker, simply cannot be permitted. 
 
I see the question as being a twofold question. First of all there 
is the question of the unprecedented grab for power — and 
maybe it isn’t so unprecedented. I understand earlier today we 
had a list of a number of other incidences where there was a 
grab for power, perhaps not of this magnitude, but of a similar 
magnitude. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Speaker, is: is this Bill constitutionally 
valid for the legislature? Can the legislature give the provincial 
cabinet power to make  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

353 
 
 

changes to existing legislation in the manner contemplated in 
Bill 5? 
 
The Bill appears, Mr. Speaker, to grant the cabinet power to 
obliterate the intent of the legislature, in so far as prescribed 
powers, duties, and functions of ministers and departments go. 
 
When you read clause 12(b) . . . I would just refer the members 
opposite, particularly in the back-bench, to clause 12 1(b). It 
says: 
 

Notwithstanding any Act or other law, but subject to the 
other provisions of this Act, the Lieutenant governor in 
council (cabinet) may, by Order, on the recommendation of 
the President of the Executive Council, determine the 
organization of executive government and of its various 
departments, and for that purpose may: . . . 
 
b) disestablish any department. 

 
Now when you read that it becomes abundantly apparent that 
cabinet can disestablish the department. If this was done, the 
legislation setting up the department concerned would 
effectively be obliterated. If you disestablish a department, 
you’re in effect repealing the legislation. 
 
While the departmental Act would still be on the statute books, 
there would be no vehicle in the form of a department to carry 
out the powers, duties, and functions mandated in the 
departmental Act. 
 
(1915) 
 
So what happens to the people that are in the department if we 
don’t have a department to carry out what’s on the books, the 
legislated Act? What happens to the rights that are given to 
people in those Acts? Are they removed from the statute books, 
as well? We don’t seem to have any answers to this, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is causing us a great deal of concern. 
 
Nowhere does Bill 5 say that in transferring powers around, the 
cabinet must ensure that the mandate of each department must 
be preserved in the cabinet’s new scheme of departments. 
There’s no requirement, no obligation, on behalf of the 
executive arm of government to ensure that the powers and the 
rights and anything in those departmental Acts is carried over 
into a new department — no obligation at all. So you can 
disestablish your department and have this Act sitting in limbo 
with no obligation to carry through on it outside the legislature 
— all by regulation, all behind closed doors — without coming 
back to the legislature for approval. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the cabinet is given the power to 
disestablish a department by section 12(1)(b) with no 
corresponding obligation to transfer the powers, duties, and 
functions of the disestablished department to another minister 
or department. If you absent an express obligation on the part of 
the cabinet to transfer the mandate of the disestablished 
department somewhere else, the will of the legislature as 
expressed in the departmental legislation may be completely 
frustrated. It is true that under sections 5 and 22, cabinet may 
transfer  

mandates around, but there is no clear obligation on its part to 
do so, while at the same time it has the right to disestablish a 
department. And that’s inconsistent; that’s incongruous; and 
that is something that cannot be permitted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll explain it to you, Louise. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well please do. The power of cabinet, as stated 
in Bill 5, becomes even broader when one considers 12(1)(a) of 
the Bill. Let’s just read 12(1)(a). It says that cabinet may: 
 

establish, continue or vary any department and determine the 
objects and purposes of the department; 

 
The objects and purposes. Nowhere does Bill 5 say that in 
determining the objects and purposes of the department that 
cabinet is limited in assigning objects and purposes to picking 
them from the objects and purposes which exist within the 
range presently set out in existing departmental legislation. In 
other words, just as there is no clear obligation to keep the 
existing legislated range of objects and purposes intact, there is 
no clear prohibition placed on the cabinet with respect to the 
addition to the range of objects and purposes. 
 
In other words, they can disestablish a department. They don’t 
have to move the powers and functions of that department to a 
new department. They can instead create new objects and 
purposes for the new department outside of the legislature. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, goes beyond the mandate in the Manitoba 
Act; it goes beyond the mandate in the federal Act, in the B.C. 
Act, and in the British Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Clause 12(1)(a) by its terms allows cabinet to 
establish any department and to determine its objects and 
purposes. Thus cabinet, Mr. Speaker, could conceivably 
disestablish all existing departments and create new ones with 
objects and powers as they define. 
 
The result is that given the sweeping language of Bill 5, all 
departmental legislation presently on the statute books could be 
effectively obliterated and replaced by a new regime of objects 
and purposes as determined by cabinet, without the necessity of 
legislative approval. And once that new regime is in place, 
sections 17, 18 and 19, Mr. Speaker, allow the minister or 
cabinet or both to delegate the exercise of powers related to his 
purpose as he defines by regulation. 
 
Let’s just take a look at section 17 now. Section 17 (1) says: 
 

A minister may . . . enter into agreements on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan with (and I’m going to go 
down to clause (b)): 
 
any person, agency, organization, association, institution or 
body within or outside Saskatchewan; 



 
December 18, 1986 

 

354 
 
 

For any purpose related to the exercise of any of the powers 
or the carrying out of the duties or functions assigned or 
transferred to the minister . . . 

 
Now I ask myself, what’s the purpose of that section, Mr. 
Speaker? Is that the privatization section? Is that meaning 
they’re going to go outside of the civil service in order to have 
their duties and functions carried out and exercised? Is that their 
political patronage section, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Or is it delegation? Is this their delegation section? I notice that 
Manitoba in section 10 and B.C. in section 15 have a delegation 
section. But if the hon. members on the opposite side of the 
House would look at those two sections, they will see that 
delegation is to an employee in the civil service under the 
auspices of the minister, not to any person, agency, 
organization, or association. One doesn’t delegate their powers 
beyond to that extent. 
 
I’m unclear as to what’s meant by section 17, Mr. Speaker, and 
I certainly invite the members opposite to clarify some of these 
things for us, if indeed they do have an explanation. 
 
Let’s take a look at section 18, Mr. Speaker, and let’s review 
what the hon. member from Souris-Cannington said on his 
second reading statement on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Order, please! Order, please! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I’m just going to quote. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was the other Bill, Louise. 
 
Ms. Simard: — It’s Bill No. 5. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This one’s 7. 
 
Ms. Simard: — We’re dealing with Bill No. 5. I will quote the 
hon. member from Souris-Cannington, who thought we were on 
Bill No. 7, but actually we’re on Bill No. 5, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I may quote from him on Monday: 
 

It does not give new powers to the cabinet. It does not permit 
the expenditure of new money, nor does this Act even allow 
the re-allocation of moneys for new purposes without the 
consent of this Assembly. 

 
Now I wish to take a look at section 18, which says: 
 

The minister may, for any purpose relating to any manner 
under his administration . . . 

 
And that’s the new administration, the new department created 
by regulation, behind closed doors, without coming to the 
Assembly. The minister: 
 

may make grants on any terms or conditions that he may 
prescribe to any person, agency, organization, association, 
institution or body within or outside Saskatchewan. 

 
But there’s no new spending powers, Mr. Speaker, we are told 
by the members opposite. But yet we’re told about new 
departments being created outside of the Assembly and giving 
them the power to make grant son any terms and conditions 
they may prescribe. 
 
It goes on to say a minister shall obtain the approval of cabinet 
before making any grant that’s in excess of 10,000. So 
theoretically, they could make 100,000 grants for $9,000, get no 
approval from cabinet — all under new departments that were 
created outside of this legislature. And yet we’re told there are 
no new spending powers. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please! 
 
I’d like to bring to attention the ruling, paragraph 734 in 
Beauchesne’s regarding second readings. The member is 
quoting quite extensively from the clauses of the Bill, and 
therefore, I’d like to read paragraph 734: 
 

The second reading is the most important stage through 
which the bill is required to pass; for its whole principle is 
then at issue and is affirmed or denied by a vote of the House. 
It is not regular on this occasion, however, to discuss in detail 
the clauses of the bill. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — May I speak to that, Mr. Speaker. It is 
impossible to make the point that has to be made on the second 
readings debate that this Bill goes beyond its powers without 
referring to sections. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I understand what the member is attempting 
to do. However, it would seem to me that according to rule 734 
it would be more appropriate if she attempted to do that, and 
perhaps in even greater detail, in clause by clause passage of the 
Bill. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll not quote from the sections, 
but I will try to work around that and just deal with the 
principle. Okay, Mr. Speaker, if I may continue at this point. 
 
What is happening here with respect to Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, is 
cabinet can in effect define the minister’s purposes, and the 
minister can then delegate powers related to his purpose and 
grant money to others to assist him in effecting his new 
purpose. And those provisions of the Bill that deal with that, 
when you look at the fact that it relates to the mandate of the 
minister as prescribed by the legislature . . . For example, if the 
Act put these provisions in and this was agreed upon by the 
legislature with respect to a particular department, is not as 
objectionable. But when you allow the objects and purposes and 
the entire department to be set up by regulation and then in 
effect give the power to make grants and new expenditures 
without it coming back to the legislature, it goes much further 
than we’ve ever seen in the past, or that I have seen in any other 
province in Canada. 
 
Therefore, the legislation, in effect, does the following: it 
obliterates existing departments; it neglects to transfer mandates 
of obliterated departments elsewhere. It creates  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

355 
 
 

new departments with objects and purposes as defined by 
cabinet. It doesn’t create the department; it allows the cabinet to 
create it, and it approves ministerial delegation of powers and 
ministerial spending to these new departments, which are not 
approved by the legislature. 
 
The other thing that causes me some concern is there’s some 
indication in the Bill that this does not ever have to be brought 
before the House, that it doesn’t have to be tabled before the 
House, that it doesn’t have to be disclosed. I’m not even sure 
that this has to be disclosed or gazetted, the regulation has to be 
gazetted. There’s a section in The Regulations Act that allows 
you to dispense with gazetting, and this has a section in it that 
says The Regulations Act applies. 
 
I’m not sure why that provision is in there. It’s causing us 
concern. Are they attempting to assure that they will be able to 
avoid and dispense with the gazetting of the regulation? We 
don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but it’s causing us a great deal of 
concern. 
 
In effect if this analysis of Bill 5 is then correct, the legislature 
by enacting Bill 5 gives the cabinet power to effectively repeal 
and replace existing legislation. The enactment of Bill 5 would 
thereby amount to the legislature delegating broad legislative 
powers to the cabinet. 
 
The question is whether it is constitutionally valid for the 
legislature to give some of its powers away to another body. 
The law is clear that the legislature can validly delegate powers, 
including powers that can be described as law making or 
legislative powers, to subordinate bodies in all sorts of ways. 
The power to make rules is given to others, such as the 
Highway Traffic Board, the Labour Relations Board, etc. Such 
delegation, however — and here’s where the difference lies — 
such delegation, however, normally involves the granting of 
power to make rules within and subordinate to a primary piece 
of legislation. The body to whom rule-making power is granted 
can only work within the confines of the primary statute, the 
statute that creates it and gives it the powers. Bill 5, however, 
purports to delegate the power to make rules which would 
effectively amend, repeal, and replace existing legislation. It 
gives the cabinet a carte blanche to legislate in very broad 
terms. To do so, therefore, is not an exercise in delegation to a 
subordinate body but rather the elevation of the delegate to the 
status of a Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — It’s the elevation of the delegate, i.e. cabinet, 
to the status of a Legislative Assembly, and that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, I say this is a power grab, and I say this is usurping the 
powers of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the Manitoba legislation . . . If I 
might just compare this to that, because there was a statement 
on second reading speech that it followed the Manitoba 
legislation — the Manitoba legislation talks  

about disestablishing a ministry or a department, if you like, 
and transferring duties and functions. It doesn’t talk about 
objects and purposes, and objects and purposes are much 
broader than duties and functions. And the member from 
Kindersley would understand that. 
 
I want to also refer to the B.C. legislation, Mr. Speaker, which 
says the same thing in effect. It refers to the transfer of duties 
and functions from one ministry to another, not to objects and 
purposes, Mr. Speaker. And those are different things. Anybody 
who has experience in law will know that those are two 
different things. And objects and purposes are broader than 
duties and functions. 
 
What happens in Manitoba and B.C., Mr. Speaker, is that — as 
I understand it — is that the basic departmental legislation 
remains intact. The substantive provision remains intact. The 
powers and the objects of the department, if you like, remain 
intact, and the sort of administrative things are dealt with by 
regulations — the changing of the name, the changing of 
functions, who’s responsible for this department, and so on. It’s 
not a question of totally destroying a department and then 
creating, by regulation, new objects and purposes. The objects 
and purposes, or the powers, are left in legislation in these two 
provinces. That’s my understanding. If that’s not accurate, I 
would like to hear from the members opposite. 
 
With respect to the British law that was referred to by the 
member from Souris-Cannington . . . And I believe he said that 
similar legislation has been in place in Great Britain since 1946. 
Not so, Mr. Speaker, no so. And I am quoting from 
Butterworth’s 20th Century Statutes, 1946, number 43, talking 
about the Act to which I assume he was referring. 
 

This Act has two main objects: firstly to introduce greater 
elasticity into the machinery of government by providing for 
the transfer of functions and changes of titles of Ministers of 
the Crown to be effected by Orders in Council . . . 

 
And then something about dealing with temporary wartime 
departments, which isn’t relevant to us. But if I may go on: 
 

S. 1(1) provides for the transfers of functions from one 
Minister of the Crown to another to be made by Order in 
Council instead of by full-dress amending legislation as 
would otherwise have been necessary. 
 
Under sub-s. (2) an Order in Council may be made dissolving 
a Government Department and redistributing the functions of 
the Minister in charge of that Department. This process, 
again, would otherwise have required legislation by 
Parliament. As the disappearance of a Department of State is 
considered of more moment than a transfer of Ministerial 
functions, it is provided that orders under this subsection 
require affirmative resolutions of both Houses of Parliament. 

 
In other words, it goes back to parliament. And then they deal 
about . . . He goes on to say: 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

356 
 
 

 
Though the above powers of executive action by Order in 
Council are in substitution for legislation by Parliament, they 
are limited in scope and cannot be used, as was explained by 
the Lord President of the Council in moving the Second 
Reading, for instance, to create a new Ministry, to re-create a 
dissolved Ministry (or department), to increase . . . 

 
He said they: 
 

. . . cannot be used . . . to create a new Ministry, to increase 

. . . the number of Ministers, to make permanent or add to the 
duration of temporary functions of a Minister, to grant a 
Minister any new statutory function . . . 

 
Cannot be used to grant a minister any new statutory functions. 
Let me repeat, just so everyone over there hears: 
 

. . . cannot be used to grant a Minister any new statutory 
functions or to abolish or modify any statutory duty or 
restriction which Parliament has placed upon him. These acts 
must still be subject to . . . the full rigour of the legislative 
procedure. The powers exercisable by Order in Council 
merely provide a simple procedure for redistributing the 
functions of Ministers, and have been considered necessary 
in order to avoid delays in any such redistribution which 
might be caused by the pressure of a heavy legislative 
programme. 

 
And of course we don’t have any problem with that sort of 
administrative aspect. It’s the fact that Bill 5 goes far beyond 
that. It does the things that it’s stated in here will not be allowed 
in Britain. 
 
There was also a reference, Mr. Speaker, to Ottawa. They 
referred to this law being in Ottawa since 1970. 
 
Well, I have here from the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, 
2nd Supplement, the various provisions of that Act, which make 
it abundantly clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not what 
happens in Ottawa. 
 
In Ottawa it goes back; it goes back to parliament. It isn’t done 
behind closed doors. It isn’t a fait accompli behind the closed 
doors of the executive to become law all over the province. It 
goes back to parliament. 
 
And if I can just deal with those relevant sections: section 14 of 
this Act that I have referred to says — and I’ll summarize the 
section, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my ability: 
 

. . . for the time being of a special portion of the public 
service of Canada presided over by a Minister charged with 
the responsibility for the formulation and development of 
such policies, the governor in Council may, by proclamation, 
establish a Ministry . . . for that purpose. 

 
So he can do it by proclamation. 

To go on to section 16: 
 

The Governor in Council may, by proclamation, from time to 
time, change the name of a Ministry of State or vary any 
matters set out in the proclamation establishing the Ministry. 

 
Section 17 deals with the termination. 
 

The Governor in Council may, by proclamation, terminate 
the existence of a Ministry of State. 

 
But section 18(1), Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

An Order in Council authorizing the issuance of a 
proclamation under section 14 or 16 (as I quoted) shall not be 
made (shall not be made) until the proposed text of the Order 
in Council has been laid before the House of Commons by a 
member of the Queen’s Privy council for Canada and the 
making of the Order in Council has been approved by a 
resolution of the House of Commons. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — So I beg to differ with the member from 
Souris-Cannington, who said similar legislation has been in 
place in Great Britain since 1946, in Ottawa since 1970. It 
hasn’t been, Mr. Speaker. There’s no provision in Bill 5 to 
bring those regulations before this House. No provision. 
 
Not only does it require that it be brought before the House, but 
subsection 2 of section 18 goes on to say that it “shall be 
debated in the House for not more than seven hours . . .” But 
there’s at least seven hours of debate on it, . . . “after which 
time the question shall be decided in accordance with the rules 
of the House.” That’s a different question altogether, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s a different issue. That is totally understandable. 
Anybody can understand that that’s the way you may improve 
the efficiency of government and still maintain democratic 
traditions and still handle things in a fair and just manner. 
That’s the way to do it, without usurping the functions of the 
legislature and making a power grab to do everything behind 
closed doors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And I had mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, that 
I had concerns with the provision that says The Regulations Act 
applies because I’m not sure why they would put a section in 
there saying The Regulations Act applies. I would imagine it 
applies by implication. But why has it been specifically stated? 
 
There are provisions in The Regulations Act, Mr. Speaker, to do 
away with gazetting, to do away with giving the public notice 
of the regulation. And is it the intention of the government by 
including that section in their Act to prevent or avoid the 
necessity of publishing the regulation? I ask them that question. 
I would like to hear their answer. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

357 
 
 

Nobody has any quarrel or argument, Mr. Speaker, with making 
the administration of government more efficient, not if it ids 
done democratically, if it’s done fairly, and if it’s done before 
this House, which is where many of these things should take 
place. We have no quarrel with efficiency and trying to 
streamline things. We’d like to see that happen. 
 
But there’s no question that Bill 5 is an abuse of legislative 
power. And since it allows an abuse, it is in my respectful 
opinion ultra vires this legislature. In other words, it’s beyond 
the powers of this legislature — beyond the powers of this 
legislature to give a body outside the legislature law-making 
powers of this calibre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is this another tactic, Mr. Speaker, to reduce 
their accountability to the public? I ask you: is this another 
tactic to reduce your accountability? 
 
It permits the government to do behind closed doors what it 
should be doing in the Assembly and what it should be doing in 
public view. I’m not even sure whether it has to publish the 
regulations, or whether they can dispense with giving the public 
notice that they’ve created these powers and purposes and 
objects. 
 
And as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, we all like efficiency. No 
question — we all like efficiency, but sometimes we pay a very 
high price for efficiency. And I would like to know, Mr. 
Speaker, what the price is here. Is the price many, many, many 
jobs of civil servants as was elaborated in some detail by a 
member of this House earlier this afternoon? Is the price 
encroachment on our democratic traditions and our democratic 
principles? Is that the price? Is the price too high in Bill 5? I say 
the price is too high. I say that if the government wants to do 
these things by regulations, they should have to bring that 
regulation back to this House for its approval before it is 
considered law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I don’t know what the intentions are of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But when one scrutinizes the 
legislation, one must consider all the possibilities, all the 
possible ramifications, where can this lead us to, what is the end 
result of this legislation if it’s taken to the ultimate. To do 
otherwise would be to fail on our part as opposition. And we 
can’t do that. These things have to be brought to your attention. 
You have to be made to understand the problems that we’re 
having with this legislation — and you should understand the 
problems. 
 
One may argue, Mr. Speaker, that oh, they can have a go — 
they can have a go at it in the regulations committee or they can 
have a go at it in estimates. But both those tools, Mr. Speaker, 
are not effective enough because there’s a delaying process; 
things are already fait accompli. Things have already happened 
by the time they get there. It’s after the fact. It reduces the 
function; it reduces the power of the Legislative Assembly if all 
we can rely upon is scrutinizing these things in the regulations 
committee, scrutinizing these things in estimates. It’s not 
adequate. It’s not adequate review. It’s not democratic. It’s not 
fair to the people of Saskatchewan and it’s not fair to this  

Legislative Assembly. 
 
If it means, Mr. Speaker, that we have to constantly monitor 
every single regulation passed by cabinet, summer and winter, 
whether this House is sitting — and I say that’s what Bill 5 will 
require us to do — if it requires us to do that, and it does, then it 
is an excess of the authority of the legislature. 
 
And in summary, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to reiterate the 
argument as to why we have grave concerns with this 
legislation. And they are basically that the section that allows 
for establishing a new department allows them to go beyond 
stipulating duties and functions and allows them to stipulate 
objects and purposes, new objects and purposes. Very broad 
power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
They can disestablish a department and leave the departmental 
Act there, with all the powers and all the substantive provisions 
in the legislation; no obligation to carry those over to the new 
department. Repealing an Act holus-bolus, with no obligation to 
put them in the new department, no obligation to come to the 
legislature — totally unprecedented. It doesn’t require the 
regulation to come back to the House. It doesn’t require it. It 
may not even require the regulation to be published. 
 
What’s happening here, Mr. Speaker? What’s happening here? 
What is happening here is either a very innocent or ignorant slip 
or a power grab. I don’t know what it is, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
totally perplexed by this legislation that’s brought forward. I’m 
perplexed by the fact it’s stated that similar legislation has been 
in place in Great Britain since 1946, because it’s not similar; in 
Ottawa since 1970. It’s not similar to Ottawa; it goes beyond 
Ottawa. I’m perplexed because it says it’s based on the 
Manitoba Act. 
 
The Manitoba Act wording is very different, much different. 
And the only thing I can conclude, and I hope that I’m wrong, 
but the only thing I can conclude is they want to remove all this 
legislative power out of this House behind closed doors. They 
want to keep it to themselves; they don’t want the public to 
know; they don’t want public scrutiny of the legislation; they 
want to do it entirely on their own. And I say that’s very nearly 
approaching a dictatorship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite 
took careful note of what my colleague, the hon. member from 
Regina Lakeview, had to say. I want to pick up on the points 
that she made and I want to make the point: it’s a very serious 
legal point that what you’re trying to do with Bill 5 is ultra 
vires, as the member from Regina Lakeview said, and indeed 
unconstitutional. 
 
Someone asked what ultra vires means, and I say that it means 
simply that it is beyond the power of this legislature to do what 
you’re trying to do. Now in order to convince you that that may 
be the case and to convince you that this Bill needs a serious 
second look, let me refer the Assembly to two decided cases, 
one decided in the Privy Council at a time when appeals in 
Canada landed at  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

358 
 
 

the Privy Council as a court of last resort — a case decided in 
the year 1919; and secondly, a case decided in our own 
Supreme Court of Canada in 1980. 
 
And the object of this analysis that I’m going to lay before the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is to the effect that what you’re trying 
to do is beyond the power of this Assembly, and when I 
conclude my remarks, I’m going to seriously ask the 
government to take this idea back to its law officers — I see the 
Minister of Justice is paying attention to what I’m saying — to 
take this Bill back to the law officers and ask that the Bill be 
looked at again from that perspective. 
 
Now the first case that I would like to refer the House to was 
the Privy Council decision decided in 1919, and it’s referred to 
as: “Re the Initiative and Referendum Act.” Now this was a 
piece of legislation passed by the government of Manitoba in 
1916. And what it sought to do, Mr. Speaker, was provide a 
procedure in Manitoba whereby the laws of that province could 
be made and could be repealed by direct vote of the electors 
instead of by the members of the legislature. 
 
Now the Government of Manitoba at that time, when they 
brought their legislation before the House, was met by an 
argument precisely similar to the argument being made today in 
respect to Bill 5. The legal ability of a government to pass this 
kind of provision was brought into question in the Assembly, 
and what the Government of Manitoba in 1913 did . . . in 1916 
did was to refer the question to the courts and ask the courts for 
an opinion as to whether or not the procedure which was being 
set up by their legislation was within the powers of that 
legislature to enact. And that question went to the Manitoba 
Court of Appeal and worked its way through eventually to the 
Privy Council. And a decision was made by the Privy Council 
in 1919. 
 
Now, as I say, that legislation sought to provide that the laws of 
Manitoba could be made or could be repealed by a direct vote 
of the electors, which mean simply a public referendum. 
 
The Privy Council, and I quote the judgement of Viscount 
Haldane, who was one of the most eminent jurists in the life of 
the Privy Council. He said this, he said — and he’s referring 
here, Mr. Speaker, to the British North America Act — he said, 
and I quote: 
 

The language of section 92 is important. That section 
commences by enacting that “in such province the legislature 
may exclusively make laws in relation to matters” coming 
within certain classes of subjects. The only one of these 
classes which is relevant for the present purpose is the first 
enumerated, “the amendment from time to time, 
notwithstanding anything in this Act, of the constitution of 
the province, excepting as regards the office of Lieutenant 
Governor. 

 
Now section 92 of the British North America Act is no longer 
in force, Mr. Speaker. It’s been replaced by the Constitution 
Act. And the Constitution Act contains the same kinds of 
provisions as did the British North America Act. 

 
So, the Constitution Act, reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote: 
 

Subject to section 41, the legislature of each province may 
exclusively make laws amending the constitution of the 
province. 

 
And it’s my argument, Mr. Speaker, and I think it perfectly 
plain that the provisions of the Constitution Act are the same as 
the provisions of the British North America Act, as regards to 
this question. 
 
Now, Viscount Haldane, in this Manitoba case, went on to hold 
that as the Manitoba legislation would affect the office of the 
Lieutenant Governor, it was ultra vires. And he went on to state 
as follows, and I quote here from page 945: 
 

Section 92 of the Act of 1867 entrusts the legislative power 
in a province to its legislature, and to that legislature only. No 
doubt a body, with a power of legislation on the subjects 
entrusted to it so ample as that enjoyed by a provincial 
legislature in Canada, could, while preserving its own 
capacity intact, seek the assistance of subordinate agencies 
. . .; but it does not follow that it can create and endow with 
its own capacity a new legislative power not created by the 
Act to which it owes its own existence. 

 
And I end the quote at that point. 
 
The point is simply this, Mr. Speaker: that if any of the 
provisions of Bill 5 can be seen, as it has been asserted in this 
House to be, as provisions that give to the cabinet the same 
powers as possessed by the legislature, then Bill 5 is, on the 
basis of the rationale of the Privy Council decision that I’ve just 
referred to, beyond the power of a legislature. It is ultra vires of 
this legislature. 
 
Now this question, as I said earlier, was reviewed by our 
Supreme Court of Canada in 1980, and the case that I’m talking 
about was the reference by the Government of Canada to the 
Supreme Court of Canada of the proposal to abolish the senate, 
or at least to re-cast the senate in a different form. And the 
constitutionality of that proposal was questioned by the 
provinces and by the opposition in parliament, and was referred 
by the government to the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
During the decision, or while deciding that case, the Supreme 
Court of Canada had occasion to look at this 1919 Manitoba 
case that I’ve been telling the Assembly about, and it approved 
and adopted formally in Canada the words or the decision of the 
Privy Council in 1919. 
 
Now let me turn for a few minutes to the decision in the senate 
case, the Upper House case decided by the Supreme Court in 
1980. As I said, Mr. Speaker, what was at stake in that case was 
the constitutional validity of a federal Act to abolish the senate. 
At page 68 of that judgement, and I’ll provide the Minister of 
Justice with the citation for it, but at page 68 of that judgement 
the Court refers to the fact that federal legislative power was 
given to the Queen by and with the advice and consent of the  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

359 
 
 

senate and the House of Commons. That’s how the federal 
legislative power is cast in the British North America Act. And 
at page 72 the Court stated, and I quote: 
 

The elimination of the Senate would go much further in that 
it would involve a transfer by Parliament of all its legislative 
powers to a new legislative body of which the Senate would 
not be a member. 

 
Now then, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada 
that referred to this Privy Council decision of 1919, and stated 
— and again I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The court held that Section 92 of the Act vests the power to 
make or repeal laws exclusively in the Legislature and that it 
did not contemplate the creation of a new legislative body to 
which the Legislature could delegate its powers of legislation 
or with which it would share them. 

 
Now, while the case was — I go back now to the Manitoba case 
— while it was before the Court of Appeal, which was an 
earlier stage than the Privy Council, the Chief Justice of that 
court had the following to say, which I think is relevant. He 
said: 
 

The legislature can in no way change any of the provisions of 
Section 92 . . . no matter what changes are made in the 
constitution, the provincial legislature and no other body can 
legislate on the subjects set forth in the remainder of the 
sub-sections. 

 
Now thus, Mr. Speaker, both the Privy Council and the 
Supreme Court of Canada have determined that the legislature 
cannot validly change the party which makes the law. The party 
which makes the law in the province of Saskatchewan is this 
legislature, and this legislature cannot delegate that power to 
any other body, including the cabinet of this government. 
 
Now this subject is addressed in one constitutional text — and I 
don’t want to continue too long tonight, but I think I must draw 
the attention of the House to this treatment of the subject — the 
text is written by a professor named Hogg, H-O-G-G, and his 
text written in 1985 is entitled Constitutional Law of Canada, 
and I’m referring to the second edition. And I would refer the 
minister to pages at 283 to 308 of that text. He is dealing in 
these pages with the subject of delegation that interferes with 
the requirement of a legislature. He refers to this Manitoba case 
that I’ve been referring you to, Mr. Speaker, and he states the 
following and I’ll quote two paragraphs from page 292: 
 

But a more substantial objection could be made to legislation 
by initiative and referendum, and that is, that the process 
bypasses the province’s legislative assembly . . . the 
Manitoba Court of Appeal, decided that the regime . . . was 
bad, not merely because it bypassed the 
Lieutenant-Governor, but also because it . . . was not a 
“legislature”. In other words, the constitution  

contemplated that primary law-making authority could be 
exercised only by a legislature, and the term “legislature” 
involved the participation of some form of representative 
assembly. The Privy Council . . . suggested that they 
agreed with it. 
 
If the initiative and referendum procedure were construed 
as delegated rather than primary law-making power, then it 
would be immaterial that it were vested in a body other 
than a “legislature” . . . The Privy Council in the Initiative 
and Referendum Reference asserted that, while Hodge 
permitted a provincial legislature to “seek the assistance of 
subordinate agencies”, it did not follow that “(the 
legislature) can create and endow with its own capacity a 
new legislative power not created by the (constitution) act 
to which it owes its own existence. 

 
Now I apologize for the denseness of that passage, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’d take some study to understand all of the implications of 
what the author is saying, but boiled down to its essence, it is 
simply that there are some things that this legislature cannot do. 
There are constitutional limits to the things that we can do. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now all members of this House will know that this legislature 
has now power, for example, to legislate in respect of money 
and banking. That’s a subject that’s reserved to the federal 
government. 
 
The idea that I’m trying to put across to the members of this 
Assembly tonight is that there is a similar limitation on our 
power to pass legislation if what we’re doing is to try to 
delegate that legislative power to another body, and we simply 
can’t do that. 
 
Now the argument has been made from this side of the House a 
number of times today, and it was made by the House Leader 
on this side on Monday evening, that what this Bill does — 
whether that’s what the government intended or not — what 
this Bill does is to confer upon the cabinet the power to legislate 
in respect of determining the objects and purposes of 
departments, disestablishing departments, varying departments, 
and the arguments will be familiar to you by this time, Mr. 
Speaker. And there is certainly at the very minimum a powerful 
argument that those words do do — that those words can be 
interpreted to mean that the cabinet has this new power being 
conferred upon it. 
 
And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, and as I say, a very, very 
strong argument can be made that that is the case, then what the 
Assembly’s being asked to do by Bill 5 is beyond the powers of 
this legislature and is ultra vires and would be struck down by a 
court. 
 
Now quite apart from the precedents from the previous 
decisions of the courts, that I’ve referred to tonight, are the 
provisions of the charter — that is the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. And I would refer the minister to sections 
3, 4 and 5 of the charter, and I think it clear from a reading of 
those sections that we Canadians are to be governed by elected 
representatives in the House of  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

360 
 
 

Commons and in the legislatures of this country. And it seems 
implicit in the words used in that charter that Canadians have 
the right to expect that they will be governed in the main by 
primary law-making bodies. In other words, by this legislature, 
and not by another body, such as the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council referred to in section 12, subsection (1) of the Bill 
that’s before us tonight. 
 
Now I know that the government would not wish to do 
something that is beyond the powers of this Assembly. The 
government would not ask us, would not knowingly ask us to 
do something which was ultra vires of this Assembly. And as I 
said earlier, Mr. Speaker, and I repeat with all of the sincerity 
and conviction that I am capable of mustering, that at least there 
is a very serious question that the Bill in unconstitutional, that 
the Bill is not valid, and that the Bill is beyond the powers of 
this Assembly. 
 
And therefore what I’m suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
government hold this Bill — just hold it — don’t proceed 
further on it while they have the law officers or some outside 
legal authority review the provisions of the Bill, get an opinion 
on the constitutional validity of its provisions, and particularly 
of section 12. And then after that opinion has been expressed, 
we’ll be better able to judge the point that I and my colleague 
from Regina Lakeview have been trying to make. 
 
Certainly it’s not something that we should just ignore, sweep 
under the rug, and walk away from. But we also suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is nothing in this Bill that is so urgent that it 
can’t wait that kind of consideration. Better to give it that kind 
of consideration now, Mr. Speaker, to have the law officers of 
the Crown or some outside legal expert look at the Bill with a 
view to assessing its constitutionality, better to look at that 
before the Bill is passed. Otherwise, if the Bill is passed, we’ll 
just find our self in the rather embarrassing situation of having 
somebody outside, some person from outside this Assembly, 
attacking the enactment of this legislature in the courts of this 
province to determine that same question: is the Bill 
constitutional or not? 
 
Now I hope that the members have taken by submission tonight 
seriously. It’s a difficult one to make, Mr. Speaker, in any 
forum, including in the court, because it’s a dense, difficult 
subject. And it’s a subject on which I don’t hold myself out to 
be one of the province’s experts, but I felt familiar enough with 
the concepts to be able to try and put the point tonight. 
 
I sincerely hope, and all my colleagues do on this side of the 
House, that the government will take this submission seriously 
and will ask itself the very serious question about whether what 
it’s trying to do is lawful and within the powers of this 
Assembly. And I do hope that they’ll take that submission 
seriously and send this Bill away for examination by either law 
officers of the department or some outside legal expert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Let me say to the members of this Assembly 
that it doesn’t give me very much pleasure this evening to have 
to get up and speak on this particular Bill. 

 
An Hon. Member: — You didn’t have to, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes. The member opposite said I didn’t have to, 
but, Mr. Speaker, yes, I must speak because this Bill — like the 
nominating committee’s motion the other day — in my opinion, 
Mr. Speaker, strike at the very principles of democracy. And I 
want to, this evening, spend a few minutes in expressing my 
opposition to what the government is attempting to do. 
 
Members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — certainly 
the four members who have spoken just previous to me; the 
member from Quill Lakes and the member from Regina 
Lakeview, and now the member from Saskatoon Fairview and 
the other day the member from Saskatoon Riversdale — all, 
Mr. Speaker, lawyers in their profession, and all have come to 
the same conclusion that this Bill is illegal. It is ultra vires and 
it should not be proceeded with. 
 
If that is the case, Mr. Speaker — and I believe that our 
members have proven that to be the case — we have to ask 
ourselves the question again: why is the government so 
determined to bring this Bill before this Assembly at this 
particular time and try and squeeze it through and sneak it 
through the House while they know that the public out there are 
busy with other things? No one wants to prolong this House, 
but I want to tell my hon. friend, the Deputy Premier — and he 
knows me well — and I want to tell my friend from Meadow 
Lake that if I have my way, you and I will be sitting here on 
Christmas Day. We will be sitting here on Christmas Day 
because I will do everything that I can to prevent you from 
abrogating our responsibility here in this House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am very surprised that the Minister of 
Education, who throughout this evening takes this thing with so 
light-heartedness when he is to protect, he is to protect the 
rights of our children. And as the Minister of Education, I asked 
him to look at this Bill and understand what it purports to do. 
And I will, Mr. Speaker, speak on what he Bill is purporting to 
do. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier introduced this Bill in 
the House the other day, he made it very clear — or so he 
thought he made it very clear to us — that similar legislation, 
legislation of equal purpose has been in existence in Manitoba, 
in B.C., in Ottawa, and even in the British parliament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, either he didn’t speak from the facts and he was 
ignorant of those facts — and I will give him the benefit that he 
was ignorant of those facts — or else I can only draw one other 
conclusion, that he came into this House hoping to quickly pass 
this legislation, mislead us, and proceed with the Bill. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that he would do that. So, 
therefore, I must say that he was ignorant of the facts. I don’t 
know which is worse for the Deputy Premier, to be ignorant of 
the facts or to try and mislead this House. But there’s only one 
conclusion you can draw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes this afternoon very 
eloquently, I think, outlined for us the things that  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

361 
 
 

were happening and the things that did happen, Mr. Speaker, 
the things that did happen over the last four and a half years 
through this government. That this government, when the 
opposition was very weak, got into the habit, got into the habit 
where they thought that they could simply push through 
anything; when they felt that because the numbers were limited 
here, because the numbers were limited here, all they had to do 
was simply prolong it and they’d wear them down. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the electorate thought differently this time 
around. They have given us a much stronger mandate. And I 
want to remind the Premier and the Deputy Premier, 55 per cent 
of the people voted against you in the last election — 55 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Your mandate was significantly reduced. Oh 
yes, you are still the government, but I think that people were 
trying to give you a message. It is time that you start listening. 
You start listening to the people through the opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to a few of the 
back-benchers. I want to speak to a few of the back-benchers. I 
was a back-bencher also from 1971 to 1975. Now I was there 
too at one time. And I felt from time to time that I was only a 
pawn in someone else’s hand. But I’ll tell you, the 
back-benchers, if this Bill proceeds, you won’t even be a pawn. 
You’ll have absolutely nothing to say. 
 
I can understand of course why the . . . I can understand why 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview would not speak against 
this Bill, would not want to irritate the Premier, and certainly 
wouldn’t want to irritate the Deputy Premier because I think he 
has some aspirations to get on the treasury benches. And there 
is a good possibility that if he behaves himself, that the Premier 
may see fit to put him on the treasury benches. And I can also 
see why the member from Regina Wascana would not say 
anything to irritate the Premier. 
 
But I’m talking to some of the other members. I’d like to talk to 
the member from — where is he from? — well the member 
from Rosthern. Yes, the member from Rosthern. The member 
from Rosthern, I think from the area that he comes from, would 
want to — and from the background of his people — would 
want to protect the principles of democracy and would want to 
protect the rights of the members of the legislature now. 
 
(2015) 
 
The member from Kinistino the other day gave us a little bit 
about his history, and I’m a little bit aware about his history 
also. And I would think that he would look twice at this Bill 
before he would invest the kinds of power that this Bill will 
give to the Executive Council. I would think that he would want 
to talk to the Deputy Premier . . . well no, not the Deputy 
Premier, because he doesn’t understand the Bill. But maybe 
you’d want to talk to some other person in cabinet, maybe the 
Minister of Justice, and ask him what this Bill purports to do. 

Mr. Speaker, why do we need this legislation now? This 
legislature has operated since 1905 without this kind of 
legislation. When the premiers in the past . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the premiers in the past have changed the 
composition of particular departments, they have always 
brought these back to the legislature. We have then debated the 
pros and cons, and with some amendment, that legislation then 
has proceeded with, and we have carried out our duties as 
elected members. 
 
The member from Quill Lakes, as I said, so eloquently this 
afternoon pointed out also that there are no assurances that the 
present legislation will protect the employees of the civil 
service. And that, Mr. Speaker — I hadn’t thought of that 
before, but I think if one wants to inflict some sinister motives 
into this legislation, then I think one has to look at — and, Mr. 
Speaker, at the record that these people have had in the past, the 
way they’ve trampled on the rights for individual employees, it 
doesn’t surprise me, or if not even sinister any more, that they 
would want to take away the rights of some employees. And if 
they don’t like how some employees in a particular branch of 
government are operating, they can simply disestablish that 
particular branch, the employees no longer have jobs, and their 
rights are gone. And then the Deputy Premier and the cabinet 
can hire their colleagues and simply appoint those people to that 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is taking a very sinister view of this particular 
legislation. But if you analyse the Bill, if you analyse Bill 5, 
there really are no limits put on the Executive Council. Bill No. 
5, as the member from Regina Lakeview has pointed out, is 
much wider in scope — much wider in scope than any of the 
other legislation passed in Manitoba, in B.C., in Ottawa, or in 
the British parliament. 
 
I hear the Deputy Premier saying, “Well then amend it,” and I 
can assure you there will be an amendment coming forth. But it 
would have . . . Mr. Speaker, it would save all of our times, if 
the Deputy Premier simply withdrew this Bill or held the Bill, 
as my colleague from Fairview has indicated, and brought it 
back in some other form so that it wouldn’t be ultra vires and it 
wouldn’t have the wide scope that it presently has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a few other items that I want to address 
at this particular time. Why does the Deputy Premier, and why 
does the Premier want to erode and diminish, decrease our 
duties and our responsibilities here? The electorate saw fit to 
elect and vote in each and ever one of us. They have given us 
the responsibility and duties to perform. The voters in 
Saskatoon South have told me, by putting me here, to defend 
their rights, to stand up for their rights. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
they are saying to me is that, look it — if the government is 
presenting a particular Bill which will infringe on my rights, 
decrease my rights, or take them away, then we’re asking you to 
stand up and oppose that kind of legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 5 will do that. My colleagues have 
amply pointed out that there is no other legislation around 
similar in scope. There is no other legislation around similar in 
scope. And it is very, very difficult for us to accept the reasons 
why this Bill has been brought in. All the Deputy Premier said 
— efficiency. Efficiency. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

362 
 
 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this government it is . . . 
Well it’s a laugh for them to talk about efficiency. In 1982 
when they took over the government they had a surplus of $139 
million. Held a debt — the long-term debt in this province was 
3.5 billion. What do we have today? We have a deficit of close 
to 3 billion. We have a long-term debt of close to 10 billion. 
And they talk about efficiency! That’s why they want to bring it 
in? that’s a laugh, Mr. Speaker. That’s a laugh. 
 
And to even put that forward is not only an insult to the 
members here, but is an insult to the electorate of this province. 
So one has to surmise that there’s some other reasons why the 
Deputy Premier has put it forward. And I think that those 
sinister motives that they have are the ones that were related in 
this House this afternoon by the member from Quill Lake. 
 
They want to disestablish certain departments because it does 
not fall in line with their thinking. They want to then establish 
new motives, new purposes, and not come back to this 
legislature to be answerable to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we must do everything we can on this side 
of the House to either convince the Deputy Premier to move a 
substantive amendment or convince him that he is going to 
spend most of his Christmas holidays in this House with his 
other colleagues, because we will not permit this Bill to pass 
without substantive amendments. And I think that has to be 
made very clear to him. I would rather be home on Christmas 
time and new Year’s, and spend it with my family. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I will tell the hon. members opposite that I will stay 
here; I will stay here as long as it takes to convince the 
members opposite that this Bill should be withdrawn or 
substantively amended. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, what does this Bill do? Well first 
of all, as the member from Riversdale pointed out the other day, 
this Bill seems to be a power grab by the cabinet. It’s a power 
grab by the cabinet because they do not want to come before 
this House to explain the reasons why they need particular 
changes to legislation. So they want to operate by OC. 
 
In other words, what it does, it concentrates the power in the 
hands of the very few — the Deputy Premier, the Premier, and 
a few of his other colleagues in cabinet. 
 
Now what else does it do? What it does, and that’s really what 
bothers me more than anything else, is that it decreases the 
power of the elected members in this Chamber. Not only the 
members on this side of the House, but all the back-benchers 
over there. And some of you will never — as much as you 
would like to aspire to it — will never get into the cabinet. You 
will never get into the cabinet. And I think you should 
remember that and speak out for what your electorates have told 
you to speak for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fourthly what this legislation does is allow the 
cabinet to govern by decree. They’ve governed by decree. All 
they have to do is pass OCs and they never  

have to come before this legislature to explain why they had to 
have those OCs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier gave very little explanation 
the other day when he gave second reading. As I indicated 
earlier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Yes, I was here. I would like to inform the people who are 
watching television that the member from Swift Current is just 
debating with me as to whether I was in the House when the 
Deputy Speaker moved second reading, and I want to just tell 
the people and tell the member from Swift Current that I was in 
my seat when the Deputy Premier moved second reading to this 
Bill. 
 
So I want to reiterate that the Deputy Premier gave very little 
explanation, and he wanted us to believe that this was a minor 
Bill that, you know, we’ll pass it and we’ll all be happy and you 
can all go home for Christmas. But, Mr. Speaker, that was not 
the case. When we further examined this Bill, we had to come 
to one conclusion, and that was that the Deputy Premier and the 
Premier had some hidden or sinister motive this Bill at this 
particular time. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when the Premier looked at the 
results of the last election, he recognized that there would be a 
much stronger opposition. And if he was unable to do some of 
the things in the last four years with the eight or nine members 
that we had, he realized that he wouldn’t be able to do nearly as 
much with 25 members — with 25 members. So he said to his 
cabinet, look it, if we want to do this, if we want to not go 
before the legislature, let’s pass this legislation and we’ll give 
all that power to ourselves. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and his cabinet have 
been manipulative; they are power hungry; and that they do not 
wish to face this strengthened opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the Premier that 
the people spoke in the last election. Yes, they gave you a 
mandate. But, Mr. Speaker, they gave you a mandate with 44 
per cent of the vote. Fifty-five per cent of the people voted 
against you, and they’ve asked you to be cautious, to listen — 
to listen to the opposition and listen to the people. And I say to 
the Premier, you better tread a little more cautiously or next 
time around you’re not going to be on that side; you're going to 
be on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve also noticed in the House 
since I’ve been back that the Premier doesn’t like some of the 
rules of the House, so he simply ignores some of them . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . he simply ignores . . . Some people 
also say he also ignores the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Premier should be doing: the Premier 
should not be decreasing the power of the legislative arm of 
government, he should be increasing it. That way he’d be 
listening to the people. The people don’t want an executive arm 
of government that can  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

363 
 
 

simply govern by decree or govern by OC. The people want 
you to bring your legislation before this House, to debate it in 
this House, to debate it before the television, and then make the 
decision — not behind back doors, not let your patronage 
people decide and runt his government, but let the legislation 
come here and we will debate it and pass it at that particular 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier also stated in second reading 
that he did not want to debate in this Assembly the finest details 
of all reorganization with the government departments. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, no one asks him to debate the finest details. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we ask him at least to bring before this House 
fundamental changes in departments. We are asking him to 
bring that legislation before this House so that we can openly 
discuss it, openly debate it. And, Mr. Speaker, when there are 
fundamental changes made to the laws of this province in 
regards to education or social services or labour, you not only 
have a right but you have a duty and an obligation to bring 
those back to this legislature so they can be debated and the 
people will know then and only then whether or not we have 
made the right decisions in this House. And then, Mr. Speaker, 
they can make their decisions. They can make their decisions in 
the next election and decide as to who should form this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, again the Deputy Premier was 
either again ignorant of the facts, or I must say that he misled 
the House when he stated — and I’ve checked — when he 
stated that weeks upon weeks of time of this legislature have 
been spent on discussing reorganization of departments. It’s not 
true; it simply isn’t true. The legislature has never spent weeks 
and weeks debating and discussing reorganization. And the 
Deputy Premier should have been aware of that. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that he was aware — and he nods his head that he was 
— and therefore I can only surmise that he was misleading the 
House. 
 
(2030) 
 
If he says he knows, why then did he state it? He was 
misleading. Well, parliamentary rules would not allow me to 
use the other word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our House Leader, the member from 
Riversdale, pointed out the other day in this Assembly, there 
has been no consultation on this Bill. It is a conglomeration of 
power by the cabinet and it is a decreasing of the role of the 
elected members of this Assembly. The Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
allows the cabinet, by OC, by order in council, to establish new 
objects and new purposes for each government department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they don’t like a particular department right 
now they simply disestablish it and they don’t have to establish 
a new one. But even if they did they could establish a 
brand-new department totally different, totally different from 
the other department; ascribe brand-new, totally different 
obligations and duties to the employees of that department, and 
never once come before this legislature to explain their reasons 
for making those  

moves — not once. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: is that democracy? Is that why this 
Assembly has been elected by the people of this province? If we 
allow them to do that, what is the purpose of this Assembly? 
There is really no purpose for it then because what you have is a 
government governing by decree; governing by order in council 
by the people appointed by the Premier, that is his cabinet. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the guts of this Bill, and we cannot allow 
that to happen; we must protect the rights of all members of this 
House. And again I plead with the members opposite. If you 
have any role to play at all, ask your cabinet tomorrow in 
caucus: what is your real intent of bringing this Bill forward 
now? What problems have you had in the past in getting your 
legislation through this House? There weren’t any. There aren’t 
any. So you must assume. Like I have assumed, that there are 
ulterior motives. There are other reasons why they want this 
legislation through, reasons they have not told you. 
 
I just don’t believe that the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, whose parents I have known for a long 
time and who I know personally, would want this legislation to 
pass. I don’t believe that. I just don’t believe that. And I think if 
he knew the real reasons for it he would tomorrow in caucus 
say to the Deputy Premier, hey, look, give me the real reason. 
Maybe you’ve got a good reason to have this legislation passed, 
but tell me what it is. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the Premier that the 
establishing and disestablishing of departments, the final 
authority for establishing and disestablishing of departments, 
has always rested with this body. It originates from the cabinet, 
it originates from the cabinet; they present it to this House and 
the final authority rests with us. We either defeat it, or we 
amend it, or we pass it. But you do not have the right to usurp 
the role of individual members in this House. And in my 
opinion that is what you are doing. You are diminishing our 
roles. You are saying to the electorate out there, I don’t care 
whether they elected the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
I don’t care whether you elected the member from Saskatoon 
South. We, the cabinet, will determine what your role is going 
to be. And, Mr. Speaker, to me that is unconstitutional, that is 
not democracy. 
 
And that is not what we’ve taught our kids. We’ve taught our 
children to respect the principles of democracy, to cherish those 
traditions that our fathers and forefathers have worked for for so 
hard. And that is why many of the people came to this country. 
And as the member from Kinistino himself said the other day, 
that was one of the main reasons he came here. And I’m asking 
him now: look at that legislation and do you not see that this is 
in opposition to what you stated the other day in this House? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to simply wrap up my remarks on this 
particular Bill by saying that this Bill does not do what the 
Deputy Premier has told us it would do. It is much wider in 
scope. There are no particular urgent reasons why it is needed. 
The past has worked well. We have always co-operated in this 
particular legislature even when we  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

364 
 
 

were on the other side and many of you were on this side. We 
have co-operated when the government has presented 
reasonable legislation. It has always worked. 
 
It may not have been as efficient, but what’s the price that we’re 
going to pay for efficiency? I say to the members opposite, 
please, let’s not rush this through. Do what my colleague from 
Fairview has asked you do. Hold this legislation; bring it back 
in the spring session; consult with your legal people; and then 
let’s have another look at it. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are some fundamental questions 
which have to be answered, asked and answered, before we can 
proceed at all with this Bill. If the present legislation has been 
effective in the past, why the fundamental changes now? Why 
the urgency? 
 
Number two. Why do we want to give the cabinet the authority 
to overrule decisions made by this Assembly? Why do we want 
to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And as my colleague from Fairview pointed 
out, we don’t even have the authority to do that. It is ultra vires 
to this legislature. We can’t do it. And even if we could, why do 
we want to do it? 
 
Number three. Should we, the elected members of this 
Assembly, allow the cabinet, by simple order in council, to 
establish and de-establish entire departments of government, 
and thereby, Mr. Speaker, take away, abolish, the rights of 
many individuals, rights that have been enacted by this 
legislature and have been fought for by people for many years. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, are we going to allow the Premier and his 
ministers to usurp the legislative duties and responsibilities of 
the members of this Assembly? I say no. And I don’t know why 
the members opposite, who are not in the cabinet, why they 
would want the cabinet to take away your responsibilities, your 
duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be a sad day in this legislature and 
in this province if we allow the legislature, and if we allow the 
cabinet in this legislature, to take away the responsibilities that 
have been given to us over many, many years — rights that 
have been worked at and enacted over the last 50 to 70 years. 
 
I say to the members of this House, let us take a recess, 
withhold this Bill, come back in the spring and have a fresh 
look at it. And in the meantime, as the member from Fairview 
has indicated, why don’t you take it to your legal people, have 
them have a look at it and do as the Deputy Premier has said — 
bring in some serious amendments, and maybe we on this side 
of the House then will be able to support it. 
 
If not, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member from Riversdale, 
who said the other day that this is nothing but overkill. It 
concentrates the power in the hands of a few — that is the 
cabinet — and it allows them virtually to do anything that they 
desire without coming back to this legislature and be 
accountable to us, the elected  

members of this Assembly. 
 
For these reason, Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to join with 
me in opposing this particular legislation and ask the Premier 
and the Deputy Premier to hold the legislation until the spring 
session. 
 
Thank you very kindly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
have a number of comments that I wish to make on Bill No. 5 
tonight. I don’t think I’ll keep the Assembly too long. In doing 
so I share some of the concerns that have been stated by the 
official opposition about the Bill. I think some of their remarks 
in this debate have been somewhat overstated, but not all of 
them. And while the government might giggle, as they have 
done, at some of the opposition’s complaints about Bill 5, the 
government, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be foolish to 
be so smug and so arrogant as to ignore all of the fundamentals 
that have been raised in the opposition’s case. 
 
As a general comment, Mr. Speaker, I find the first portions of 
Bill No. 5, until you get up to section 12, to be marginally 
acceptable. But from section 12 onward come the offensive 
sections, and I would make specific reference to sections like 
section no. 12 and section no. 19. 
 
I take exception, Mr. Speaker, to the notion that the objects and 
purposes of any department can be created, altered or 
eliminated without any reference to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. I would also take exception to the omnibus 
spending authority conferred upon ministers, again without any 
reference to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
These provisions, it seems to me, are excessive. They do betray 
a kind of arrogance on the part of the government and they are 
fundamentally anti-democratic. They show this government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, cannot distinguish between the role of 
government and what is right for the province of Saskatchewan 
on one hand, and what is good for the Progressive Conservative 
Party on the other hand. They constantly run those two things 
together. They cannot distinguish between government and 
their own political party. 
 
There is, I think here, an unprecedented grab for new power in 
this Bill, or to state it more accurately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
transfer of power from the public in the legislature to the 
cabinet without any reference to public scrutiny. 
 
This government has the reputation for having one of the 
biggest and most expensive political bureaucracies in the 
history of Saskatchewan and, indeed, anywhere in Canada. Now 
I’m not referring here to the legitimate public, service in the 
province of Saskatchewan; I’m referring to that tight cadre of 
partisan aides and advisors and assistants and consultants and 
counsellors in the Premier’s office, in every minister’s office, in 
many of the Crown corporations and other government 
agencies. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

365 
 
 

They are largely appointed and controlled directly from the top 
in terms of the Premier. They’re very well paid, as we all know. 
Their objectives are obviously primarily political and partisan. 
They already have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, enormous power in the 
government in Saskatchewan today. They are the back-room 
planners and thinkers, the political handlers; they are the final 
decision makers; they are the ultimate power brokers. 
 
This legislation that we’re discussing this evening would 
increase that back-room, non-accountable wielding of power. It 
is already massive, and Bill No. 5 would make it worse. It’s an 
attack, Mr. Speaker, not only on this legislature in general 
terms, it’s an attack not only on the democratic traditions of 
Saskatchewan, it’s an attack not only on members of the 
opposition, it is an attack too, on back-benchers on the 
government side and even on those ministers in the cabinet who 
don’t happen to be in the Premier’s favoured clique at any 
particular moment in time. 
 
The members across the way already know that problems of 
that nature exist. They already know that some of them feel left 
out and used and abused and manipulated and taken for granted. 
They complain about that from time to time. It’s difficult to get 
through all the flack-men and the handlers to get close to the 
inner circle, to get close to the Premier. You have the feeling 
sometimes on the government back-bench that you just don’t 
count. 
 
(2045) 
 
What counts are the pollsters and the advertising agencies and 
the faceless, nameless, unelected advisors; what counts is the 
political machine. That’s what counts, that’s what matters, and 
that’s where the clout is, Mr. Speaker, and Bill No. 5, coupled 
with Bill No. 7 that we discussed earlier, will only make that 
situation worse in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would ask members opposite in the government caucus 
and outside the small core of the privileged few, I would ask 
them to think very carefully about Bill No. 5. I would ask them 
to think about the basic rules of parliamentary democracy, ask 
them to think about the ideals of this legislature, this central 
institution of our democracy. I would ask them to think about 
their own self respect as individual MLAs. I would ask them to 
think about it. And surely, having done so, they couldn’t simply 
mindlessly rubber-stamp this kind of legislation which would 
violate some important traditions of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some specific reference to 
some of my concerns about the spending authority issue which I 
mentioned a few moments ago. And that is included in section 
19 of Bill 5. And if members read that particular section — I 
won’t read it at this moment — if members read that particular 
section, they will find very broad, very sweeping language in 
conferring spending authority upon ministers of the cabinet. It’s 
an omnibus kind of authority. 
 
And the question might be asked, well, why does it matter? 
What’s the point? What’s wrong with that? I would give you a 
specific example of what’s wrong with  

that, Mr. Speaker, drawn from the recent experience that we 
have all had in the Saskatchewan election campaign. During the 
course of that campaign, one of the issues talked about a lot 
across Saskatchewan, sometimes favourably, sometimes 
unfavourably, was the program announced by the government 
on the eve of the election having to do with their new housing 
policy. 
 
And concerns were raised by a great many voters in 
Saskatchewan about that program, about its timing, and about 
its method of implementation, which seemed far more designed 
for political purposes than housing purposes in this province. 
And specifically, Mr. Speaker, I would refer to the component 
within that program for the $1,500 matching grants. And the 
question is raised, Mr. Speaker: where was the specific 
authority conferred by this legislature — the specific authority 
— for spending one-third of a billion dollars in that way? 
Where was the authority to do it? 
 
The government tended to run from that question during the 
election campaign. But on investigation if you examine the 
statutes, the authority — if there is any — would seem to be 
found in the Saskatchewan housing Act, and particularly in 
section 16 of the Saskatchewan housing Act. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I wont’ take the time of the Assembly 
to read section 16 into the record at this particular moment in 
time. It’s a section that is commonly found in many of the 
statutes of Saskatchewan, in common language in sections used 
for this purpose of conferring spending authorities. But the 
section refers to specific spending for specific purposes on 
behalf of specific people. 
 
I remember very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in the television debate 
during the election campaign when I raised this point and made 
the argument that what the government had done in relation to 
its housing program, and particularly the $1,500 matching 
grants, that they had, in fact, exceeded the authority that had 
been conferred upon them by section 16 of the Saskatchewan 
housing Act. When I made that point or at least raised it as a 
valid question, that the government may well have exceeded its 
authority in proceeding in the way that it did, I remember the 
look of surprise — and some would even say shock — on the 
face of the Premier, and I challenged him to test his program — 
if not before the courts, then at least before the Provincial 
Auditor — to determine if in fact he had the authority to do 
what he was proposing to do by virtue of that particular section 
in the Saskatchewan housing Act that I have made reference to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you compare the language of that section, 
section 16 in the Saskatchewan housing Act, with section 19 in 
this legislation, you will find that the section in the housing Act 
is very limited. The language in section 19 in this Bill before us 
tonight is very broad. It is an omnibus kind of authority, and 
this section, I think, is rather a tacit admission on the part of the 
government that I may well have been right in the point that I 
was making in the television debate. And indeed, if it were 
tested in a court, if it were challenged before the Provincial 
Auditor, that program that was announced on the eve of the 
election might in fact be found to be wanting in terms of  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

366 
 
 

the legal authority to proceed with it in the way in which it was 
produced at the beginning of the election campaign. 
 
This new section, however, if this Bill is passed, would correct 
that political defect. It would mean that no question would ever 
need to be raised about whether a section in the Saskatchewan 
housing Act had been exceeded or not, or a section in any other 
Bill or legislation had been exceeded or not. The omnibus 
spending authority is included in section 19 in the broadest of 
language and again without any further reference to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again I would say in summary, Mr. Speaker, that I do not 
object to all of the provisions contained in this Bill, particularly 
those provisions contained in the first portion of the Bill. But 
the latter half of the Bill does seem to me to be at least 
questionable in terms of the issues that it raises about the 
powers and the objects of departments, and in terms of the 
spending authority in very broad language that it proposes to 
confer upon ministers in the future in both cases without 
reference again at any point to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would invite members of the government to be cautious 
with this legislation, to cool down and to slow down. Don’t just 
ram it through for the sake of saving face politically. Don’t just 
presume that because an argument is raised by the opposition 
that that argument is invalid. There may well be some truth on 
this side of the floor, just as there may well be some truth on the 
other side of the floor, too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned in my throne speech, debate speech a few days 
ago, neither side of the Assembly has the market cornered on 
virtue, and it would pay us some dividends to listen to each 
other once in a while and to give each other some benefit of the 
doubt. 
 
And I would say to the government this evening that they 
should slow down and cool down, think this thing through a 
little bit, listen a little bit, think about it some more, and please, 
above all, respect this institution which we all have the 
fundamental duty to defend. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter the 
debate tonight. I think it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 
debating a Bill of this nature before Christmas. The Assembly 
would really be well advised, the government members 
opposite would be well advised to simply withdraw the Bill, 
and we could go home and members of the press could go home 
and you could go home, Mr. Speaker, to enjoy a Christmas 
recess, rather than debating this kind of a Bill. 
 
But I think that it’s not by accident, Mr. Speaker, in my view, 
unfortunately, that this Bill is coming to us just prior to the 
Christmas recess. I feel, unfortunately, that this Bill is coming 
to us today, Mr. Speaker, because the government members 
opposite have decided that they need to bring in this legislation 
while members of the public are busy with their Christmas 
shopping, with their preparations for Christmas, and are 
naturally not following the public business of this legislature as 
closely  

as they do at most other times of year. I think that’s the reason, 
Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell why this Bill is before us today. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that in fact this Bill probably explains 
the major reason why this sitting of the legislature was called, 
in my view. This sitting of the legislature has been called to 
push through this Bill which essentially passes on to the cabinet 
enormous powers that, since 1905, have rested with this 
legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, that is simply, in my mind, 
inexcusable and unacceptable. And because we find it 
unacceptable, members on this side of the House feel obligated, 
as part of our responsibility to providing leadership in this 
province, to oppose the Bill and to continue the debate. And I 
think it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that that’s necessary at this 
point in the pre-Christmas season. 
 
Now, I have a number of points that I would like to make about 
the Bill. The two sections of the Bill that concern me the most, 
Mr. Speaker, are sections number 12 and sections number 19. 
And for the sake of members who may not have read the Bill 
and for members of the public, I just want to highlight those 
two sections. 
 
Section 12 allows the government — the cabinet — by order in 
council: “to establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine the objects and purposes of the department;” and 
secondly to: “disestablish any department;” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I first want to address the question of 
establishment of departments because what we’re seeing here 
today, Mr. Speaker — is that from now on members of the 
Legislative Assembly and members of the public are going to 
be asked to follow and monitor the new objectives that are set 
by the government, not from the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but by 
way of reading the regulations that are published in orders in 
council. In other words, we are going to be asked to monitor the 
activities of government with respect to the setting of direction 
and with respect to the setting of objectives — which is after all 
a very fundamental aspect of government — by reading the 
regulations that are passed and adopted by the cabinet, and 
published. And really, Mr. Speaker, that is, it seems to me, 
unprecedented in legislatures across this country or in the 
British parliament. And it’s simply not in the public interest to 
conduct the public’s business in that way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, secondly I want to say that there isn’t even 
any assurance in the future that necessarily all the regulations 
will be published. The way this government is operating, we’re 
quickly moving towards a new kind of secrecy that we’ve not 
seen for some time. And I think that what this Bill does is it 
essentially moves a lot of decisions that are made by the 
government behind closed doors. And really, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s most inappropriate. 
 
Now the greatest concern I have about section 12, Mr. Speaker, 
is the subsection that says that the cabinet may, whenever they 
wish . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry, but I must interrupt the speaker. 
Perhaps the member wasn’t in the House earlier when I drew 
another member’s attention to paragraph  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

367 
 
 

734 which states that member should not discuss in detail 
clauses of the Bill. So you may speak in a general way about 
the Bill in second reading, but I would ask you to refrain from 
quoting from Bill. You will have ample opportunity to do that 
in the clause-by-clause passage. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll refrain from that, 
and just say that one of the primary purposes of this Bill is 
clearly for the cabinet to be able to abolish any department of 
government whenever they wish. And, Mr. Speaker, I find this 
actually in my own view to be the most alarming intent of this 
Bill. 
 
I’d just like to comment, Mr. Speaker, on what I think may be 
some of the departments that the government would wish to 
essentially attack by way of passing orders in council. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, in my mind that one of the departments 
that this Bill may be designed to launch an attack on is the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Perhaps 
members opposite are interested in eliminating some of the 
functions of the Rentalsman’s office for instance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another of the departments that I’d be concerned about would 
be the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. Often, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had real doubts about 
this government’s commitment to co-operation and to 
co-operatives. One of the important functions of the objectives 
of the department is to advise co-operative members of the 
Saskatchewan community on the establishment of new 
co-operatives, and to provide consultation and advice to 
existing co-operatives. That’s the kind of purpose that I could 
see being eliminated by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the Culture and Recreation department, I’d worry about 
things like the heritage resources branch, and whether the 
government members may wish to greatly reduce or eliminate 
that. 
 
In the Department of Education, Mr. Speaker, I’d worry about 
something like the community education branch, and whether 
that could be eliminated by order in council as a result of this 
Bill being passed. 
 
It wouldn’t surprise me at all, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill was used 
by members opposite to launch an attack on the Department of 
the Environment and to reduce some of its duties and functions 
and objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the likely prime targets of this government 
if this Bill is passed is that they would use this Bill to eliminate 
many of the functions of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and 
see those functions privatized, Mr. Speaker, and contracted out. 
 
(2100) 
 
It wouldn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 
used this Bill as a vehicle to launch an attack on the Land Titles 
Office, and to see that privatized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the departments that I would be worried 
about, where many of the services could perhaps  

be eliminated from the point of view of government and 
contracted out, would be the provincial lab in the Department of 
Health. Are the members opposite going to use this Bill, if it’s 
adopted, to then be able to pass simply by order in council, 
regulations that would do away with the provincial laboratory 
services that we have in this province that are very important? 
 
For instance, right now the provincial labs do tests on 
specimens submitted by hospitals, physicians, or public health 
officials. That lab does testing on water samples, Mr. Speaker, 
that are submitted by the Department of the Environment. 
 
That’s the kind of function that the government could easily, if 
this Bill passes, simply have eliminated by passing an order in 
council without ever coming to this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
and have those services contracted out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t surprise me if the 
government, who’ve never been big supporters of the 
Saskatchewan dental plan and who cut back dental care services 
for children age four years of age and 18 years of age, decided 
that, using order in council, that they would further reduce the 
scope and the services provided under the Saskatchewan dental 
plan. That’s another area, Mr. Speaker, that has never been a 
favourite with members opposite. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, in terms of health care, there’s the mental 
health services and the psychiatric services branch. That’s been 
another area of service that’s never been highly popular with 
members opposite — that they never had a lot of commitment 
to. Now by way of regulation and order in council, if this Bill 
passes, many of the services in that department could be 
eliminated, Mr. Speaker, without every having to come to this 
legislature. 
 
Another of the departments that’s not been all that popular with 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, has been the Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat. It’s been poorly funded, and it could be 
abolished by way of an order in council if this Bill passes 
tonight, or in this sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you come to the Department of Labour, 
some of the areas that I’d worry about would be the toxicology 
unit, the occupational health and safety unit. A lot of the 
functions of the department with respect to its obligations to 
reduce hazardous and unsafe working conditions could be 
eliminated, Mr. Speaker. If this Bill is adopted those functions 
could be eliminated by way of order in council. 
 
One of the areas, Mr. Speaker, some of the other services and 
objectives and departments that I’d be worried about, Mr. 
Speaker, if this Bill passes, are the Northern Affairs Secretariat, 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 
 
This government has been steadily whittling away at the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. It could be abolished, 
Mr. Speaker, simply by way of an order in  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

368 
 
 

council without having to come to this legislature. The 
Women’s Secretariat has never been particularly popular with 
members opposite. It could be done away with by way of this 
Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting for a moment that the 
government is about to launch an attack on all these 
departments. But I’m simply saying, Mr. Speaker, that among 
this list there are three or four prime targets that the government 
is no doubt looking to either greatly reduce their functions or to 
eliminate completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s so dangerous about this Bill is that 
members opposite could essentially eliminate those objectives 
of government or eliminate entire departments such as the ones 
that I’ve listed without ever having to come before this 
Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, that is simply passing to cabinet 
an essential responsibility of this Legislative Assembly and it’s 
removing one of the fundamental rights of members of the 
legislature to be able to debate decisions like that on behalf of 
the public before they become law. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
alarmed that that kind of a function would ever be considered 
by any government and put in the form of legislation as it is in 
this Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say a word about section 17. I 
think that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg made a 
good point with respect to section 17 when he said that section 
17 . . . And I won’t go into the details of the section, Mr. 
Speaker, according to your earlier ruling, but just to say that this 
is the other fundamental section of this Bill. It’s the second 
intention of this Bill, which is to greatly increase the ability of 
government to spend money without having to come under the 
full scrutiny of this legislature. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
a very, very inappropriate and unfortunate section of the Bill 
that ought not to be in the piece of legislation. 
 
I want to make some general comments on this legislation, in 
closing. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation 
essentially, as other members have mentioned on this side of the 
House, represents a major power grab by this government, 
timed very carefully just before the Christmas holidays when 
the attention of the public is not on this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that this Bill represents an 
unprecedented attack on the rights of the Legislative Assembly 
and an attack on the rights and responsibilities of individual 
members who are attempting to represent their constituencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major rights and responsibilities of this 
legislature is to establish the objectives and direction of 
government and is to establish departments of government, and 
by removing that opportunity for members of this Assembly the 
government is doing a great disservice to this Assembly and to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if members opposite were simply concerned 
with administrative efficiency the government would have 
brought in a large-scale subsequential amendment to all of the 
statute law in Saskatchewan that would result from this Bill. 
They would have also, Mr.  

Speaker, in my view, tabled the orders in council that they 
wanted to introduce to streamline the process of government 
efficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if their objective was to simply make government 
efficiency they would have, in my view, brought in the 
subsequential amendments throughout all the departmental Acts 
that go together with this piece of legislation so that we could 
have seen them clearly, Mr. Speaker. And they would have 
brought in all the orders in council that they want to lay on the 
table to streamline government. 
 
And if they’d done that, Mr. Speaker, then perhaps members on 
this side of the House would be prepared to take a serious 
second look at this piece of legislation. But the fact that they 
haven’t done that, in my view, Mr. Speaker, indicates that 
they’re not really serious about streamlining government and 
making it more efficient. What they want to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
move the powers of government from the legislature to the 
cabinet. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment now on one of the other 
concerns I have about this Bill which some of my colleagues on 
this side of the House have already raised, and I will therefore 
touch on it only briefly. And that is that this Assembly has the 
responsibility to consider whether or not legislation is ultra 
vires, in other words whether it’s unconstitutional, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation borders on 
being unconstitutional or in fact is unconstitutional. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, that that concern in itself should be sufficient 
justification for the government to take this Bill back, to review 
it again, to have their legal experts and other legal experts in the 
province comment on it to determine whether or not it is in fact 
constitutional, before they bring it here before this Assembly. 
They have that responsibility, Mr. Speaker and it seems clear 
that they have not examined that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would be interested in hearing what 
members on the other side of the Assembly, government 
members, have to say with respect to the constitutionality of 
this Bill, and with respect to whether they have sought broad 
legal advice on whether in fact this Bill is constitutional or not. 
Because it would not surprise me, Mr. Speaker, if they haven’t. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before closing I want to touch on some of 
the comments that have been made with respect to arguments 
put forward by members opposite regarding the fact that this 
Bill simply represents similar actions, is along a similar path to 
legislation that was earlier put into effect in places like the 
British parliament, the House of Commons in Ottawa, and in 
provinces like our neighbouring province in Manitoba. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members opposite that 
this legislation bears no resemblance to the legislation they have 
made reference to in other provinces, or in other countries, at 
all. With respect to the British parliament, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the points that they’ve tried to make is that this legislation 
resembles legislation in the British parliament that is used to 
streamline the business of the British parliament. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

369 
 
 

Well I want to make two points here, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
the British parliament is approximately 10 times the size of this 
Assembly. There’s a need to streamline the activities of that 
parliament in a way that’s not required in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. To get a Bill through in the House of Commons or the 
British parliament is not an easy task. There’s not nearly the 
difficulty involved in getting a Bill through this Assembly 
because of its much smaller nature, Mr. Speaker. So first of all, 
the need for streamlining is not the same. 
 
But secondly, and I think more importantly, in the case of the 
British parliament the order in council abolishing a department 
of government, for instance, has to be — or establishing a new 
department — has to be laid on the table for all members of the 
House of Commons to examine or the British parliament to 
examine before it comes into effect. And it’s only after that 
opportunity for examination that if there are no objections and 
no debate that order in council will become law. If there is no 
objections, the order in council will automatically go into effect 
and become law after 40 days. If there are objection, Mr. 
Speaker, then there’s a debate. But what members opposite in 
this Bill are proposing is that there will be no opportunity for 
debate at all, Mr. Speaker. And so really this proposal is very 
different from the proposal that is used in Britain, in the British 
parliament. 
 
In Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, order in councils must be tabled and 
they must be . . . if there is an order in council to establish a 
new department, or to abolish a department, those orders in 
council have to be tabled and they have to be approved by way 
of a resolution of the House of commons, Mr. Speaker. Now we 
see no proposals from members opposite, from the government, 
to do that by way of this Bill. What they want to do is make 
their decisions on passing orders in council to abolish 
departments in cabinet with no reference to this legislature at 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have suggested that this Bill 
is similar to legislation in Manitoba. And again they are 
incorrect on that account because what Manitoba does, Mr. 
Speaker, in their Bill, is that they make provision in their law 
for some of the functions of the legislature and duties of the 
legislature to be streamlined and to be handled by way of order 
in council when they are changed. But, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba 
law makes no provision for the fundamental objectives of a 
government department to be changed without it coming before 
the Manitoba legislature. And that’s what this piece of 
legislation does, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of the reason why 
this legislation, in my view, is highly inappropriate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make one more comment before 
closing, and that is that this legislation provides no protection 
for public servants whatsoever. A government department could 
be abolished, Mr. Speaker, by way of order in council and there 
are no guarantees that the members of the public service, 
regardless of how long they have served, regardless of what 
their functions are within the department, would have any kind 
of a protection. And a department could simply be eliminated 
and members of the Public Service Commission — or members 
of the public service — would have absolutely  

no protection by way of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
another issue that’s not addressed in this Bill and another reason 
to be alarmed about this kind of legislation. 
 
Now before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on one other 
major concern that I have, and that is with respect to a number 
of the possible implications that might arise from this 
legislation that are, in effect, objectives, duties and functions 
that come with the establishment of a particular government 
department, but for which there would not necessarily be any 
protection in the event that this Bill is introduced and a 
department can be eliminated. 
 
(2115) 
 
I want to use, for this purpose, the Department of Advanced 
Education and Manpower, which is my critic area, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the areas that I would be concerned about if this Bill 
passes, Mr. Speaker, is what would happen to areas of the 
Department of Advanced Education and Manpower Act that 
make provision for things like the academic freedom of 
universities, Mr. Speaker, or for immunity from liability for 
universities, Mr. Speaker? 
 
If this Bill was passed, do we have any guarantee that the orders 
in council . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, would 
we have any guarantee that the orders in council passed by the 
cabinet would necessarily protect the academic freedoms of the 
universities? We have no guarantee, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, my interpretation of this legislation is that in theory — 
I’m not implying this motive to members opposite — but that in 
theory the provision of academic freedoms to the universities of 
this province could be eliminated by order in council, Mr. 
Speaker, that this would not need to come before the legislature. 
 
I just give this as an example of why this is a bad piece of 
legislation. I’m not suggesting that members opposite are 
planning to do that, Mr. Speaker, but what I am saying is that 
this piece of legislation would give members opposite, would 
give any government that follows members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, the ability to eliminate section 9 of The Department of 
Advanced Education and manpower Act that makes provision 
for academic freedoms for our universities and do it by order in 
council without coming before this legislature. 
 
I use that, Mr. Speaker, simply to make the point that the 
powers of this Bill, if it comes into effect, are far too broad, that 
this Bill is simply a bad piece of legislation that ought to be 
withdrawn immediately. It’s a power grab that’s unprecedented 
in the history and tradition of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and 
I urge members opposite to withdraw this Bill and to bring back 
a Bill that will streamline the efficiency of government without 
taking away the due rights of members of the legislature, of 
members of the Legislative Assembly, and of this Assembly 
itself, Mr. Speaker, and the public that we represent. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, the hour is late, and I’m sure  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

370 
 
 

the other members of the legislature are as tired as I am, but 
unfortunately I must rise in spite of being tired, to speak for 
myself and on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Centre 
about this Bill that the government is trying to push through just 
a few days before Christmas. 
 
I wonder if the members opposite have actually studied this 
Bill, especially the back-benchers on the government side. I 
wonder if they’ve read it and had some discussion about it. I 
wonder if they can understand it. Because to me it’s just as 
serious an issue as any of the other issues that we’ve had to rise 
to speak to since this Legislative Assembly began the 21st 
Session not so long ago. 
 
We’ve had to speak over and over again about the need for this 
Legislative Assembly to respect the parliamentary traditions of 
our Assembly and to put ourselves forward to work for 
democratic government, rather than the kind of government that 
Bill seems to represent. 
 
Now it’s interesting to me, when I was listening to the throne 
speeches, to hear the members opposite talk so much and such 
purpley prose about their attitudes towards government and 
towards freedom. 
 
The member from Maple Creek, the Minister for Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, said this in her speech: 
 

We are now embarking on a second phase of an important 
journey, a journey of building this province with a 
government that supports and protects the people and 
responds to our citizens’ needs, rather than a government in 
which it itself becomes a dominant factor, dominating the 
people and doing the major activities by itself. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is my contention that the members on this side 
of the House, the members currently in opposition, are the ones 
that are supporting and protecting the people and responding to 
our citizens’ needs. 
 
And it is the members who are forming the government at this 
particular point in time who are creating a government which in 
itself becomes a dominant factor, dominating the people and 
doing the major activities by itself. Certainly by itself, because 
the intention is to leave out the opportunity for the opposition to 
debate the changes that may be made to government 
departments. 
 
They make a big show of being opposed to big government, Mr. 
Speaker, and yet look at they’re doing with this legislation. 
They are the ones that are sanctimonious in their righteous 
descriptions of their government, and in the purpley prose that 
they use to throw people off guard as to what their actual 
intentions are. I think this kind of rhetoric throws people off 
guard, and I want the people in Saskatchewan, and particularly 
in Saskatoon Centre, to understand what is being proposed here 
with this Bill to reorganize the Executive Council. It’s very 
important that they understand that this government is in a 
power grab; that they want to — and he’s admitted it; the 
minister from Souris-Cannington has admitted that they are in a 
power grab. They love the trappings of power, and it’s very 
much against the freedom and the democracy that we stand for 
in Canada. 

 
One of the things that the government opposite continues to 
want to do is to see the people of Saskatchewan as somehow 
different from the Government of Saskatchewan, talking 
continually about what the people want, and talking about 
government as being a dominant factor as if somehow they are 
not contributing to this government being a dominant factor. 
 
With this kind of Bill that’s before us they are very much 
contributing to dominance. This Bill has been misrepresented 
by the minister from Souris-Cannington, telling us that it’s the 
same as what they have in Manitoba, and it’s not; the same as 
what they have in Britain, and it’s not; and the same as what 
they have in Ottawa, and it’s not. And that argument has been 
very well put forward by the colleagues on this side of the 
House. 
 
I find it very dishonest that this government talks about freedom 
and big government as if somehow they stand for good values 
and principles when they can come forward with this kind of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, freedom is indeed very precious. It’s precious to 
us in Canada and it’s something that we must protect and 
understand. To some people freedom means the right to do 
whatever they want to do and to heck with everyone else. To 
others freedom means the kinds of co-operation in how we are 
going to govern ourselves here in the province; to come to a 
mutual understanding of the laws that we live under and to 
create them together so that we know where we’re going and 
we know what we’re doing as we continue to live together in 
this great land. 
 
We need government, and we need good government. It’s our 
way of protecting ourselves from the forces that we don’t 
control any other way. The question is very much what kind of 
government we’re going to have in Saskatchewan for the future. 
 
I believe that democratic government is the best, and what I 
heard from the members opposite is a belief in an autocratic 
government that I find really quite frightening. They don’t seem 
to believe in government by the representatives of people in this 
legislature. They seem to believe in government by secrecy of 
cabinet and bureaucratic order — just the very things that they 
say they’re opposed to. This is what they’re bringing in with 
this legislation. 
 
I find it quite amazing that people can be so contradictory. How 
can you possibly talk and criticize other governments when you 
can do this kind of thing to the very precious government that 
we have here in Canada and in Saskatchewan? 
 
This government claims to dislike bureaucracy, but under the 
current department structures bureaucracy is clearly organized 
and the decision-makers are identified. Under this new Bill 
where decisions can be made in Executive Council without 
coming to the floor of the legislature, who knows who the 
decision-makers are? Who knows what decisions are being 
made? How do they get out to the public? How will we ever 
have an opportunity to work out together what we want in this 
democracy? 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

371 
 
 

 
This legislation obviously must be amended to make it reflect 
the kind of values that we all say we believe in. Now in 
speaking to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the time 
to reflect on what this Bill means very specifically to the 
department that I’m the critic of, the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs. I’m quoting from a letter that we’ve 
received from the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk advising 
us on the content of this legislation. And I’m referring also to 
the proposal in the new legislation that departments can be 
discontinued, disestablished, transferred, pushed around, 
rearranged, in spite of the people that are working in them, and 
in spite of the reasons for those departments being set up in the 
first place. 
 
Now the standard department Act has the following provisions. 
All these provisions are in every Act, as I understand it, and 
they seem to be fairly clear. Each department establishes the 
continuation of the department and names it. There’s the power 
in the Lieutenant Governor in Council to adopt a seal. There’s 
the establishment of deputy minister position and power to hire 
any necessary employees. There’s the power to hire technical or 
expert advisers. There’s the power for the minister to establish 
advisory committees, which can be very useful. There’s a broad 
outline of the department’s area of authority, that is the mandate 
of the department, the enumeration of the powers granted to the 
minister to carry out the department’s mandate. There’s the 
power to provide grants and financial assistance, although some 
departments don’t get enough — provision requiring an annual 
report and power to make regulations. 
 
There is no difficulty in placing all these common provisions in 
one Act and making them applicable to all departments. And if 
that is what this Bill intends to do, then by all means let us get 
on with the business of streamlining the legislation. This could 
be an improvement as it cuts down on non-essential repetition. 
 
However the provisions necessary to state the department’s 
name, mandate, and powers would have to be drafted in terms 
of authority to enact an order in council that would create a 
department, give it a name, describe its mandate, and grant to it 
some general and some specific powers to achieve that 
mandate. 
 
This provision will be critical. It will have to be vague enough 
to permit the creation of any department that might 
appropriately be created, while at the same time specific enough 
to prevent abuse, if that is a problem in this area. 
 
Now I’d like to turn specifically to the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, because there are specific 
provisions in existing department Acts which will pose some 
difficulties if they’re removed or interfered with. 
 
(2130) 
 
The Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs was 
established to take care of all that part of the administration of 
the Government of Saskatchewan that  

relates to consumer and commercial affairs and that is not by 
law assigned to any other department or agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan that shall be under the control of 
the department. And this department shall have general 
supervision of consumer and commercial affairs and shall 
examine and report to the minister from time to time on matters 
related to consumer and commercial affairs. 
 
I’m reading from Section 5(b): 
 

. . . make inquiries into and report upon consumer (and 
commercial) affairs legislation in force in Canada and 
elsewhere and, on the basis of the inquiries and reports, make 
recommendations to the minister with regard to consumer 
(and commercial) affairs legislation; 
 
5 c) investigate complaints received by the department 
respecting alleged contraventions of consumer (and 
commercial) affairs legislation or respecting practices that are 
alleged to be contrary to the interests of consumers; 

 
And 
 

5 (d) disseminate information with respect to consumer (and 
commercial) affairs matters . . . 

 
I’m being very specific about this Act because I think it’s 
important to understand, from the point of view of a specific 
topic, what the Bill means. 
 
The first section . . . there are several impacts to Bill 5. One is 
that Bill 5 allows for the transfer of powers, duties or functions 
from one minister to another through the simple amendment of 
legislation. 
 
So what will happen to Consumer and Commercial Affairs, a 
department by the way, which was set up as a result of the 
pressure and the power of consumers in Saskatchewan to try to 
make their interests represented in the government to put in 
place the regulations that can help them in the market-place? 
What will happen to the Consumer and Commercial Affairs if 
this Bill gives it the power to be transferred? Will it go to the 
Department of Small Business and Tourism? Are consumers to 
be lumped in with the interests of small business? 
 
What will happen to the power of the department to investigate 
complaints received by the department respecting alleged 
contraventions of consumer and commercial affairs? That 
investigation can be very important. Will it be transferred, for 
example, to the Department of Justice? But the Department of 
Justice is a big department, concerned already with enacting the 
laws and setting up new laws, and a consumer complaint can 
very often be dealt with without having to go to something like 
the Department of Justice. These complaints alert us to the need 
for improvements and can help us to have that kind of 
consolation with the people that the government says it values, 
so it belongs in the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs which is very much a department in touch with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

372 
 
 

What about Section 5(d): disseminate information with respect 
to consumer and commercial affairs matters. What would that 
be transferred to? The minister responsible for Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs makes a great point in her throne speech 
debate of underlining the value of education. But it could very 
well be transferred by Bill 5 into something like the Minister of 
Education’s jurisdiction and offered to students in a Grade 5 
class, and that would be the end of education for people on 
consumer issues. 
 
Another point that can happen with this legislation is the point 
that’s been well spoken to by other members on this side of the 
House, the possibility of disestablishing the departments 
without transferring the powers, duties or functions. That is a 
very important power that we are proposing to . . . by this Bill 
that the government is proposing to put into the hands of an 
Executive Council and not bring to the floor of this legislature. 
 
What would we lose if the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs was disestablished? We would lose the 
power to have legislation supervised. I’m not saying these Acts 
would be discontinued, because I realize that they would not, 
but the Department of Consumer and commercial Affairs plays 
a very important role in regulating and making sure that both 
consumers know about legislation that affects them, and that 
legislation is put in place that protects them. 
 
It’s also interesting to see the Acts that affect mainly the 
commercial affairs of Saskatchewan and have been very 
important in regulating the business community. There is, for 
example, The Auctioneers Act. That controls how auctioneers 
function in Saskatchewan. Perhaps the member from Melfort 
has some reason to get involved in having direct control over 
such an Act, but I suggest that an Act like that, or an Act like 
The Business Names Registration Act are Acts that help 
business people to know what their competition is doing, to 
understand the rules and regulations that they operate under, 
and that other people will operate under. And they have been 
put in place to help small businesses and people who are 
entrepreneurs to conduct their business and be able to be also 
fairly treated by other people who get into the same business 
with them. 
 
There is The Companies Winding Up Act, which is obviously 
important. People need to know how companies are going to be 
fixed and wound down when they go out of business. There is 
The Mortgage Brokers Act; The Motor Dealers Act which 
controls how car companies will be functioning in 
Saskatchewan — a very important Act because it’s such a 
competitive business; The Partnership Act which controls how 
people work together in partnership in business — an issue that 
can be very important to the business community because of the 
difficulties that people get into; The Real Estate Brokers Act; 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. Those are only a few that, I 
think by looking at them, affect the business community, would 
be of concern to people engaging in commercial affairs in 
Saskatchewan. And who would regulate? Who would 
co-ordinate? What department would oversee these Acts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also many Acts that come under  

the jurisdiction of the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs that are very important to consumers. And 
it has taken consumers a long time to get recognized by 
government. Many Acts in the past favoured the business 
community. It took a long time for the consumers to also get 
some Acts in that protected them. I’m thinking for example of 
The Collection Agents Act which is an Act that controls how 
people’s goods are reclaimed and taken back by businesses 
when they’re not able to make payments. And anyone who’s 
read the history of Saskatchewan, in the 1930s will realize that 
a Collection Agents Act is a very important piece of legislation 
for people — people who today are experiencing bankruptcies, 
experiencing their credit line running out, experiencing debt in 
a way that I think is probably quite horrendous for people when 
it happens to them. 
 
And the Collection Agents Act talks a lot about controlling 
collection agents — how they can work; whether they can 
harass you in the middle of the night with phone calls; whether 
they can come and take your furniture and put you out on the 
street; whether they can write letters and constantly harangue 
you, even if you’re sick, or something else has happened that 
you have no control over. There are many documented cases of 
people suffering from the unregulated activities of collection 
agents, so it’s very important that this Act be in place, and it’s 
very important that there be a department to look after it. 
 
An example of a new Act that’s come into place as a result of 
consumer pressure, I’m sure, is The Condominium Property 
Act. Condominiums are a new development; they’re a 
development that’s had some problems, and it’s important that 
an Act be put in place so that we know what we’re doing when 
we build and buy into a condominium. 
 
One of the most important Acts covered by Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs is the Consumer Products Warranties Act. 
Consumers in Saskatchewan have some warranty on every 
product they buy. This Act outlines sellers’ and manufacturers’ 
responsibilities with regard to the sale of all consumer products 
in the province. And this Act also means that a disclaimer or 
exclusion clause is invalid for consumer sale. 
 
That’s an Act that the New Democratic government brought in, 
in 1979. It’s been a very important Act for people — to know 
that they have some protection if they buy a product that does 
not live up to its expectations, they can get some compensation. 
And it’s been a very good Act on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Another one that’s been important is the cost of 
credit disclaimer Act. Now some of you may remember before 
there was legislation in the province what it meant when you 
signed a credit slip. You were responsible for the debt you that 
you incurred, and you often didn’t know exactly how that 
compounded interest was going to add up. 
 
This legislation, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, requires 
that all credit contracts contain certain information: the name 
and address of the seller; a description of the goods or services 
sufficient to identify them; and a statement of the price, credit 
charges, terms  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

373 
 
 

of payment, security taken and the true annual interest rate. The 
agreement must be signed by both parties and a complete copy 
given to the consumer, to the borrower. 
 
Now people opposite are laughing at this. They seem to think 
it’s a funny idea to have a Cost of Credit Disclosures Act, but 
for people who were trying to take a loan out and borrow for 
furniture before this Act came in place there were often very 
disastrous results. 
 
This government seems to think that if they educate people 
enough, this sort of thing won’t happen. But when you sign on 
the dotted line for a line of credit for a piece of furniture and say 
you’re going to pay in advance — pay over time for the piece of 
furniture — and if you don’t know what the interest rates are 
going to be at the end of it, a lot of people got caught with a 
large payment that they weren’t prepared for, an d often ended 
up having paid for the piece of furniture twice over, and losing 
it in the end, anyway. 
 
So it was important to have this legislation in place, and it’s 
important to know what department is going to control it. The 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs said in her 
throne speech that the activities of the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs are designed to strengthen the 
confidence of the consumer in the market-place. She says: 
 

As we all know, the alternative to a strong market-place is an 
ever-growing government bureaucracy with the resulting 
limitations of freedom on each and every one of us as 
consumers. 

 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs has not got the priorities of the department 
correct. She hasn’t got the argument correct here, because an 
alternative to a strong market-place is good regulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — It is regulations put forward by the government, 
which is the people of Saskatchewan if we have a full 
legislative House enacting the laws, and it’s very important that 
consumers have that protection. They are people in 
Saskatchewan too, and they depend on the government 
legislation because individually you can’t always protect 
yourself. You need to have a sense that regulations and laws are 
provided on behalf of all of us to make the society run 
smoothly. 
 
Some other Acts that have been very important and have been 
enacted lately is the Direct Sellers Act. That Act was very 
important because people were being pressured at the door to 
buy materials that they didn’t want. They were signing 
contracts that they didn’t want to sign, and some of it was 
intimidation, some of it was high pressure from salesmen. Many 
of the people that were most deeply affected by the 
door-to-door selling were senior citizens. 
 
When I canvassed in Saskatoon Centre, I met many older 
people still living alone in their own homes, some of them quite 
frail. And having someone come to the door and tell you that 
your roof is rotten and you’ve got to have new  

shingles and they’ll do it for a cheap price and standing in your 
doorway looking fairly big, looking fairly awesome, can be 
quite intimidating to an older person. 
 
(2145) 
 
So it was a very good idea that the Direct Sellers Act was put 
into place. It was a very good idea that there was a Department 
of Consumer and Commercial Affairs to look after this interest 
on behalf of the seniors and to put in place some laws and 
regulations that would control the direct sellers. 
 
And I notice, with approval, that the Act was amended by the 
government opposite to give people tend days to consider a 
contract that has been signed at the door, rather than the four 
days that was in the Act earlier. The more time that people have 
to learn and to understand what they have committed 
themselves, the more time that people have to talk to their 
neighbours to learn about an Act like The Direct Sellers Act, 
the more time they have to protect themselves. And that can 
only be a help to the consumers of Saskatchewan, to the people 
of Saskatchewan, because all of us are consumers at some point 
or other. All of us depend on a strong Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs. 
 
There is The Homeowners’ Protection Act, and, a very 
important Act for Saskatoon Centre, The Landlord and Tenant 
Act and The Residential Tenancies Act. That is an Act that is 
obviously one that the current government might be interested 
in changing or dealing with in some even less effective way 
than they are now. It’s been a very important Act for the tenants 
in Saskatoon Centre. It’s one that I’d like to see strengthened 
rather than weakened, and I’d like to see it remain, of course, 
under the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
where it should be properly looked after. 
 
I’ve had experience with an Act that’s under the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs called The Non-profit 
Corporations Act, a very good Act for helping groups of people 
organize themselves together into a community group and work 
on their own interests. It’s a very valuable Act because it helps 
people, representing all sorts of issues, to work together in a 
way that they can understand. They clearly know how they’re 
organized. They know how to proceed with their business, and I 
think that’s what the issue of government is all about. 
 
I notice another Act called The Pyramid Franchises Act, and we 
all remember when pyramid franchises were active in 
Saskatchewan. And again, it was mainly older people who got 
trapped by that scheme, victimized by it, and therefore 
legislation had to be put in place to protect them. It was good 
that there was someone there listening to the concerns and able 
to move on presenting legislation to help them. 
 
And the final Act that I’d like to talk about is The Theatres and 
Cinematographs Act. That’s the Act that brings in the Film and 
Video Classification Board. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you sure you’ve got the right speech 
for the right Bill? 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

374 
 
 

 
Ms. Smart: — No, I don’t think I have the right one, but I 
know I’m talking about a very important Act to people. The 
video stores that were selling pornography or renting 
pornography to children, was a very great concern. It was a new 
development; we hadn’t ever had this before in Saskatchewan. 
These stores came in and they set up very quickly, many of 
them in every community — terrific competition, lots of 
resources there — some of which are absolutely terrible. The 
community was enraged. The consumers got very upset about 
it. They wanted you to do something. The pressure was on you; 
the pressure was on the department. The consumers knew who 
to go to to put the pressure on to get legislation put in place that 
would help us deal with the situation of the video stores. 
 
If all these issues are diffused, if a department like the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, is threatened 
and can be destroyed . . . disestablished, excuse me, by an 
Executive Council, we will lose the ability to focus on one 
department whose mandate is to take care of people. 
 
Now one of the things I had mentioned already was the fact that 
this Act proposes to transfer powers from departments to 
disestablished departments. And the third thing that apparently 
it will do is to give the Executive Council the power to establish 
new departments and determine the objects and purposes of the 
department. So a scenario goes through my mind something 
like this: the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
is disestablished so there is no one to look after the consumer 
interest, there is no one to look after the interests of small 
business, commercial affairs. 
 
I wonder what the Premier’s vision is with the power to 
establish a new department? Perhaps, given the kind of activity 
that’s been going on from this government and the kind of 
questions we had in the House today, the Premier is proposing a 
department of multinational corporations in agribusiness, 
certainly a department that would have the consumer’s interest 
not at all at heart. I wonder what is objective could be? I could 
see an objective like: to sell out Saskatchewan. The purpose of 
such a department could be to see that the consumers — the 
same consumers whose interests have been dissipated by the 
lack of a department to focus on — they would get low wages, 
no benefits, no safety regulations, no protection from the 
businesses that are being brought in. 
 
Perhaps even the consumers might be faced with legislation that 
would require them to have to eat pork three times a day in 
order to be able to deal with the tremendous output from all 
these bacon plants and hog producing, hog slaughtering 
factories that are being set up in the province when there’s not 
the stock to put into them. 
 
There could be very broad powers in establishing new 
departments without a discussion here in the legislature. 
 
You can smile, and I know it can be funny, because when you 
start to have visions you can really amuse yourself quite a bit 
sometimes. But it is important, and I would like to say that we 
should be very careful in the legislation that  

we enact, and the way in which it affects the department. 
 
Now I’d like to go very specifically again to the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs and talk about some 
sections in this Act which, if they were taken away, or if the 
department was disestablished, or if these sections were taken 
away, we would have some real problems. 
 
I’d like to refer, first of all, to sections 6 and 7. These two 
sections in the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs legislation that establishes the Department refer to the 
minister’s power to order inquiry or investigation: 
 

(1) The minister, or any such person who is authorized in 
writing by the minister to do so, may investigate or inquire 
into any matter where the minister has reason to believe that 
an investigation or an inquiry is expedient of the due 
administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of the 
department. 
 
(2) The minister or person making an investigation or inquiry 
under subsection (1) may at all reasonable times demand the 
production of and inspect all or any of the books, documents, 
papers, correspondence or records of the person in respect of 
whom the investigation or inquiry is being made. 
 
(3) (And) any person who has the custody, possession or 
control of any books, documents, papers, correspondence or 
records demanded under subsection (2) shall produce them 
and permit the inspection thereof by the minister or the 
person making the investigation or inquiry. 

 
Now what happens if the minister’s powers under this section 
are increased by an Executive Council? That means the 
Executive Council can go into anyone’s business and make an 
investigation or an inquiry, demand the production and inspect 
all of their books, go into their premises and demand their 
papers, their records. It gives the Executive Council a 
tremendous amount of power over people who are affected. 
Anyone they wanted to get at, they could just issue an order in 
council if this department wasn’t there and if the minister 
doesn’t have the power. They could issue it to anyone. 
 

7. A person who does not comply with subsection (3) of 
section 6 is guilty of an offence and liable on summary 
conviction to a fine of not more than $500 and, in default of 
payment, to imprisonment for a term of not less than seven 
days or more than thirty days. 

 
Now what that means to me is that the Executive Council is 
taking unto itself the power to find someone guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine or to a prison term. That’s very 
frightening to think that the Executive Council could give 
someone that power without it having to go through a minister 
of a department and be something that could be questioned here 
on the floor of the legislature. 
 
Sections 8 and 9 give the minister the power to issue a stop 
order. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

375 
 
 

The minister may, where in his opinion such action is in the 
public interest, order a person to cease: 
 
(a) using a particular form of advertisement in any business 
or undertaking where he is of opinion that the advertisement 
was made in contravention of The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Act (which I’ve already told you about) or any regulation 
under that Act. 

 
If the minister thinks that it’s in the public interest, he will order 
a person to cease “using a particular form of contract in the sale 
of goods or services.” 
 
Now that’s a very important clause because it raises the 
question of what does this government mean when it says it’s 
going to work in the public interest? I’ve already expressed my 
concern about what’s meant by the public, because this 
government seems unclear as to whether the public is all of us 
or whether the public is a few vested interests that they want to 
represent. 
 
If the public is all of us, they would not take into their own 
hands the power to order a person to cease using a particular 
form of contract in the sales of goods or services because those 
particular contracts can be very important to the consumer. 
They can be well regulated by the Department of Consumer and 
commercial Affairs, and they can also be well messed up and 
changed by somebody behind the scenes. That’s why we’re 
talking bout the problems of having a power-grab kind of 
government. It’s very difficult to make sure that all these things 
don’t happen unless there’s a chance to talk about it here at the 
legislature. 
 
The other thing that the person may be able . . . that the 
Executive Council was taking onto itself: 
 

. . . in the public interest, (to) order a person to cease selling, 
offering for sale, advertising for sale, or distributing any 
goods or services in any business or undertaking. 

 
That’s pretty broad — that’s pretty broad. The minister has that 
power now. But you may well take that power into some back 
room, and it might well do in competition rather than stimulate 
it. You keep talking about how much you believe in 
competition. Why would you have something like this that 
could easily suggest that you can manipulate it behind the 
scenes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I also notice under section 8(2): 
 

Subject to subsections (4) and (6), an order made by the 
minister under subsection (1) expires after five days from the 
day on which the order was made. 

 
And that’s part of the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. What happens if that’s taken away? An 
order could go on for ever, an order to seize someone’s goods 
and books and interfere in their own  

personal lives in a way that is really unacceptable here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 9 also refers to the minister’s powers to issue a stop 
order, and sections 10 and 11 give the Attorney Generals power 
to initiate class actions on behalf of consumers. 
 
I know that my time is running out, but I want to underline how 
important this Act has been that establishes The Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, to establish for the 
consumers of Saskatchewan a department and a jurisdiction that 
will protect them. Under section 10 of this Act: 
 

The Attorney General, for the benefit of any persons or class 
of persons who have suffered loss, or who allege that they 
have suffered loss, by reason of a person: 

 
And in this situation it’s very often a person that has a lot more 
money and a lot more power than the power who have suffered 
the loss, or who allege that they have suffered the loss. 
 
The Attorney General: 
 

may commence and maintain any action or proceeding 
against the person that the persons could have commenced or 
maintained on their own behalf at the time the action or 
proceeding . . . 

 
Very important power from the Attorney General. And I want 
to know what will happen to that if we put in legislation that 
will allow the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs to be destroyed — or disestablished — excuse me. 
 
I would urge the members opposite to take this Bill back and to 
amend it so that we can have the law that will streamline the 
process but that will in no way destroy the institutions that we 
already have. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I have a number of comments I want to 
make. I will, in view of the hour, beg leave to adjourn the 
debate and let the Government House Leader adjourn the 
session. So I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 
 


