


















































June 19, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 19, 1986 
 
 

2151 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued ) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to spend some time, 
and my colleague from the Quill Lakes wants to follow up when I 
complete here. It deals with the guarantee and this great hoop-la 
that you’ve been talking about, a paper-mill being built. And in 
your announcement originally, you talked about how it could be 
started by August of 1986. This is when we were planning an 
April election and a June election. What are the guarantees that the 
paper-mill will be built in the coming year? Have you got a 
written guarantee as to when the construction will begin? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, what we have is a 
commitment, a firm commitment from the company, that upon 
closing, construction will being on the paper-mill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — When you say a firm commitment, what are 
you referring to, a firm commitment? Is there a written agreement 
— signed by whom in Weyerhaeuser and by whom from the 
government? — that construction will begin? And what date is on 
that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That will be a written commitment in the 
final agreement that will be closed, you know, after the passage of 
the Bill and when the final agreement is passed. But that provision 
will be in that agreement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What agreement are you talking about? I 
imagine there will be a number of agreements signed. What 
agreement are you now referring to? Does it have a name? And 
when do you think that agreement will be completed and signed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the agreement that we’ve been 
referring to, or that I would refer to, which will be called the 
development agreement, it will be signed some . . . probably 
weeks away here now. And that commitment that I just suggested 
will be a written commitment within that agreement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And the commitment will . . . We’re 
insisting what date that the construction will begin? Bargaining 
from our side, our side being the people side or the government 
side, what are we insisting that the beginning of construction — 
what date that would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the way it will be, that the process 
will commence immediately following closing of the agreement. 
And we don’t know what closing date is because closing date will 
be when all of the final negotiations are done, and at that date after 
the agreements are signed, several agreements, one of them being 
this development agreement, they’ll be under way. And that’s, as I 
say, a written commitment. And as I’ve  

said to you before in the debate prior to the supper break, upon 
closing the various agreements that will be signed between 
Weyerhaeuser Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d 
be willing to make those completed agreements available to you or 
your leader. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can indicate 
completion date. Will the agreement include a completion date, 
which is more important than the beginning date because the 
agreement terms of the debenture indicate “prior to start-up of the 
paper-mill” as opposed to beginning of construction, whereby the 
losses that the company will incur will be written off of the debt 
owing up to the point of start-up. 
 
And so, of course, the company could actually start, lay some 
concrete, and then not complete it because obviously it’s in their 
best interest not to have a start-up date because all their debt is 
being written off against the principal of their debenture up till the 
end of 1989. 
 
Have you got a date when completion of the paper-mill will be 
written into the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, there wouldn’t be a date in the 
closing that said this is the date that it must be finished. But I 
would just say to you that it’s expected that the completion will be 
about two years from the start of building. That’s how long it 
would take to build an installation of this size. 
 
And I’d just say to you that it would be, you know, it’s in their 
interest as well to build it as quickly as possible and have it into 
production as quickly as possible because they have, you know, 
166-whatever, point eight million dollars of their money in there, 
and they have no reason to leave that money lying fallow during 
that time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder: I had asked you before the supper 
break if we could go through some scenarios. 
 
If the company were to run the operation of these four major 
components — the chemical plant, and the pulp-mill, and the 
sawmill at Big River, and all of the areas they control — the 7.5 
million acres or 8 million acres that we’re talking about being part 
of the agreement — if they run it very efficiently and make a little 
bit of money, the idea is, is that any profits would go towards the 
debt after taxes; that any profit would go towards the debt owing? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. chairman, the company would get a 
20 per cent return on the $83 million of capital, and then the 
government would get the interest on the debenture. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And that’s as I understand it. And in terms 
of a loss, the total amount of the loss up until 1989 would actually 
reduce the amount owing on the debenture, regardless of how 
much it was. Or is there a limit on the amount of the loss that 
would be deducted from the debenture owing? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, the losses would be there for us say — 
or for the government, until . . . not necessarily until  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2152 
 
 

’89, but until start- up of the paper-mill, or with the back-up 
position of that December 31st of ’89. 
 
And I just should explain here what the circumstance was. In the 
negotiations we had a choice of one of two things: either pay the 
losses in this way — you know in terms of until the paper-mill and 
the integrated facility is in place — or don’t have the debenture 
take effect until start-up of the paper-mill and the integrated 
facility, which is what is important here. And in the second 
scenario, the one we did not choose — the scenario we did not 
choose, and I think that you may be suggesting that we should 
have; we did not choose to continue to pay the loses on the 
free-standing pulp-mill that’s now there in cash on an annual 
basis. Rather, the payment from the government now will be in 
paper rather than in cash on an annual basis; let’s put it that way. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, the question I had: is there 
any limit on the amount of the debt that could be incurred in a year 
that would reduce the amount owing on the debenture? 
 
(1915) 
 
Like if there’s a $10 million deficit, as I understand it, that would 
reduce the debenture to $238 million. If there was $20 million, 
that would reduce it to $228 million. Is there any limit on that? Or 
is it the bigger the deficit, the less they owe? 
 
This is getting very, very unbelievable, that the bigger the deficit 
the less they’re going to owe the people of Saskatchewan. It would 
seem to me if they’re wise business men — and I know they are 
— that they would not build the paper plant before they got their 
debt written down and insist on getting as much debt every year as 
they could because at the end of that three-year period they may 
not owe anything and, in fact, may own the whole operation 
debt-free, simply by losing enough money each year. And that 
seems incredible. 
 
I’ll tell you, it’s incredible. It’s not the way that most governments 
run. It may be the way your government runs but I’ll tell you, it’s 
not the way the government should run, or the private sector. It’s 
not the way it should run. 
 
What I’m asking you: is that accurate, that there’s no limit on the 
amount of deficit that they can write off against the amount owing 
on the debenture; and that if it were $50 million a year in losses, 
that in three years they could have their $248 million debenture 
written down to $98 million? And in fact you could extrapolate 
that they could in fact have the whole plant paid for and debt-free 
simply by losing money for three years. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I think the 
member is suggesting is that — if I see the scenario the way he’s 
suggesting that it will take place — he suggests that it would be to 
the benefit of the Weyerhaeuser Company to run the business of 
the pulp-mill and so on into the ground over a period of a couple 
of years, and then after that period of time when the integrated 
facility is up and operating, to have this run-down company. I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, it’s just not the case with a  

company with the reputation of Weyerhaeuser Canada. They have 
committed, and they will commit in the documents, to operate 
under established business practice in the Canadian forest 
industry, and that’s something . . . You know, some members may 
smile at that, but I’ll say that a company of the reputation of 
Weyerhaeuser, a major corporation, does not put that sort of 
commitment in writing or even make that commitment anywhere 
and take that lightly. So we think that we’re well protected, and we 
think that we have, as I said before supper, Mr. Chairman, we 
have an excellent company who will be an excellent corporate 
citizen here in the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You still didn’t answer the question. 
There’s no limit then on the amount of losses that they can write 
off against the debentures owing. And if it were 50 million a year 
— let me use the example of 50 million a year for three years — 
their debenture would be 150 million less, or they would only owe 
98 million. 
 
Well let’s use the scenario if they went into northern 
Saskatchewan and sold off the chemical plant which is making 
money in Saskatoon. Let’s say they sold it off; there’s nothing in 
this document that says they can’t sell off the chemical plant. Let’s 
say they sold it off for 98 million. Let’s use the scenario. They’re 
going to sell it off. There’s nothing dishonest about selling the 
chemical plant, and applied that against the debentures owed, 
because that’s what they would have to do with it, and then 
moth-balled everything else. Not run it down, just laid everyone 
off and moth-balled it to keep the wood out of the market in the 
United States so they could run their plants in the United States at 
full capacity, and lost 50 million a year for three years. They 
would be less the chemical plant, and the 98 million would go 
against the debentures. The 150 million that they would have lost, 
the loss would be applied against the debentures; they would owe 
nothing. And three years from now they would come out of there 
with a pulp-mill, with a sawmill at Big River and seven and a half 
million acres of forest. And at that point in time there would be no 
employment. And what difference would that make to them if in 
their board room in Tacoma, Washington, they decided to do that. 
Why wouldn’t they do it? 
 
And what I’m saying to you is: what guarantees do you have that 
that isn’t exactly what they’re up against and are doing? Because 
remember this is the same company that is lobbying the U.S. 
government to impose trade embargoes against Canadian lumber; 
as part of that deal the free traders from the States and the — 
protectionist, pardon me — who are wanting the borders closed, 
they belong and have membership in the group lobbying the 
government in the United States. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you still haven’t answered 
clearly whether or not there’s any limit on the amount of losses 
that they could have that would actually reduce the debentures 
owing to the people of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things. First of 
all, the member begins from the premise that the company . . .  
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2153 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Wants to make money. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, you begin from the premise that this 
company will give a commitment that I’ve said they have, that 
they will continue to operate and that they will build a paper-mill 
immediately upon the end of closing. That commitment is in the 
agreements which I told you I will give to you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ve got the agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, you haven’t got the agreement; 
you’ve got the schedule to the principles, to the principles of the 
agreement. You do not have the agreements. I told you that you 
would get the agreements at the date of closing, when everything 
is in place. And what I’m saying here to you, and giving you the 
undertaking as a member of the House, is that there will be . . . that 
they have committed to carry on, and that this will be carried on. 
 
Now the thing that . . . If the losses . . . Let’s take your scenario. 
First of all, any losses that are there must be reported in a normal 
practice, and they’re subject to audit and all of those things, okay? 
So those losses will have to be real, or they won’t be able to be 
reported; that’s number one. 
 
Now let’s take the other side. Let’s say this deal did not go ahead. 
And if those losses, in your doom and gloom scenario, which is 
very easy for you to call forward . . . So if those losses are real and 
that market is in the situation that you suggest it would be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s not what I said. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, if it is in that situation, who would be 
paying for those losses, cash up front, on an annual basis? And 
I’m just saying to you — and you and I will obviously agree to 
disagree on this — you start from the premise that the 
Weyerhaeuser Canada corporation . . . You start from the premise 
that they’re dishonest. Your members did that in the House once 
before. You start from the premise that they will not operate. And 
I start from the premise that they’re a credible corporation, and 
they have said that they will operate under the established business 
practice in the Canadian forest industry. I accept that; you don’t; 
and we’ll disagree on that for ever. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, what I’m saying about the 
people from Tacoma, Washington, and Weyerhaeuser, is that 
they’re great business men. We have the documents that show 
their income for the past number of years, and they make a lot of 
money. What I’m saying here is, they have an incentive to lose 
money because they get their debt written down, the higher the 
debt is, and at the same time protect their market in the United 
States. In fact, more than that, they could export into 
Saskatchewan because you haven’t proven to us that they’re going 
to keep the plants going. You have no proof. 
 
You say: trust us and later on we’ll give you the documents that 
will prove what we’re saying. I’m not saying that Weyerhaeuser is 
doing anything illegal. Obviously they’re not. It’s a written, signed 
agreement with you people. And this is no preliminary agreement. 
This is schedule B to principles of agreement, March  

24th, ’86, and there’s initials on each of the pages of this 
agreement. This is a signed agreement. And what I would like to 
know is that on this schedule, whose initials are on here? Tell me 
who has signed this agreement for the government, and who for 
Weyerhaeuser? You and your people were trying to lead us to 
believe that this is some sort of agreement, and we’re working 
away at it here. This is a signed agreement. Whose initials are on 
here for the government and for Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member is 
under the wrong impression, I want to make that very clear now. 
Here’s what I said at the time that I gave you the schedule, and it’s 
true. It’s the basic principles of agreement. In other words, these 
are the principles upon which the agreements will be based 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . .There’s no question. There’s no 
question, those are the basic principles upon which the agreements 
will be based, okay. And the agreements, as I’ve said the you 
before, the actual agreements, those initials, those initials have 
been signed . . . the initials on there; one is the president of Crown 
Management Board who sits beside me on behalf of he 
government, and the other initial is a representative of 
Weyerhaeuser Canada. Okay? So those initials are gone through 
there — basic principles of agreement, okay. Now the agreements, 
the actual agreements which are based . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . that’s a schedule to the agreement. Mr. Chairman, 
would you ask the member to ask his questions from his feet 
rather than his seat and we’ll get into it. I’m going to make the 
explanation. The explanation is that it’s a schedule to the basic 
principles of agreement, what I’ve given you, because that’s what 
you asked for. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The minister is attempting to answer the 
question, but he can’t do so if he’s continuously being interrupted 
by opposition members. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — But if we get back to the former question, 
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to make that clear that what they have 
is a schedule to the principles of agreement. One of the things that 
will be in the agreement, the company will be obligated not to run 
the business with the purpose of benefiting them under the 
debenture, and if they do, we can claim damages. That’s in the 
agreement; that will be in the agreement. We can claim damages. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, you say that you have an agreement 
somewhere where this is stated. I have here schedule B to the 
principles of an agreement, March 24th. How many other 
schedules are there on that date, and can you table them now? I 
would like you now to table the rest of the agreement that was 
initialled at that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what the member 
have and what I agreed to at the time that I gave you . . . I said I 
will give you the schedule which is the schedule of repayment of 
the debenture because that’s what you asked for and we were able 
to give that to you now. We were able to give you that now. Okay. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that the document that you have must 
be done. The document that you have, they must be in place, the 
basic principles, the agreed upon principles  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2154 
 
 

upon which final negotiations will take place. We must start from 
a premise of some principles, and that’s what that is. And that’s 
what that is. And it’s initialled; it’s not a contractually binding 
agreement. The contractually binding agreement — I have said to 
and given you the undertaking — that will be provided upon 
closing. That will be provided upon closing; it will not be provided 
prior to closing because it can’t be provided prior to closing. 
 
(1930) 
 
We’re dealing with a company in a confidential basis back and 
forth. What I’m telling you here is that these are the principles 
upon which we’ve agreed, because we’ve agreed to them on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan — these principles. The 
company agreed to them on their own, and we said, okay, here 
under these principles let’s carry this forward and come up with an 
agreement, if we can do it, based on these principles. We’ve said 
that; that’s ongoing. 
 
This Bill will be the enabling legislation for us to enter into those 
agreements, and that’s why the Bill is before the House today, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, we simply don’t believe 
you when you say that there isn’t other parts of this agreement that 
are signed as this one is. Obviously there are other schedules that 
were signed at the same time; you don’t start out an agreement by 
starting at schedule B. Obviously there’s more to the agreement 
that you’re hiding from the committee, that you’re not giving to 
us. 
 
Now if you want to say there’s other parts of it that I can’t give to 
you that’s signed, and I can’t give it to you or I don’t want to give 
it to you, that may be an argument that the committee would have 
to live with, not agree with, but have to live with. But don’t for 
crying out loud tell us that there’s no other parts that are signed, 
obviously there are. And I would like to know what the other 
sections are that were signed at this time and what areas they 
outline. What parts of the agreement were outlined at that time? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman, I at no time said that 
there was not . . . that the principles of agreement, that that 
schedule it is attached to did not exist. What I’m saying to you is: 
that portion, the schedule of repayments of the debenture — which 
obviously should be and is a point for you to know about, and so 
on, and that’s fair ball — and the agreements as it relates to the 
debenture repayment schedule, and so on are largely completed, 
and that’s why I was able to give it to you now. Okay? 
 
But the basic principles, of which that is just a part, are set out and 
they’re initialled as you see on that portion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you realize these were initialled when 
you passed them across the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I knew they were initialled when I passed 
them across the House; of course, I did. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So they have to be part of another 
agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have just said that they are a part of a 
larger agreement. What I’m saying to you is this, if the member 
from Regina North West would listen. What I’m saying to you is: 
the negotiations on many of the principles and in the final 
documents, the negotiations are still ongoing, and I will not and 
cannot — cannot in the middle of those negotiations — give you 
the rest of the documents.  
 
I have said in second reading debate that I would give you  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2155 
 
 

the documents that are possible for me to give during this time of 
negotiation. I have done that; I have given you the interest rate; I 
have given you what I can give you before the negotiations are 
complete. And I have given you the undertaking, as well, that 
upon closing of this agreement — of the series of agreements — 
upon closing I will provide a copy of the final documents to the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, what we have here is 
one of the schedules to a signed agreement. This is a schedule 
which would be attached to a signed agreement. Now, you’ve got 
an agreement. There is a signed agreement . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. There is a serious 
discussion taking place in the House this evening, and it cannot go 
forward if it is constantly being interrupted by certain members. 
And I ask them once more to please allow the debate to go 
forward with no interruptions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, this is a signed schedule B to 
principles of a certain agreement. Now you wouldn’t have a 
signed schedule to an agreement without having a signed 
agreement. Obviously there’s a signed agreement. The agreement 
for this sale is signed. You can look at it in two ways. You’re 
asking us to pass the Bill here, and on the one hand saying — 
which I don’t believe — that there’s no signed agreement, that 
we’re still negotiating. 
 
I don’t think you’re dumb enough to come here and ask for this 
many millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money if you have no 
agreement. You’re really expecting the people of the province to 
sign over the money when there’s no agreement? I don’t believe 
that part of it. 
 
I think what there is is a signed agreement, as this document 
indicates that there is a signed agreement, and we’re now getting a 
Bill passed to allow for the money to be spent. I think you’re not 
telling the committee what the agreement is because it’s too 
embarrassing. And if you give us this part, as embarrassing and 
damaging as this is to the agreement, then I can only hate to think 
of what the other part of the agreement is — like when I asked 
you, for example, what was the term of your agreement? And if 
the minister would think back to his answer, he said 20 years. 
Then he sends me a document that says the debenture, and I read 
from 1(a), the debenture will be a principal amount of 248 million 
Canadian, to be for a term of 30 years from the date of issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re as accurate in quoting what might be in the 
agreement as you were about this one before you gave me the 
document, excuse the committee and the public for being 
suspicious of this government, because obviously you weren’t 
accurate. You had this document in front of you, and before you 
handed it over to us you said 20 years, and in the document it said 
30. 
 
I use that only by way of making a point, that we believe there’s a 
signed agreement. Obviously there is, or we wouldn’t be here 
dealing with a Bill that would spend the kind of money that you’re 
calling for. And what I’m wondering is if you’d be good enough, 
on behalf of the  

people you represent, to share the agreement with the opposition 
and the committee and the people of the province. Because in 
order for us to vote on this Bill, obviously we should know what 
the agreement is. Because if the agreement is good, and obviously 
there are certain parts of it that we don’t agree with already, but if 
it gets worse than this, obviously the public won’t want us to 
support it. 
 
And I daresay that the back-benchers on the Conservative side of 
the Assembly haven’t had an opportunity to review this document 
because I can’t believe that many of them would be in favour of it. 
I can’t believe that many of the back-benchers would be in favour 
of this if they knew what was in it. 
 
And I say what we should have here is a sharing of the agreement. 
How else can we possibly spend that kind of money you’re asking 
for in Bill 56 if we can’t see the agreement. Because obviously 
many members, whether they’re government or opposition, will 
want to know what the agreement is before we give consent or 
vote against the Bill. 
 
And I just ask you again: is it possible for you to get that 
agreement so we can have a look at it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman. I will tell the member 
as I have told him before, there is no signed agreements. The 
agreements are not finalized. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Of course they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. And just one more explanation for the 
member. What he has in front of him . . . Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please! The minister is 
attempting to answer the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s misleading the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina 
North West says I’m misleading the House. I’ll tell you that I’m 
not misleading the House. I resent that remark by that member. 
But I’ll just get back to it now for a moment. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what the members have before them, and what I 
sent over to the member from Shaunavon and a copy to the House 
Leader of the WCC Party, is an initial agreement of principles, of 
basic principles upon which a final agreement will be based. I’ve 
give you that portion which I could give, that portion of the 
agreements which are largely completed now. And that has to do 
with the schedule and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Once more I must interrupt 
proceedings to warn hon. members to allow the minister to answer 
the question. He cannot answer the question if he is consistently 
being interrupted. So please allow him to answer the question; 
then you can ask more questions if that’s what you want. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
agreement, or the basic principles which the members  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2156 
 
 

have before them — which I must say, Mr. Chairman, I believe 
those being very forthright and still believe as being very 
forthright in giving to them — which is the schedule of repayment 
of the debenture. Now that obviously was to be a point of some 
contention, and I believe that. And I said to them, I will provide 
this because those parts of the final agreements have been largely 
complete, and you should have access to this, and here it is. 
 
I’ve also said, which is unprecedented in the House, I have said 
that at the closing of this agreement, final agreement . . . at the 
closing of the agreement, which is the only time I can give to you 
when you’re into negotiations on such an issue, a business issue 
— upon closing, I will give those agreements to the member. And 
I have said that I would do that; now that’s unprecedented here. 
And I would invite them to tell me what precedents they have for 
ever giving agreements before negotiations are complete. They did 
not do it. No one has done it, because it’s impossible to do in 
terms of the business practices that must go on between the 
government and the company with which we’re dealing — in this 
case, Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
So I have said to you . . . And what you have there is initialled, 
basic principles, a list of the basic principles of agreement. They 
are initialled by a member — the chairman of the Crown 
Management Board on behalf of the government, and a 
representative of Weyerhaeuser Canada. And by initialling that, 
those basic principles, that initial document then said, go forward 
and come to the final agreements; and we said we would do that 
— company and government agreed. And that’s under way now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to 
go into some details in respect to this. But I wish that you 
wouldn’t try to deceive the House, because what you have passed 
over to us here is schedule B, and you ask us to make decisions in 
respect to schedule B. And you say, that’s all that exists. Well 
then, what we’re asking is for other documents? We’re asking you 
is, in fact, the agreement itself completed, the agreement itself, 
because this is a schedule to an agreement? 
 
Let me just demonstrate the deceit that you are trying to pull on 
the legislature here this evening. You say that this is all that you 
can provide us. Well I’m going to tell you that if you look at this 
here schedule B, which is a part of an agreement, you can’t even 
interpret schedule B because it refers to schedule C. All right, 
there you go. You have it. You have schedule C. You have 
schedule A. You have the agreement. Because you wouldn’t be 
coming forward and trying to finalize with the Bill unless you 
knew what the agreement was. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you’re going to be here for some length of time. 
This is one of the largest transactions in the history of this 
province, and I’ll tell you they have a right, and we have a duty, to 
get the information and the best possible information that you can 
provide. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, in the previous transactions in this 
House at the time that legislation was being passed, the documents 
were tabled with the  

legislation. And the records will show this; the journals of the 
Legislature of the Assembly, Session 1966, when Mr. Ross 
Thatcher, the late Ross Thatcher was the premier of 
Saskatchewan. The Primrose Forest Products Limited Agreement 
entered into since February 19,1965; the Prince Albert Pulp Mill 
Agreements. And it goes on: 
 

Prince Albert pulp-mill copies of amendments to several 
amendments relative to; Prince Albert pulp-mill copies of 
several loan agreements relative to. 

 
When the Prince Albert pulp-mill agreement and the legislation 
was presented to this House previously by the late premier, Ross 
Thatcher, I’ll tell you the agreements were tabled at that time. 
 
(1945) 
 
And here you’re saying and you’re telling the people of 
Saskatchewan that you’re very proud of this agreement; it’s really 
good for the people of Saskatchewan. Well I’ll tell you, if it’s 
good for the people of Saskatchewan, be proud and table it in the 
legislature, and this debate will end. 
 
All we are interested in, Mr. Minister, is to determine that in fact 
in the agreement it is good for the people of Saskatchewan. And if 
you table the agreements . . . But I’ll tell you, by tabling what you 
have here, this is the biggest give-away; this is the terms only for 
Weyerhaeuser. I’ll tell you, by manipulation of paper and issuing 
paper they can not pay one single dollar. They don’t have to pay 
one single dollar because all they can do is issue preferred shares. 
And the preferred shares have no voting rights; they’re paper. 
After a period of time, all they have to do is issue preferred shares 
in lieu of what they owe. Not a single cent has to be paid. 
 
Do you realize that it says 8.5 per cent on interest; and there’s no 
provision if there’s no payment of the interest or principal, that 
there’s interest on interest and arrears. Oh no, that doesn’t happen. 
Zero per cent interest rate. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, we had an opportunity to quickly look through 
this document, Mr. Minister, and I’ll tell you Weyerhaeuser does 
not have to, and can manipulate within the terms of this schedule. 
Perfectly legal — they do not have to pay one single cent towards 
the $248 million. That’s exactly what is in this agreement. And I’ll 
tell you, there is no guarantee in this here as to when the start-up is 
for the commencement of the paper-mill; there’s no guarantee of 
that. There’s no guarantee that — in fact there’s the right to sell off 
certain assets; that’s provided for in here. There is no one . . . 
 
When you look at the agreement, you ask yourself, what is a 
purchased asset? And you have to ask yourself, is the forest 
licence a part of the purchase asset? Or can all of these other assets 
be disposed of, and a separate agreement exists with 
Weyerhaeuser that they have in fact the forest licence? We don’t 
know that. That could be a separate part for entering into this 
particular agreement, that they have the forest licence separate and 
apart from this agreement here. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2157 
 
 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, we want to get on with the people’s 
business, I’ll tell you that. But you haven’t come clean, Mr. 
Minister. You have the main agreement — there is no doubt about 
it — because this is schedule B to it, and it’s initialled, and 
schedule C is referred to in here. And you can’t even ask us to 
interpret schedule B unless we have schedule C, which you refer 
to. 
 
So simply I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you in fact let us get on 
with the examination of it? If it is a good deal, as you have 
indicated — if it is — then I ask you to table the main agreement, 
and I ask you to table all of the schedules to the agreement and any 
other financial arrangements that you may have supplementing 
this major agreement. 
 
I ask you, can you do that, because there’s no way that we’re able 
to, on the basis of what you have here. Because as I said, and I 
don’t think you can deny it, and I’d like you to ask your officials: 
is it indeed possible for Weyerhaeuser not to pay a single cent 
under this agreement by issuing paper? That’s exactly what could 
happen; there’s no doubt about it. 
 
And I ask you, are you prepared, Mr. Minister, to let us get on 
with the examination of it? If you will table those documents, 
what we will do is examine them. If they are, in fact, in order and 
we find nothing that would jeopardize the investment of the 
people of this province, then I think we’re prepared to examine 
those and to proceed with due haste. 
 
But I’ll tell you, on the basis of this document — and we had a 
chance to look at it only briefly during the supper hours — but I’ll 
tell you, not one single cent needs to be paid because they can 
issue preferred shares in lieu of payments. And so I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, will you in fact assist us here in getting on with the 
examination of this by (1) providing the main agreement; (2) 
providing the additional schedules to the agreement other than just 
schedule B? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I said before 
and what the members refuse to want to understand . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, they refuse to want to understand that this is 
not the agreement that they have. I have said to them that the final 
agreements are not in place; the final agreements are not in place. 
And all of those final agreements which I have undertaken to 
provide to you at the time of closing, which I would say will be in 
weeks rather than months from now, all of those final agreements 
which are being worked on are based on this agreement of 
principles to which this schedule B that I provided you is a part. 
I’ve said that. 
 
This is not a negotiating forum for a half a billion dollar deal, I can 
tell you that. It’s not the negotiating forum; it can’t be; it’s not 
possible . . .(inaudible interjection). . .Oh, I understand that; and 
we understand, and we’ll stand before the public, at any time when 
this is totally finished. 
 
But what I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to make very, 
very clear, the schedule that they have, schedule B to the basic 
principles, which is an initial agreement of principles, and those 
agreements of principles . . . I mean, 

 if the members opposite think that this schedule and the kinds of 
things that are in schedule B are what kind of documentation that 
is in place at the final stages of a half a billion dollar deal, it’s not 
the case. There is much more to be done. 
 
The reason I was able to provide — and as I said in second 
reading debate when we debated the principle of the Bill — was 
that we would provide to you the documents that we could provide 
at this stage — in other words, the documents which are provided 
and do not jeopardize the negotiations which are still ongoing. 
Those negotiations, however, as it relates to this right here — the 
repayment schedule of the $248 million debenture — those 
negotiations for that portion are largely complete and we can 
provide that. And I did provide that. So I was forthright in doing 
that with the members. 
 
I once again say, as I did before, Mr. Chairman, this is the point, 
the key point here that members do not wish or want to 
understand; they don’t want to understand that. Because they do 
understand. And I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, they do 
understand it, but they don’t want to, and they’re throwing a red 
herring in. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that I cannot provide the documents 
until closing. What the NDP are saying is this: if they were in the 
government, doing a deal, they would sign the deal and then they 
would come to the legislation for the enabling legislation. What 
I’m saying to you is what we did — we’re coming to the 
legislature for the enabling legislation to enter into agreements 
with Weyerhaeuser Canada for the purchase of the pulp-mill, the 
completion of the building of a paper-mill for the integrated 
facility. 
 
So we’re coming to the House for enabling legislation, which is 
what this Bill is. And what the NDP is saying is that they would 
sign the agreements, to heck with the legislature, and then come 
forward to get enabling legislation after it’s been signed. 
 
What I’m saying to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, is we come here, we get our enabling legislation, 
and we deal with the enabling legislation, and then we go to sign 
the agreements which the legislation enables us to sign. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this is really the 
biggest piece of nonsense that you’re giving to us that we’re heard 
in this legislature for a long time. I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, what 
you’re doing is a cover-up. Because you cannot come into this 
legislature and . . . And don’t grin across there — the helpers. 
Because this is a forum of legislators; and I’ll tell you it’s no 
game, protecting the people’s rights. I’ll tell you that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Could we please have some order in this Assembly? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, in section 5 of 
the schedule B, I ask you to turn to subsection k under section 5, 
and I ask you, what is the significance of subsection k of section 5, 
which says, “shall not charge or grant security interest in the fixed 
assets of the  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2158 
 
 

combined assets, except in accordance with schedule C”? 
 
Are you negotiating schedule C, or do you have schedule C? 
Because I’ll tell you, this agreement has no meaning unless you 
have schedule C. So turn around and ask your lawyer; turn around 
and ask your officials. Ask them whether you have schedule C. 
Would you advise me, Mr. Minister, whether you have schedule 
C? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This is the point I made a minute ago, Mr. 
Chairman. The members don’t want to understand the point that I 
made. What I have said to them is that we have this basic group of 
principles which is initialled, and they have various schedules 
related to them — various schedules. And what I have said is, 
schedule B, which relates . . .schedule B, which is the one that I 
provided to them, one portion . . . I have not said that the basic 
principles to agreement do not exist. I haven’t said that. I say they 
exist. Basic principles — I say that those are principles and that 
initial agreement of principles exists, and there are several 
schedules to that, B being one of them. 
 
B is the one in which the basic principles in schedule B are largely 
completed in negotiation in the final documents, and I was able to 
provide that, as I said I would. I did, and now they make a big 
point of, why are the others . . . I have already said I cannot 
provide all of the other principles upon which negotiation are still 
continuing, because I did not say to the member who yells — the 
bull moose from Quill Lakes who yells — I did not say to him that 
it does not exist. I said to him I’m unable to provide it because the 
negotiations are still under way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I note, not only is this a 
schedule to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I must 
direct my comments at this time at the member for Regina North 
West, who is continuously interrupting the debate. I would ask 
him to please refrain his enthusiasm, and allow the man to ask his 
question. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. There is 
undue disorder in the House tonight, and it’s coming from 
everywhere; and it’s coming from the member from Regina North 
West, who continually interrupts. And I’m asking you once more 
to allow this debate to go forward. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m waiting till the minister’s done his 
chit-chat. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, not only is this 
not a draft agreement, this is patently a part of an executed 
agreement. Mr. Minister, the document is initialled. 
 
(2000) 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to turn your attention to the bottom of the 
agreement. The initials of the signatories are on the bottom of this 
agreement. “G.W.”, which obviously stands for George 
Weyerhaeuser . . . What does the G.W. . . . That’s his? All right. 
Okay. Then your deputy has initialled it. If that is your deputy’s 
initials, that’s fine. Your deputy then initialled it. So your deputy 
has signed this agreement on behalf of the government. 
 

Mr. Minister, patently what we have here is an executed 
agreement. It’s been executed by the individual sitting to your 
right. So Mr. Minister, don’t tell us this is a few notes written on 
the back of an envelope. This, Mr. Minister, is a part of an 
executed agreement, clearly. You just finished telling us that your 
deputy has executed it. I suppose it will be next Christmas before 
we find out whose initials are also in the corner. But if you want to 
tell us who else initialled it, that might be interesting, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me just see if I understand your proposition. 
You’re going to give us part of an executed agreement. It proves 
to be a bomb. And then you tell us, well, this is really nothing at 
all; it was never part of an agreement, and we’re not going to give 
you the rest. Are you serious that you’re going to give us this and 
nothing else, and you expect this to pass within the lifetime of 
anyone sitting in this Chamber? Mr. Minister, nobody gets away 
with that. Nobody gets away with that. I doubt if such behaviour 
would be tolerated in a banana republic or in an Iron Curtain 
country, much less this country, which has a history of some years 
of democracy. Mr. Minister, will you tell me whose the other 
initials are in the corner? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well Mr. Chairman, just an example of 
. . . You know, I’ve explained what this is. I said before, and I will 
say to the member, that the president of Crown Management 
Board, Garnet Wells . . . G.W. stands for Garnet Wells on the 
initial. And the other one is Bill Gaynor, who I believe is the 
vice-president of Weyerhaeuser Canada. And those two people 
have signed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So it’s an executed document. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It is not an executed document. What it is 
. . . It is not a final agreement. I have made this point so many 
times, Mr. Chairman; so many times I’ve made the point to the 
members. It is not the final agreement. What it is, is . . . And I 
think the members should understand that when you’re dealing 
with a transaction of this size, that you must have principles. You 
must have the basic principles upon which you can pursue the 
final stages of agreement. And there must be those basic principles 
in place. And if they cannot be put in place, it isn’t beneficial for 
either side to continue. That’s the point. 
 
In this case the two parties, one being the government, the other 
being Weyerhaeuser Canada, were able to come to a set of 
principles which they said, yes, we can agree to these basic 
principles. And so each page on the schedule that the members 
have has the initials of the representative of the government and 
the representative of Weyerhaeuser Canada to say, here’s our 
initials to say let’s pursue this. And as each page flipped, they said 
let’s pursue this. And as they were able to come to the end of the 
various principles that had to be set out in this basic document, 
they said, now let’s proceed. 
 
We have the agreement of principle. Let’s proceed with the 
negotiations and put our negotiators to work into the final stages. 
That is what is ongoing now, Mr. Chairman. That’s what’s 
ongoing now, hon. member. The hon.  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2159 
 
 

members on the opposite side, Mr. Chairman, do not want to 
believe this. They will not believe it. But I will just have to say to 
them that look, we’ll have to agree to disagree. What I have said, 
and I give you this undertaking, the final agreements are not 
signed, Mr. Chairman. I’ll tell you and the committee and the 
members of this House that the final agreements are not signed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, on the assumption that I will 
be allowed to complete my line of questioning when the member 
from The Battlefords is finished, I would yield the floor to the 
member for The Battlefords to introduce some students. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin:— Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
appreciate the co-operation from the members of the opposition. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly tonight 52 students 
from McKitrick School in North Battleford. They’re grade 5 and 6 
students. They’ve spent the day in Regina. They’ve toured the 
national history gallery and the RCMP barracks and eaten a bunch 
of hamburgers. And we’ve had a good visit in room 218 of the 
Assembly. 
 
They’re accompanied by Heather Frank, Amy Williams, Cliff 
Johnston, and bus driver Marsil Van Hooren. And I’d appreciate it 
if all the members of the Assembly would join me in welcoming 
these students from The Battlefords. As you’re well aware, it’s a 
long way for them to come, and we don’t get a whole lot of groups 
here from that far away. And I appreciate your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Before continuing, I join my colleague in 
welcoming the students here from The Battlefords. They’re going 
home this evening. They have a long way to go, and I hope the 
visit is worthwhile. I hope it’s worth the trip and worth the late 
night. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 (continued) 
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, we now have it that we have an 
executed agreement. I do not intend to waste my time or yours 
pretending this is anything else. The people the like of Bill Gaynor 
do not affix their signatures to draft documents. When the 
vice-president of a company signs a document, it’s not a draft 
document. It’s an agreement which he intends to bind his 
company to. 
 
There may well be a secondary agreement which find tunes some 
of the details, but this represents an agreement as to basic 
principles. So we have that established. I don’t intend to spend a 
lot more time on the subject. This is a part of an executed 
agreement. Well it’s clearly a part of an executed agreement. No 
one’s denied that. This includes the repayment terms. It’s the most 
important part of the document, but it’s only part of it. 
 

This, Mr. Minister, is a document of such a nature that the English 
language is almost inadequate to describe it. Mr. Minister, as my 
colleague from Quill Lakes said, with a minimum of difficulty the 
company can avoid payment of anything at all. There is no 
repayment schedule for the principal. It is payable out of earnings. 
Earnings are defined as being the excess left over after a 20 per 
cent return on a grossed up basis on the aggregate of the 
investment. 
 
Assuming the company pays a 50 per cent income tax return — 
and I’m guessing at that, and if that’s not the return please assist 
me, but assuming it’s a 50 per cent income tax rate — I calculate 
that unless the company had a return on investment of in excess of 
13 to 14 per cent, they wouldn’t have any earnings, and therefore 
they wouldn’t owe anything on this agreement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the average in that industry is about 8 
per cent or 9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And 13 per cent would be a high . . . I don’t 
know that the . . . The member from Regina North East says that 8 
per cent’s an average. I don’t know that. I do know that it is . . . 
that the primary industries do not enjoy a 13 per cent rate of 
return. 
 
Mr. Minister, having said that, however, it isn’t the earnings that 
are available for the repayment, it’s the cash flow defined as the 
earnings less the deemed current income taxes and with . . . after 
adjustments made for sale of capital assets and depreciation. From 
that you deduct $8 million, which is said to be a maintenance 
capital, and from that you deduct other amounts too numerous to 
mention, which carry on for three or four pages. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Then they might make a payment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It would be extremely unlikely. It would have 
to be a banner year in the forest industry before there would be 
anything payable under this agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, the terms of this agreement, if they don’t embarrass 
you this evening, they’re going to. I can tell you, Mr. Minister, you 
can’t give away — which is what you’ve done — you cannot give 
away a quarter of a billion dollars in assets and laugh that one off. 
You may laugh this evening, but you’re not going to be laughing 
when the public finally get a crack at you. And the sand is running 
out of the clock for you people, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say, oh, but it’s not that bad. I know this looks 
dreadful, and it does look dreadful, but there are other portions of 
the agreement which ameliorate it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if for something else . . . First of all, I assume 
that anything that is in the main agreement, or in schedule A — 
which we have not a hint of, or in schedule C which we do have a 
hint of — I assume it is not inconsistent with this schedule. It may 
add additional terms and conditions, but it doesn’t contradict the 
plain terms of this agreement which, as I say, according to my 
calculation require a 12, 13 per cent rate of return on assets before 
anything’s payable. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2160 
 
 

Mr. Minister, as further proof that it is well within the 
contemplation of the parties that this may never be paid back, 
clause 3 on page 5 goes on to say that if in the 17th year — which 
is getting very close to the 20th year, by which you expect it 
repaid — if by the 17th year there hasn’t been $60 million on 
interest and principal . . . And of course by the 17th year the 
interest alone ought to have exceeded that. I’m doing this 
calculation quickly in my head, but the interest alone ought to 
have exceeded $60 million after 17 years. 
 
Mr. Minister, it goes on to say that if you haven’t paid 60 million, 
then you adjust the formula for determining cash flow so that the 
formula’s enriched a bit. You start out with earnings, which are 
only earnings in excess of that formula, but that’s not what you 
get. What you get is cash flow, which suffers further reductions. 
And if by the time you make it through those hoops, if you haven’t 
got 60 million after 17 years, then this formula clicks in and 
suggests what’s going to happen. And on the 30th year its all 
washed away; thereafter virtually nothing’s payable. Thereafter 
they issue preferred dividends. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would have your staff check through 
The Financial Post 500, or any of the other summaries that are 
provided of corporations. Give us a few examples of other 
companies which have issued dividends, or preferred shares 
rather, on the following terms. I’ve never seen . . . I’ve had some 
exposure to the securities industry. I’ve never seen this before. 
 
These are preferred shares which have no right to dividends unless 
declared by the directors; no preference as to dividends; and 
dividends may be declared on other classes of shares whether or 
not dividends are declared on these preferred shares. The 
dividends are non-cumulative and, Mr. Minister, they’re 
redeemable on a mandatory basis according to a formula in section 
E — on an optional basis, I should say — and after 10 years they 
can then simply be converted into further preferred shares, as it 
appears. 
 
Mr. Minister, simplified somewhat, unless the forest industry 
receives profits on a rate of return which I would doubt that they 
have had since pre-World War 1, since the frontier days of the 
logging industry; unless they enjoy some enormous profits; unless 
Weyerhaeuser chooses to leave the profits in this company, a child 
could figure out a way to have these profits appear somewhere 
other than in Saskatchewan. And unless — and I want you to 
picture this . . . 
 
This is in Tacoma, Washington, the board of directors sitting 
around the table deciding at the end of the year what shares, what 
dividends ought to be declared. There’s one class of shares for 
which there’s only one beneficiary. It’s a foreign government, and 
it’s going to be a socialist government after October, so you got to 
throw that into the mix. And you’ve got to ask yourself, Mr. 
Minister, what do you think those directors do? How generous do 
you think the directors will be with respect to preferred shares? 
 
I’d suggest that they’re not going to declare dividends on those 
preferred shares. No other shareholder but the  

Government of Saskatchewan is going to hold them apparently. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that there’s not likely to be enough profits 
to pay it. If there are, it is easily avoided. And if they don’t pay, 
and that’s contemplated by the agreement, then, Mr. Minister, 
there’s arrangements made for the conversion of the — whatever 
it may be; it’s scarcely a loan — conversion of the give-away into 
preferred shares which are even more useless because they depend 
upon the discretion of the directors to declare dividends and are 
not redeemable unless the directors decide to redeem them. That is 
the arrangement which you are putting forward. 
 
(2015) 
 
But you say, but oh there’s something else which says that the deal 
isn’t as bad as it appears. I would be surprised if your main 
agreement contradicts the schedule; if you do, you need some new 
draftsmen for your agreement. But if there is another portion of the 
agreement which does indeed ease the burden on the taxpayer 
somewhat, you have to give it to us. You can’t simply give us this 
and when we are shocked, as we are, say, ah, but don’t worry; 
don’t worry; trust us. There’s another portion of the agreement 
you haven’t seen. We ask you, well, what does it say? What are 
their terms? Oh, we can’t tell you, can’t tell you. Why? Well 
because that’s still to be negotiated, notwithstanding the fact that 
it’s clearly an executed contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know who you think you’re playing games 
with. I don’t, Mr. Minister, know what you expect us to believe, 
but if you expect us to believe that this is not an executed 
agreement; and if you expect us to believe that this industry is 
going to enjoy the kinds of profits which will be needed to make 
this repayable; and if you expect us to believe in the event that it 
isn’t repaid and it’s converted into preferred shares, the 
redemption of which, and the dividends on which, are in the sold 
discretion of the directors, and only the Government of 
Saskatchewan is ever going to get it — if you expect us to believe 
it on that circumstance — the good folks down in Tacoma, 
Washington are going to make what amounts to a gift to the 
people of Saskatchewan, then I say, Mr. Minister, you are dealing 
with the wrong opposition. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, if you expect this opposition to believe such a 
load — out of deference to the Legislative Chamber, I won’t 
describe it for what it really is — Mr. Minister, if you expect us to 
believe that, then you really are dealing with the wrong people. 
 
I am genuinely surprised to know that the members of your caucus 
believe that. I do not believe, Mr. Minister, that . . . There are 
some people in that caucus who have a background in business. 
One of the things you learn in business is to read a financial 
statement. If you can’t walk through a financial statement, Mr. 
Minister, you aren’t going to be in business long. So I suspect, Mr. 
Minister, there are at least some members of your caucus that can 
read a financial statement. I cannot understand how the members 
of your caucus could have approved of such an arrangement. I 
know why the minister and the cabinet approved of this sort of an 
arrangement, because you are  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2161 
 
 

desperate about your pay cheque. Unless you put together a rich 
agreement, unless you can put together a rich agreement — unless 
you can put together something in the dying days of this 
government, you don’t expect to be re-elected. 
 
And it’s obvious as well that you never expected to have to bring 
this Bill before the legislature until after the election. And then 
after the election, who cares if the Bill takes a month getting 
through the Assembly? 
 
Mr. Minister, your own cabinet may have agreed to it out of 
desperation. Mr. Minister, your caucus may have agreed to it out 
of a misplaced sense of trust. I think when they hit the streets on 
Friday night and get home for the weekend, and they have to 
answer some of these questions, I think they’re going to be a little 
less trusting the next time you say to them: trust me. Well I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, if you expect us to believe this, then you have 
finally carried it one step too far. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell us what the terms of the balance of the 
agreement are which you say ameliorate the give-away provisions 
of this schedule? What is it in the rest of the agreement which 
makes this a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan? Surely if 
there’s something else somewhere which strengthens your case, 
you ought to give us that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite, when he talks about the clauses in the schedule which I 
provided, which he insists on calling a final agreement, which I 
have indicated and explained very carefully — the record will 
show that — just what it is that he has in hand. Okay? 
 
The member talks about the 17-year provisions and the 30-year 
provisions. And if you take the most dire scenario in the forest 
industry — the most dire scenario in the forest industry — which 
is very easy for members of the NDP opposition to conjure up at 
any time . . . Because they’re down into the dire doom and gloom 
all the time, regardless of what the industry they’re talking about, 
or what sector of the economy, or what portion of the province. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, let’s just go back as we did prior to the supper 
hour and think about: where did he just say the NDP is on this? 
What the NDP is saying is that they’re against the construction of 
a paper-mill in Saskatchewan. And I will stand by this anywhere, 
and so will the people of Prince Albert, and Prince Albert people 
in the industry will know that a stand-alone pulp-mill will not 
make it. And what this paper-mill does is gives viability to an 
already existing industry in the province, and that’s the 
maintenance of jobs and all of the various things that go with that. 
 
But the NDP will say, no, we’re against the paper-mill. And by 
saying they’re against the paper-mill, they’re saying, close the 
pulp-mill. They’re saying, the pulp-mill’s in serious trouble and 
we don’t care about that; down it goes and down goes the jobs that 
go with it. That’s what they’re saying. That’s exactly what they’re 
saying, Mr. Chairman. 
 

And let’s take his dire straits scenario one step further. Let’s take 
his dire scenario one step further, and he talks about at the point at 
the end of 30 years — of the term of the debenture, the end of 30 
years. He takes that and talks about how the industry would lose 
all this money over all that period of time. 
 
Let me ask the member for Regina Centre, or any other NDP 
member, or anybody else who can follow the ridiculous logic of 
those folks: where would the stand-alone pulp-mill, the Prince 
Albert pulp-mill be, given the market scenario that he just 
outlined? Where would a stand alone pulp-mill be? And where 
would the jobs be? And where would the meat and potatoes on the 
table be for people who are dependent on the forest industry? 
Where would they be with a stand-alone pulp-mill, given the 
scenario that he just outlined? Where would they be? Where 
would they be? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we are committed to the integration of that 
forest industry, from the sawmill operation to a pulp operation to a 
paper operation; and as an added bonus, and which is a very 
important added bonus, the use of aspen poplar, a resource in this 
province that has not been used in a commercial way, in a large 
way before. 
 
And what we’re saying to you, Mr. Chairman, and to members of 
the House — and I’m very surprised at the NDP, I’m very 
surprised at them. Initially I thought they were against this; I 
hoped they were against this project. I was hoping very, very 
much from a politically selfish point of view that the NDP would 
be down on this and against the paper-mill project in Prince Albert 
and against the people across the forested belt of this province. I 
didn’t think for sure that they’d be against it, but I was hoping they 
would be. And then the Leader of the Opposition stood up and 
said he agrees with the principles, agrees with the way in which 
it’s going on; and he said he and his colleagues agree with the 
principles. And then I thought, from a politically selfish point of 
view, it’s too bad that they finally came to their senses. 
 
But now, Mr. Chairman, tonight we see the real NDP. They’re 
against the paper-mill, Mr. Chairman. They’re against it, and the 
people of Prince Albert will know they’re against it, and the 
people across the forested belt of Saskatchewan will know they’re 
against it. And the spokesman for the NDP against the paper-mill 
is the member from Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to ignore that 
because I think the public are going to ignore all that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I calculated it would have to be a return on assets, a 
return on investment of about 11 to 13 per cent before the interest 
is payable. If that’s not accurate, Mr. Minister, what are your 
figures and would you explain your figures? I explained mine. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, if I understood the 
member’s question correctly, he’s asking me if 11 to 13 per cent 
return on assets would be a . . . What I’m saying is that I believe 
that that’s not an unreasonable amount — 11 to 13 per cent — if 
your number is correct and scenario  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2162 
 
 

is correct. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — What you’re saying, Mr. Minister, then, is that 
payment on behalf of Weyerhaeuser to the Saskatchewan 
government doesn’t kick in until the return on assets exceeds 13 or 
14 per cent. If you examine . . . And I can’t recall the exact date, 
but Fortune magazine, I think, outlines every year based on output 
of assets exactly what return in the primary industries is, and I 
would doubt whether in the forest industry one out of the last 10 
years has provided an output in excess of 12 to 13 or 14 per cent. 
If that’s the case, how do you ever expect this particular project to 
be paid for? 
 
The Saskatchewan government has all the risk in this whole 
venture, as has been outlined many times tonight. The only 
Conservative government that I can think of that has been 
involved in the forest industry with private investment happened 
in the mid-60s in Manitoba with Duff Roblin and the Consolidated 
Forest Industries at The Pas — Dr. Adam Kasser. This agreement 
basically, this part of this agreement, I think, has the makings of 
another CFI. And what happened to CFI? Historically where are 
we at today here in this House? It’s because the opposition now, 
when they were government, overspent in the forest industry in the 
North. I believe they spent $180 million to Parsons and 
Whittemore of New York to acquire the assets that are presently 
being sold. 
 
Now to recover that investment . . . And I heard one of the cabinet 
ministers this evening comment that the appraisals that were made 
on the assets that were sold would embarrass the former 
government, simply because the expenditure of 180 million just 
does not support the current value of these assets. But I suggest it 
doesn’t matter what the appraisal on these assets is because there 
is no money invested. The cash to cash return on this investment 
by Weyerhaeuser, even up to 12 or 13 per cent return on earnings, 
is gigantic. And who accepts the responsibility? I ask you, Mr. 
Minister: who was at the table when this agreement was drawn? 
Who were the players who were at the table with the government 
when this was drawn? Because I think somewhere down the line 
somebody has to be responsible, if in fact you pass this Bill, for 
the negotiations and the deal made on behalf of the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
(2030) 
 
I ask you: who was at the table when this agreement was drawn? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, let’s just go back with the 
member and with all of the members of the committee. The reason 
that this Bill is before the House, and must be before the House, 
and the reason that we’re even into a negotiation to dispose of a 
pulp-mill and to build a paper-mill and to try to integrate an 
industry which needed that integration for so long . . . We’re into 
this. This government did not buy a pulp-mill nor did we build 
one. That pulp-mill was there. 
 
The pulp-mill was purchased by the former NDP government. 
They purchased it because they could not stand to see Canfor at 
that time — a private company — come in and buy it. And they 
stated a very good reason for  

not doing it, a reason which at the time when I was in opposition I 
agreed with, the reason being to rationalize the forest management 
lease arrangements which needed so much to be rationalized 
across northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But what I say to the member from North West and to all the 
members, as I intimated earlier today, when we took over 
government, and here was a pulp-mill and a chemical plant and a 
sawmill in Meadow Lake and whatever else that’s part of that 
pulp-mill operation, there was no evidence of any attempt even to 
rationalize the forest management lease arrangements, which 
means — just to translate that for you, Mr. Chairman, — which 
means that there was no attempt being made to rationalize the way 
in which the forest was being managed across the North. It was 
not being done. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we undertook to do that and in order to do that and 
in order to manage the forest in the best possible way it became 
very obvious, as it should have been to that other government for a 
long time, that the only way that a pulp-mill would have any 
opportunity for viability in the long term was to be integrated with 
the manufacturing of paper and integrated to some extent with a 
sawmill operation. So that, Mr. Chairman, you have saw logs 
going to a sawmill and you have pulp logs going to a pulp-mill 
and the added bonus here — and I’ve mentioned it before and it’s 
lost on those members — the added bonus here is the use of aspen. 
 
As someone has said, and I believe the Premier referred to this 
earlier and others in the North have said this . . . People who are 
familiar with both forestry and agriculture say it’s a scenario not 
unlike, Mr. Chairman, finding a valuable use for wild oats. That’s 
what poplar is in the forest. 
 
And we can use that aspen and it’s that forest mix, that softwood 
and that hardwood forest mix, which makes this a viable and a 
reasonable operation and which makes Weyerhaeuser look at this 
operation and say, we can take that loser pulp-mill, that 
stand-alone operation which has no opportunity for long-term 
viability, and we can make it into a long-term viable operation if 
it’s integrated with this pulp-mill. 
 
And we, as the holders of that, the government of the people of 
Saskatchewan, say we hold this operation with no long-term 
viability, not through any fault of our own but through some kind 
of grandiose schemes of the former NDP government who like to 
own enterprise regardless of the industry. And we say we must go 
with this because it’s forward looking; because it offers the 
opportunity to manufacture paper in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll repeat that: to manufacture paper in 
Saskatchewan — paper such as this that’s on every member’s 
desk — here in our province, our final product. And those 
members in the NDP have flip-flopped here tonight and they are 
now against it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this government stands very much behind this deal. 
This government is very, very committed to the building of a 
paper-mill in Saskatchewan. And I would say to any member — 
to any member, now that we go  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2163 
 
 

back to why we’re here in the first place — given the best choice, 
the choice would be that we don’t own a pulp-mill in the first 
place, and that we can collect royalties from someone operating it. 
That’s what we’ll be doing. That’s what we’ll be doing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was at the table, George, was the 
question. Who was at the table? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The answer to the member from North 
West’s specific question: the negotiations for the most part on this 
deal have been done by the president of the Crown management 
corporation on behalf of the Crown Management Board — I’m 
sorry, not Crown management corporation, Crown Management 
Board — and the president, as CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Crown Management Board, has been for the most part involved in 
negotiations, but in very close contact with the members of the 
board who are, for the most part, ministers of the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to compliment you on 
your interest in divesting the people of Saskatchewan of losing 
ventures that were, in fact, purchased by the former NDP 
government. 
 
But I think tonight the debate has turned to, and as one member 
earlier called it, a cover-up or misleading the House on the actual 
terms of an agreement to sell Saskatchewan equity to a company 
from Tacoma, Washington on terms that basically don’t guarantee 
any return to the province, now or ever, if in fact they would like 
to manipulate the agreement. And it’s certainly designed to do 
that. 
 
We have before us an agreement that is initialled, and I suggest to 
the minister, there’s only one part of this agreement left to be 
negotiated, and it’s not uncommon in any industrial or commercial 
negotiation that the only condition left is the condition of 
financing. And that’s why we’re in this legislature today. 
 
The documentation has been signed. I would suggest that even the 
fine print has been determined. The only thing left . . . And the 
signatures or the initials on this appendix B indicate the 
documentation has all been signed. This is just part of an executed 
document and trying to slide this by the opposition, I might say, is 
almost like trying to slide a lamb chop past a wolf. 
 
I don’t know who in the government decided to give us this 
information, but it certainly doesn’t give us the information we 
need and it does suggest that all the information is in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just ask you: if all the information is in place and 
all that’s left is that subject to financing and money and that’s 
what we’re here for tonight, what have you got against tabling the 
documents and giving us an evening to look at, in fact, what the 
people of Saskatchewan can expect from this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve explained to the 
other members earlier tonight, and I’ll explain once  

again to the member from North West. What he says is that the 
agreement’s in place. What I’m saying to you is: the final executed 
agreements which those principles set out for us to go ahead and 
negotiate — I say “us,” being the two parties — to go ahead and 
negotiate, those final agreements are not in place. Okay? There is 
an agreement of principles upon which negotiations can take place 
and it has several schedules attached. 
 
One of those schedules is schedule B which I provided to you 
when we were in the discussion about the repayment schedule for 
the $249 million debenture. It was a reasonable request and we 
were able to provide it on the basis that I said before. We’re able 
to provide that one because the negotiations for the final 
arrangement n that portion are largely complete. 
 
And I said in second reading debate, as I say to you here again: 
where that’s the case, I would provide the documents that I can 
provide. Where the negotiations are not complete, I will not and 
cannot — for very understandable reasons, for fair people — I 
cannot provide those documents because it will tie the hands of 
our negotiators down into the final stages. It’s not fair to our own 
side and it’s not fair to the company to have those negotiations 
carried on in a detailed way in the legislature or any place else. 
 
But further to that, I have undertaken, because I realize that it’s the 
public’s business we conduct, that once negotiations are over — 
and this is not a negotiating forum — that the final documents 
upon closing will be provided. Now I have said that; I will stand 
by that; and that’s really all I can say. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Chairman, what is left to negotiate? As we 
know and as you know, the initial document we received tonight is 
part of the document that was signed by these two participants, 
signed in the interest of the province of Saskatchewan and the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation, to put this deal together. And I suggest 
to you that all that’s left is the consideration or it’s subject to 
financing. And if in fact that’s not the case, what would be left to 
negotiate? 
 
I would doubt that they even put consideration up for this offer. 
They haven’t got any money in the deal. Are you going to have to 
return their consideration to them after this document is 
completed, subject to the financing? And consideration is just a 
few dollars you put up to make the document legal. I would 
suggest that you likely have to return that to the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation. 
 
Is that the negotiation that’s left? Did they get into this deal with 
zero? Do they not bring in one American dollar to get involved in 
our forest industry to the degree they have been involved and they 
will be involved after this agreement is completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well in answer to the question of the 
member about what else is left and so on, like, what I’m talking 
about, when we say the final documents . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’ve been signed. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. I have given the undertaking . . .  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2164 
 
 

The member insists on saying they’ve been signed. I’m telling 
you, Mr. Chairman; I tell the committee: they have not been 
signed, the final documents. Mr. Chairman, just for the 
information of the committee, the final documents, I’m informed 
by counsel, who’s involved in the negotiation of these, will run in 
the order . . . The documents agreements itself will run in the order 
of well over 200 pages; with schedules attached, will be in the 
thousands of pages — and is not finished. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. What I’m saying to you is they are not 
finished. And each party to any negotiations will go to those 
negotiations and try to get as much as possible for their respective 
position. That’s what’s obvious, and we know that, and that’s what 
is going on. And this is not the place for negotiation to take place. 
What I have said, and I agree with you, and that’s why I said that 
we have the final documents as it relates to the repayment 
schedule of the debenture largely complete — those negotiations 
— and I was able to provide that. And I did provide that in a 
forthright way, and you have that. 
 
But for you to think that that little document that you have in front 
of you is the agreement . . . What I’ve said before and what I will 
say again, there must be, before negotiations can take place on a 
half-billion dollar project in a serious line-by-line way, there must 
be some basic principles which are agreed upon by both parties, 
upon which those negotiations should take place. 
 
That is what that schedule B that you have is a portion of. And 
what else can I say except to say that it’s reasonable? It’s a 
reasonable argument. And if you insist . . . I can tell you once 
again, I cannot provide the documents until final closing is done. 
But I will undertake, as I have done, to provide those documents at 
final closing to the opposition members and in fact to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to the documents, Mr. Minister, 
what did the signatories that in fact initialled schedule B, what was 
their commitment to? This is just part of a commitment and 
anybody, I suppose, that’s ever dealt in commercial transactions, 
or any transactions, would agree that even after financing, things 
can change. But at that point there is a commitment. And it 
appears to me that the purchaser, who is Weyerhaeuser, is making 
no commitment and that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
making all the commitment with respect to financing and with 
respect to sale of the assets. 
 
Now I think it would normally be, in a normal course of a 
transaction of this nature, Weyerhaeuser would have to table some 
money in consideration to enable this transaction to be put 
together. Weyerhaeuser hasn’t been involved in business in 
Saskatchewan before. I realize they recently had a picture on the 
front page of Fortune, of the Fortune magazine, which certainly, I 
suppose, outlines their credibility. But have they put any 
consideration into this transaction? And what is this part of? If in 
fact the signatories to the original deal are not the signatories on 
schedule B, what is schedule B part of? And would you not admit, 
Mr. Minister, that there is an agreement that was signed by the 
signatories to schedule  

B? 
 
Can I repeat the question, Mr. Minister? Would you not admit 
there is an agreement signed by the signatories who are on this 
schedule B? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman. That’s why I went into 
the explanation that I did earlier when I . . . in the member’s first 
question. Because he says, what is Weyerhaeuser, what are they 
bringing to this agreement? What I’m saying that they’re bringing 
to this agreement — they’re bringing $166.8 million to the 
building of a paper-mill. They’re bringing that much . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
Well the member says that it can’t be used as consideration . . . 
Just to repeat what he’s saying in the to and fro here, what he says 
is it can’t be used as consideration. What I’m saying is that they 
are bringing $166.8 million to the building of a paper-mill. The 
building of the paper-mill will be $250 million. One-third of that 
— only one-third- one-third is guaranteed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, which does not mean that the Government of 
Saskatchewan puts up $83.4 million as the Bill states. It means 
that we guarantee that portion of the debt. But Weyerhaeuser 
Company . . . And so the member is suggesting to the committee, 
and I think to the people, that Weyerhaeuser has no commitment 
and that they will not . . . Well I would say that $166.8 million to 
build a paper-mill in the province of Saskatchewan is a 
commitment. 
 
Now let’s go back to that. He’ll say, well no, that doesn’t make 
any sense. They could build a paper-mill anywhere. I’ll say to you 
that the paper-mill makes no sense and cannot operate as a 
stand-alone without the pulp-mill. And I’ll say to you, as I did 
before, that the pulp-mill is not viable as a stand-alone operation 
without the paper-mill. 
 
And what I’ll say to you, that there — finally, after all of the 
attempts to finally get an integrated forest industry in this province 
— is a marriage made in heaven, and finally it’s there for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and based on good forest management 
and based on good business practice. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well this document that we have is not based 
on good business practice. If all the consideration the province of 
Saskatchewan has in this deal is a promise in the future to build a 
pulp-mill . . . They don’t even have a promise to in fact build a 
paper-mill. They don’t even have a promise in fact to pay off the 
debt, unless they in fact make a profit. And anybody that’s been in 
business realizes that profit can easily be moved around. 
 
So we’re asking, and I think it’s a very simple question . . . A 
suggestion has been made, and I don’t want to emphasize it again, 
that there’s a document that outlines this whole transaction. This is 
only a part of the document. Now if in fact you didn’t want us to 
quiz you on the rest of this document, why did you give us any of 
this document? I mean, it refers to a section C; it’s initialled, 
which is certainly not done for xerox copy  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2165 
 
 

purposes considering the people who initiated the document or 
initialled the document. What are you trying to hide? You’ve give 
us a part of it, expecting us to sit back and agree with this Bill 
based on a lack of input from your side, the government, on behalf 
of the taxpayers. So if you’ve got nothing to hide, Mr. Minister, 
table the documentation. 
 
I’ve asked you several times whether there’s any further 
documentation associated with this package. And you know there 
is; there has to be. It’s been said several times by the opposition. 
Are you denying it? Or what are you hiding if in fact there is 
further documentation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how 
many times I’ve said, I don’t deny that there’s other 
documentation that that is related to. I have said that, that that 
schedule B is attached to a wider basic series of principles which 
have been agreed to. I have said that I can’t provide the others. He 
says to me . . . The member from North West says, you shouldn’t 
have provided us with what you did. On one hand he says, you 
shouldn’t have given us this; and the next thing he says, don’t give 
us this. And then he says, well why don’t you give us more. 
 
What I have said in a forthright way from the very outset of this 
debate is that I will give what I can give. And we have given this. 
And obviously I knew you would ask me some questions. I knew 
what I was giving you. And it’s obvious, it’s not some kind of a 
big find that you have. It’s not some big deal that you find that you 
have initials of the president of the Crown Management Board and 
the initials of Mr. Gaynor. I mean, what’s . . . That is the basic 
principle. 
 
I have said to you . . . I explained it well. But as I said to the NDP 
opposition, the other opposition, is that they do not want to 
understand the explanation, which is a reasonable and fair 
explanation. They’ve indicated they don’t want to understand that, 
and so they’ll carry on with the debate. 
 
You have indicated as well in your line of questioning that you do 
not want to understand the explanation . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, you’ve said that you don’t want to understand 
the explanation. You say: are you denying it? He’s yelling: did 
you deny, do you deny that more exists of this? I say, no I don’t 
deny that. And I also say that there will be a large, very large 
document, final documentation on this very, very large, 
half-billion dollar deal. I said that as well. And I’ve also said that I 
will provide that at the time of closing the deal, which is the only 
reasonable time to provide it and the only time it can possibly be 
provided. And that’ where it is. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the members say, and once again the 
members of the NDP say, if we were in the government, they say, 
we would sign the documents, and then we would go to the House 
and say, we need some enabling legislation so that we can sign 
some documents. That’s what they say they would do. 
 
Well, I’m telling you, Mr. chairman, we have said we will sign 
documents when the legislative approval is given to sign them — 
which is the right way to go, which is the  

right and proper way to go. And we’re asking for enabling 
legislation. We’re asking for enabling legislation, and that’s what 
this Bill is all about, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Minister, that is contrary to all good 
business practices as they relate to buying and selling property of 
any kind. The deal is truck before the money is put up. And what 
you’re saying is, you’ve got a loosely structured deal based on, in 
part, schedule B. And you’re going to come to the House, you’re 
going to have the money approved, and then go out and make the 
deal. I mean, that is contrary to good business sense. You’re here 
to finalize, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the moneys 
to be paid out on their behalf to sell this to Weyerhaeuser of 
Washington. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why will you not give us the balance of 
documentation? And will you not admit that the deal is closed? it’s 
closed. If it isn’t closed, why are we here tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Basic principles, Mr. Chairman, of the 
deal have been announced, and they have been announced on that 
basis of $250 million, one-third of that debt . . . The basic 
principles have been announced. The deal is not closed until the 
final closing and signing of documents. The final closing and 
signing of documents cannot take place until the legislation is 
passed and we have enabling legislation, which we need. We need 
enabling legislation to say that we have the authority to enter in to 
a guarantee for $83.4 million, which is the basic crux of what 
we’re doing — $83.4 million. And what I’m saying to the 
members is: we’ve been here; we’ve been forthright with the deal 
that we’re coming with; and at the end of it all, with every t 
crossed and every i dotted at the end of closing and signing of 
documents, we’ll provide those documents. Now, Mr. Chairman, 
that’s a fair and reasonable argument. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Will the minister not admit that both sides to 
this agreement have agreed that subject to financing the deal is 
closed? The deal is closed. If that’s not the case, why aren’t we 
here tonight with other enabling legislation that would allow 
maybe the purchase by another mining corporation of a potash 
company or anything else? If you haven’t got a closed deal here, 
why are we in the Assembly? Will you not admit the deal is closed 
and what’s left is maybe some fine print, but certainly financing 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, let’s get something very 
clear here. The Bill . . . we’re not voting money. This is not the 
committee of finance. This Bill is enabling legislation to enable 
the government to enter into the agreement which we have 
announced to cover a guarantee. We’ve announced the amount of 
that, and it’s in the Bill — for the guarantee. And what I’m saying 
is that the deal will be closed when the final documentation is 
signed, and the final documentation will be signed once the 
enabling legislation is put in place, Mr. Chairman. That’s the right 
sequence of events. That’s the sequence of events which we’re 
following, and which we will continue to follow, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I just want to get a few things straight,  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2166 
 
 

because we have been getting different answers from the minister 
as we have been going through the questioning. We started out 
early in the debate and we asked him over what period of time the 
repayment of the $248 million for the asset was gong to be, and 
the minister started out by saying that it was going to be about 20 
years. Then a document is slid over to us and we find out it’s 30 
years. 
 
Questioning has gone on in the House, Mr. Minister, and we have 
asked you, is the deal in fact consummated? We were under the 
impression that what you were doing here is coming to the 
legislature and getting approval of some $83 million for the 
construction of the mill. Now surely you would expect to come to 
the legislature here with the deal consummated and lay the deal 
before the legislature, have the opposition review it, and then get 
the Bill passed — of the money which is going to be guaranteed 
by the people of Saskatchewan. Now there’s no doubt that’s the 
way you go. 
 
What you’re doing here, if . . . But the other thing is that, Mr. 
Minister, you say that negotiations aren’t complete. Well I find 
that absolutely hard to believe. Because the fact is, Mr. Minister, if 
the negotiations aren’t complete, then I’m going to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, how long will it take until the negotiations are complete? 
Can you give us an idea as to about how long it will take? Because 
if this is the only agreement that you have, it was completed on 
March 24, 1986. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, if the negotiations, if what you’re 
saying, the negotiations are not complete, how long will it take 
you before the negotiation is in fact completed? That is, when you 
in fact can indicate what kind of deal that you have, what 
commitment you have from Weyerhaeuser, what commitment on 
the part of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
We have to have the deal before we can authorize you to go 
forward and start spending taxpayers’ money, because that’s what 
the Bill indicates — $83 million you’re supposed to put up. But 
you say, but we haven’t finalized the deal. Well would we be 
responsible? Would a bank give out the money before the land 
transaction is finalized and they have the title in their possession 
for security? And you’re going to say, well no, but we aren’t going 
to give the money until we have it finalized. 
 
But I’ll tell you that we as an opposition are obligated to know 
why we are giving you this money, as authorizing you to expend 
$83 million. That is our obligation. I’ll tell you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I come back to the question. You say the 
negotiations are not complete. I ask you, how long do you expect 
it would take to complete the agreement? When do you expect that 
the agreement will be finalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I said earlier in the debate 
that the deal will be finalized in six to eight weeks, we anticipate 
— six to eight weeks. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there’s misunderstanding I believe, or at least 
they’re wishing to misunderstand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The contradictions by the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, they’re wishing to misunderstand. 
They’re saying here, we’re not going to vote the money and all the 
rest of it. I would say to the member, now look in this Bill and see 
where it says that there’s an expenditure of money. Where are we 
authorizing the expenditure of money in this Bill? 
 
What this Bill is, Mr. Chairman, and let’s have it very, very clear, 
that $250 million for the building of a paper-mill in Saskatchewan 
will be in three ways — handle the financing in three ways: 
83.333 and on into, or 83.4 for easy numbers, cash from 
Weyerhaeuser Company. Okay? So Weyerhaeuser Company — 
83 and some-odd millions of dollars from Weyerhaeuser 
Company; borrowed by Weyerhaeuser Company and guaranteed 
by the company. Okay? So that’s two-thirds. Eighty-three point 
four million dollars borrowed by Weyerhaeuser Company from 
their own sources — let’s say their bank — guaranteed by the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there’s no transaction of money. You’re not voting money. 
What this Bill is, Mr. Chairman, and all the members understand, 
is that what this Bill does is it’s the enabling legislation. In other 
words, it gives the government the authority to sign the guarantee. 
It gives the government the authority to sign the guarantee. And 
we’re here to the legislature to ask for the authority to sign the 
guarantee. And that’s what is is. 
 
Now we will have security for that guarantee of $83.4 million, Mr. 
Chairman. We will have the security of the assets, those assets 
being a paper-mill in Prince Albert, a pulp-mill in Prince Albert, a 
sawmill at . . . Okay? But the paper-mill assets, the $250 million 
assets which the members yell we own already . . . We don’t own 
a paper-mill because there is no paper-mill nor is there any 
potential for a paper-mill if they were ever around and the way 
that they would operate. There’s no potential for a paper-mill 
without a deal such as this in which we can integrate those two 
facilities. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now I can explain that to them many times. It’s not that they don’t 
understand. I submit to you, Mr. Chairman. Some of them don’t. 
Some of them do understand but they don’t want to understand. 
That’s the point. And the reason they don’t want to understand, 
Mr. Chairman, is that they have decided in that NDP caucus that 
they are against the paper-mill, which is what I was hoping for, as 
I said earlier, and which I now have confirmed and all of our 
members have confirmed. 
 
The NDP is against the construction of a paper-mill in 
Saskatchewan and the integration of our forest industry across the 
forested belt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you keep talking about the 
opposition being against getting a paper-mill. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. But what we are asking you, Mr. Minister: 
where is the agreement which says that you’re going to have a 
paper-mill? There is absolutely no document that has been filed 
here today or tonight, and  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2167 
 
 

he says it won’t even be signed for two months, and we don’t 
know the terms. That is exactly what he’s saying. 
 
And to say, well, we aren’t putting up any of the people’s money, 
well, we are guaranteeing $83.4 million. That’s what we’re 
guaranteeing. And if there’s default, we pay. Now would you go 
and sign a note or a guarantee — you, as a business man, the 
member from Prince Albert — would you sign a note, a guarantee, 
if you didn’t know the deal? 
 
An Hon. Member: — For someone else. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — For somebody else if you didn’t know the deal? 
Well, I’ll tell you, the minister has said here tonight, he came into 
the House and he said, the negotiations are not complete, the deal 
isn’t closed. He says it’s going to take from six to eight weeks 
before we have the final documents. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, we’re going to offer you a deal. I 
think that that can be prepared in less than six to eight weeks. And 
I’d like to know the reasons why it would take that long. Because 
apparently what you have said . . . March the 24th was when 
schedule B was drawn up, and I’m wondering what you have done 
in the meantime, why the document hasn’t been finalized, this 
document that you’re talking about, and why it’s going to take 
from six to eight weeks. 
 
I’ll tell you what you’re doing. You’re going to delay the final 
transaction, and it’s going to be more than six to eight weeks; it’s 
going to be until October or whenever, after the election. I’ll tell 
you, the people of Saskatchewan are not going to see the final 
document. And what you want is a guarantee by the people of 
Saskatchewan to a transaction that you say isn’t complete. But it is 
complete. You know what it is, but you’re afraid to put it before 
this legislature because you’d be turfed out of office. The people 
of Saskatchewan are watching your management and they’re not 
very pleased. 
 
You know, when this was announced, a business man came to me 
and he said, we’ll have to get those people out because they’re 
going to get rid of every asset in the province. And over and over 
they’re giving away . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, don’t 
laugh. Is it not true within this document, in this document here 
that you provided, that on the $248 million plant, that not one 
single cent needs to be paid? That’s the truth of the matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, the colleague from Regina North West has asked 
whether negotiations were complete. You said there were some 
other documents. I’m going to ask you, will you in fact provide 
any other documents which we can get a clearer picture of this 
transaction? If you refuse, if the negotiations are still carrying on 
as you claim, then we’ll make a deal with you. 
 
I’ll tell you what we’ll do. Traditionally what this government has 
done, they do not prorogue; they just adjourn the legislature. And 
I’ll tell you, you get that agreement finalized, Mr. Minister — and 
I think you can do it in four or five weeks, or two or three weeks if 
you want to — and I’ll guarantee you that the opposition will be 
here. 
 

And if you lay before us the final negotiated agreement, I’ll tell 
you, you lay it before us, give us some time to take a look at it, 
examine it, I’ll tell you, you’ll get our support if it’s in the interests 
of the people of Saskatchewan. But I’ll guarantee you that as long 
as I have a breath of life in me I’ll not agree to passing this 
legislation without seeing the agreement. You might as well get 
that straight. Because if we have to carry on here, I’ll tell you, 
we’re going to, because it’s time to protect the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, we’re going to do it. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister. WE propose that deal. All you’re 
going to do is to adjourn the Assembly. You say you can get a 
final transaction together in four to six weeks, or eight weeks. 
Fine. I’ll tell you, this is the deal. Adjourn the legislature, and I’ll 
tell you, when you lay before the House a final document and we 
can examine it and it’s in the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, I’ll tell you you’ll get our wholehearted support. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that’s fair, representing the people of 
Saskatchewan, that you lay before this legislature the final 
agreement. We give you that offer. Will you accept it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I would refer all members 
of the committee to the Bill, which is what we’re supposed to be 
discussing. It’s what we’re supposed to be discussing here. And on 
the first page of the Bill . . . The member over there says, where 
does it say . . . In his bull moose sort of way he’s up there roaring 
away once again, the member from Quill Lakes. It must be 9 
o’clock now, because at 9 o’clock he usually roars, starting 
roaring, and he started. And here we go. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Chairman, here it is on 
the front page of the Bill. He says that there’s no suggestion that a 
paper-mill will be built in Saskatchewan. Now in clause 3(1) on 
the front page of the Bill, in the enabling paragraph at the bottom 
— the last paragraph in subsection (1)(c) it says, this guarantee . . . 
what I’m talking about is the guarantee here: 
 

. . . in respect of a Saskatchewan project which will include 
improvements to a pulp mill and the development of a paper 
mill at Prince Albert. 

 
The enabling legislation we’re asking for is for this legislature to 
enable us to enter into an agreement with Weyerhaeuser Canada, 
to build a paper-mill. Okay. 
 
And it says, specifically in the actual Bill, in clause 3(1)(c), “. . . 
which will include improvement to a pulp mill,” which we talked 
about earlier with the member from Athabasca, “and the 
development of a paper mill at Prince Albert.” 
 
So what we have here, Mr. Chairman, is the NDP in opposition on 
a big stalling tactic because now in their flip-flopping on this issue 
they say, oh, just a minute, we’re still not sure what position we 
should be in. Yesterday we were for this. In second reading we 
were for this paper-mill project. And now, today, we’ve locked 
ourselves into being against this paper-mill project. 
 
And now the member from Quill Lakes will stand on his  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2168 
 
 

feet and say, here’s the big idea for a delay tactic in his roaring 
bull moose kind of a way. And he says, here we go. Let’s have a 
big delay tactic here. We won’t give you the enabling legislation 
to do this. 
 
And I say to the member from Quill Lakes, he can rant and he can 
roar as long as he wants to — as long as he wants to. But his 
government stand four-square behind the development of a 
paper-mill in Saskatchewan. Those wafflers over there decide that 
they’re now against the paper-mill in Saskatchewan, so be it. Let 
them go out and tell the people they’re against the paper-mill, after 
saying . . . First of all they said they were against it. Then they said 
they were for it. Then they said they were against it. And now 
once again, they’re confirming that they’re against it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this government and my colleagues stand for the 
building of a paper-mill and we will always stand for that and it 
will take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Finally, Mr. Chairman, we’ve got to the issue 
now because the minister has lost his cool. He cannot put before 
this legislature a finalized agreement because he knows that we 
would expose what is in that agreement. Why else wouldn’t he? 
I’d like to ask the minister if he would turn to his counsel and ask 
his counsel whether or not he could negotiate a final agreement 
subject to the approval of the guarantee by the legislature. Ask him 
if you could. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just a point that I forgot. 
The member said in his opening remarks here, now we’re to the 
point, he said. I quote him fairly closely I believe — now we’re to 
the point here. That’s right, we’re now to the point — the Bill 
which I refer to, Bill 56, An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of 
Prince Albert Pulp Company, etc., etc. Now we’re for that; now 
we’re to the point. 
 
And the point that I made is that the Bill clearly states that there 
will be a paper-mill or there will be no guarantee. That’s in the 
enabling paragraph of this Bill, clause 3(1)(c). That’s what it says, 
and it says that very clearly. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that member from Quill Lakes and those 
other NDP members bought this pulp-mill; they bought this 
pulp-mill. They bought it from Parsons and Whittemore when an 
offer had been made by Canfor. Let’s go back to the history of 
this. 
 
Canfor, a private company, had offered Parsons and Whittemore 
to buy a pulp-mill, but that government over there said, no way, 
we’re going to exercise our right of first refusal, and we’re going 
to buy it with taxpayers’ dollars — a stand-alone pulp-mill — at a 
time when the pulp prices and the projections were gong down. 
But they didn’t care about that because philosophically they said, 
the government will own it or nobody will own it, they said. 
That’s how they think. The government will own it or nobody will 
own it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I defy you or any member of this committee to find 
a Bill where they came before the legislature of the day and said, 
we’re going to buy this  

pulp-mill. Where’s the Bill that said, we’re going to buy this 
pulp-mill? Not a place — no place did they come. And yet the 
sanctimonious member from Quill Lakes will stand here and rant 
and he’ll roar and he’ll say that we’re not supposed to pass this 
enabling legislation. 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, and to all members of the 
committee and the people of Saskatchewan, this government is 
committed to the paper-mill; and this government has come before 
the legislature with the enabling legislation, as we should do, as 
any government should do. And I submit to you as well, Mr. 
Chairman, as they should have done — as they should have done 
when they bought the mill — but they didn’t. And we can go into 
some other discussions about potash and whatever. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I was absent because I took an 
opportunity to go to the library and check to see when premier 
Thatcher had filed the documents. In fact. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thatcher? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, premier Thatcher. When they entered 
into the deal with PAPCO initially, they passed a Bill in the 
legislature in the 1966 session. Mr. Minister, the agreements with 
respect to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill were filed not in some 
indeterminate time in the future — which I think is your schedule 
— but during committee of the whole. That is when premier 
Thatcher gave us the agreements with respect to the Prince Albert 
Pulp Mill. I refer you, Mr. Minister, to the journal of the 1966 
session. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if premier Thatcher thought that 
appropriate — and he did and was prepared to defend it — why 
don’t you think it appropriate and why aren’t you prepared to 
defend the agreements? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, if I remember back to that 
debate — and I wasn’t here; I’m not sure if the hon. member was 
here — the Thatcher government was involved in the deal, in 
consummating the deal that built the pulp-mill in the first place. 
The NDP was against that; the NDP were against it all the way. 
Down they go against that — no pulp-mill in Saskatchewan. There 
shall be no pulp-mill in Saskatchewan; it won’t be a reasonable 
asset to the people of Saskatchewan. That was their argument. 
There’ll be no asset, and the people . . . It’ll not be an asset, that’s 
what they said. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s that got to do with the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — He raised the question. I didn’t raise the 
question about the history of this operation. I raised the history of 
this operation before. And the reason we’re before this House 
dealing with the disposing of an asset of a pulp-mill is not because 
it was built here, not by this government, and not because it was 
purchased by this government. 
 
So, let’s go through the history of it. The Thatcher government 
built it; they sat here and were against it. They were against it. 
They bought it. The NDP bought it  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2169 
 
 

because they were against a private company owning it, so they 
bought it. 
 
did they give any agreements in that purchase to anybody? And I 
sat on the opposition at that time — no agreements from those 
guys, none — none! 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what’s more — what’s more — no 
agreements, but no commitment from them to ever provide those 
agreements upon closing, which is the commitment I have given 
to this House today, which is a forthright thing to do and I will 
stand by that. So . . .(inaudible interjection). . . We haven’t had 
those agreements, never had them from them. They bought it, 
though. 
 
So they were against the building of it in the first place. This is the 
NDP now; this is the consistency of that group over there. They 
were against the building of it, and then when somebody else was 
going to buy it, they bought it. But they always said that it 
wouldn’t be an asset to the province. And now when we’re trying 
to sell it, they say it’s an asset to the province as a stand-alone 
entity which has no opportunity for viability without the 
installation of a paper-mill in conjunction. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re against that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — They’re against that now. 
 
Now, you tell me where there’s any logic in that NDP. There is 
not and there never has been, and as it relates to this sort of deal 
and the development of the resources in the province, they cannot 
hold a candle to the way in which we’re dealing with 
Weyerhaeuser Canada to build a forest industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I just ask you to deal with the 
simple issue. Ross Thatcher tabled those agreements when the 
potash mines were taken over in 1975, the appraisals were tabled. 
What happened with PAPCO? You weren’t even here then. 
PAPCO . . .(inaudible interjection). . . You were not. 
 
Mr. Minister, Ross Thatcher tabled the agreements during third 
reading. Mr. Minister, during the take-over of the potash mines, 
the appraisal and the regulations were tabled during the committee 
by our government. If the government of Ross Thatcher can do it, 
if the government of Allan Blakeney can do it, why can’t you do 
it? If premier Thatcher was prepared to defend his agreement as he 
was — he stood in that seat over there and defended it — if Roy 
Romanow was prepared to defend the appraisals and the 
regulations, why aren’t you prepared to defend your agreement, 
Mr. Minister? You’re not, because as this portion of it we have 
suggests, that agreement is indefensible, and that’s why we’re not 
getting it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member once again 
says that the government of Allan Blakeney gave the agreements. 
I’ll tell you as it relates to PAPCO, and he says — I heard him say 
while he was on his feet to my colleague and to me — that we 
weren’t here when that happened. I’ll tell you, when you bought 
PAPCO, when the government, the members of that former 
government,  

when they bought PAPCO, when Canfor put up its offer, there 
were no agreements signed. There was an announcement that it 
was going to be done and that’s it. They never came to the 
legislature. When asked about it, they never gave the commitment 
that they would put the terms of that agreement on the table. 
 
What I’m saying to you, Mr. Chairman, in a very forthright way, 
is that when those agreements are signed, they will b given to the 
members and be made public. The documents will be made public 
and there will be substantial documents as you can well imagine, 
Mr. Chairman. So what I’m saying to you is that we’ll stand on 
our record as it relates to being forthright with the committee, and 
with the legislature, and with the people of Saskatchewan, and that 
group over there cannot stand anywhere near us in that sense. And 
we can go into the history of potash, and the history of so many 
things in which they just announce, “We’re doing this.” And at no 
time did they tell anybody why or whatever, and no documents, 
nothing. So don’t let them be sanctimonious, Mr. Chairman, I 
know I won’t. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to, before I ask the 
minister a couple of questions about the guarantees that he has on 
the paper-mill being built, one of my staff is working on getting 
for me the tabling of documents that occurred during the potash 
take-over. The minister is absolutely wrong and misleading the 
committee when he says that no documents were tabled. I will 
prove that in a moment because . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, 
he said the potash take-over; that’s what he said, and I’m going to 
get the documents. And the member from Saltcoats also indicated 
from his chair that there were no documents tabled at the time of 
the potash take-over. They were, at that time. 
 
And the minister is totally wrong, and we’ll prove that here again, 
as he was when he indicated that the terms of the agreement of the 
debentures were 20 years, and when he handed the paper over it 
turns out, and I read to you: 
 

The debenture will be the principal amount of $248 million 
Canadian for a term of 30 years. 

 
Now this will be twice in the term of about three or four hours in 
the committee when the minister has attempted to mislead the 
committee — twice. And these are with facts in front of us that 
can disprove the minister, what he has said. And yet even though 
he has attempted to mislead us on two occasions, he says, on the 
area of the paper-mill, trust us. Just believe me when I say that 
there’s an agreement forthcoming. Believe me when I say that 
Weyerhaeuser has signed an agreement or will sign an agreement. 
 
Whether Weyerhaeuser is committed to a paper-mill or not has 
nothing to do with this Bill. This Bill doesn’t commit 
Weyerhaeuser to build a paper-mill. This doesn’t commit him to 
anything. This Bill doesn’t commit him to building a paper-mill. 
 
What it does is commit us to guaranteeing a loan for 83.4 million, 
which means that if they renege on the loan the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan pay the money back. That’s what it means. It says 
right here in the minister’s write-in,  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2170 
 
 

clause 3, subsection (2): 
 

The aggregate principal amount of all guarantees given 
pursuant to this section shall not exceed $83.4 million. 

 
That’s what is says; we agree with that. And what that means is 
that if they build the paper-mill, if they build the paper-mill and 
renege on paying the loan, the taxpayers pick up the tab. 
 
Now what we want to know is what the agreement is with 
Weyerhaeuser to build the paper plant, the paper-mill. We want to 
know what the agreement is. That’s the issue. That’s the issue. It’s 
enabling legislation, that’s right. 
 
And what we’re saying is that we want to see the agreement to 
build the paper-mill before we give approval to spend the money. 
Of course there’s money to be spent here. If they renege on the 
loans, we pay 83.4 million. If they default, we pay 83.4 million. 
And the member from P.A. is saying, “if” we build the paper-mill. 
Now the Tories are saying, “if” we build a paper-mill. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Minister, that we want the agreement on 
whether or not the paper-mill is being built before we put at risk 
$83.4 million of taxpayers’ money. That’s not a little bit of money 
— $83 million at risk is $83 for every man, woman, and child in 
the province. For a family of five, it’s a little over $400 for one 
item. I’m not saying we shouldn’t do it. What I’m saying is we 
don’t have the information needed to make a reasonable decision. 
 
Now the back-benchers say, we know that it’s going to be built, 
we’re ready to stand up and vote for it. Well I challenge them 
then, if they have the information and the minister won’t give it to 
us, if you have the information needed, to pass it over to the 
opposition. Get into the debate. 
 
I say to you that we don’t have the information to make an 
intelligent decision because we don’t know what the terms of the 
agreement are. We don’t know what the terms of the agreement 
are. We have the minister’s word. I’ve proven to you on two 
occasions already he’s misled us on very important facts. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. According to the rules of Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, a member, while speaking, must 
not make a personal charge against another member in this House. 
 
I refer you . . . that is paragraph 316. I refer you also to paragraph 
322, where once again it states that “no imputation of intentional 
falsehood is permissible.” The hon. member has stated that the 
member has on two occasions misled this House. I ask him to 
withdraw that remark. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I do not intend to withdraw the remarks 
because I didn’t say that he did mislead the House. I said he 
attempted to. That’s what I said. He didn’t mislead the House 
because we caught him at it. He didn’t mislead the House. I’m 
saying, he didn’t mislead the House. 
 

Mr. Chairman: — I have asked the hon. member to withdraw 
any imputation he may have made that the member misled the 
House . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Point of order? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I was listening with care to what my 
colleague said. He said that the House was misled. That is not 
unparliamentary — it can happen innocently. I can happen 
innocently; it can happen through the minister’s stupidity, or it can 
happen intentionally. The member did not say how he came to 
mislead, just that he did. That’s not unparliamentary. It’s said all 
the time . . .(inaudible interjection). . . It isn’t. He did not say he 
intentionally misled the House. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — It’s been said several times tonight, indicating 
that the minister has misled the House; and he hasn’t even denied 
the fact. And as the member from Regina Centre suggested, it’s 
common in parliamentary debate and it has been used here all 
evening. So I would ask the Chair, withdraw his request, so the 
member from . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I will once more ask the hon. member to 
withdraw any remark which he made which may have indicated 
that the member has misled the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I do not intend to apologize. 
I challenge your ruling and would ask you to call in the Speaker to 
make a ruling because I don’t think you’re right. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. 
 
Mr. Tusa:— Mr. Speaker, during consideration of clause 1 of Bill 
No. 56, the member from Shaunavon used certain unparliamentary 
words. I asked the member to withdraw the remarks and he 
refused. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Shall the ruling of the chair be 
sustained? 
 
Ruling sustained on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 
Tusa McLeod 
Andrew Katzman 
Hardy Schmidt 
Folk Myers 
Dirks Klein 
Currie Martens 
Smith Morin 
Muirhead McLaren 
Johnson Young 
Hopfner Rybchuk 
Meagher Muller 
Glauser Zazelenchuk 
Petersen Swenson 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2171 
 
 

Nays — 10 
 
Tchorzewski Thompson 
Engel Lingenfelter 
Koskie Lusney 
Shillington Yew 
Sveinson Hampton 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I declare the motion carried, and the ruling of 
the Chair has been sustained. I therefore would ask the member 
for Shaunavon to withdraw any remarks of impropriety that he 
may have made. And that would allow the House to get back to its 
normal order of business. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I do withdraw those remarks 
as indicated by the Assembly, the decision of the Assembly, if any 
remarks were made. I’m not sure which ones were made, but I do 
withdraw whatever they might be and apologize for them. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, what has troubled us, and I 
think what has troubled the public of Saskatchewan with respect to 
this agreement, is the likelihood, or lack thereof, that the province 
will ever be repaid the 250 million plus the 83 million. We have 
little, if any, idea what the terms of the guarantee of the 83 million 
are. We’re getting as a result of some four and a half hours, almost 
five hours of debate, we’re getting some glimmer of understanding 
of on what terms we’re going to get the 250 million back. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Chairman, earlier in the evening I indicated that there would 
have to be a return that, in my view, having done a rough 
calculation — I admit it’s rough — the company would have to 
get about a 13 per cent return on assets in order to achieve the 
point where any earnings are available to pay interest. In other 
words, unless the earnings exceed that minimum of 13 per cent, 
nothing is payable on interest. Mr. Chairman, the minister then 
indicated my figures were about accurate, he said. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I took an opportunity to go down to 
the library because I, for one, did not believe that the forestry 
industry achieves a return of 13 per cent. Mr. Minister, I obtained 
the annual reports, the summary financial statements for a number 
of companies . . . for Dormond. In 1983 their net revenue was 2 
per cent of their assets. Mr. Minister, the other financial statements 
of the other companies are roughly the same. At no time, Mr. 
Minister, did any of the companies which I have — I have 
Dormond Industries; Doman Industries, MacMillan Bloedel. 
 

Mr. Minister, I have Reid Dominion Packaging; I have Reed 
Incorporated; I have Crown Zellerbach; Scott Paper. At no time 
since 1979, which are the years those returns were given, for the 
years which the records go back, at no time did any of those 
companies achieve a return of 13 per cent. 
 
I also, Mr. Minister, took time to get some information from 
Statistics Canada. In 1978 the profit as a percentage of assets was 
7 per cent; in 1979, for the industry as a whole the profits as a 
percentage of assets was 12 per cent; in 1980 it was 6 per cent; in 
1981 it was less than 2 per cent . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, 
we’ll get to Weyerhaeuser in a minute. In 1982 the revenue as a 
percentage of assets was 9 per cent; in 1983 it was 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also got the financial statements for Weyerhaeuser 
itself. You might be interested to know that so far as these records 
go back, and they go back to 1977, at no time did Weyerhaeuser 
achieve a return of 13 per cent on its assets. You might be 
interested to know, Mr. Minister, that in 1977 the rate of return 
was 7 per cent; ’78 it was 8 per cent; ’79 it was 10 per cent; in 
1980 it was 5 per cent; 1981 it was 4 per cent. Mr. Minister, at no 
time within recent history has the rate of return on the forest 
industry, either as a whole or for individual companies, ever been 
13 per cent. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that the public are never going to see a bit 
of interest. What happens if the interest isn’t paid? Whatever one 
might call it, it’s scarcely a loan since there’s no real obligation to 
repay. I’m not sure what you’d call this. A tentative gift, I guess 
one might call it. The tentative gift, Mr. Minister, is then converted 
into preferred dividends which have no right of dividends except 
to the extent they’re declared. When they’re declared, they’re not 
cumulative. They can declare dividends on other shares without 
declaring dividends on these shares. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is difficult to imagine a circumstance under which 
this province is ever going to get a nickel of that $250 million 
back. What you’re giving away, Mr. Minister, is a quarter of a 
billion dollars. That is a quarter of a billion dollars in assets. That, 
Mr. Minister, is 2,500 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province. The share of the average family of four is $10,000 — 
$10,000, Mr. Minister. It is an enormous sum of money that you 
are giving away. 
 
Mr. Minister, some people have charitably asked when we’re 
going to see the freedom of information Act. I’ll tell you when 
we’re going to see the freedom of information Act. It’s after your 
defeat. How could anyone believe in the face of this charade that 
we’re had this afternoon and this evening, with you giving us part 
of an agreement, but not the whole thing — how can anyone 
believe that we are ever going to see anything that looks like 
freedom of information. 
 
Mr. Minister, you gave us a schedule and you did not tell us with 
precision what it was. When we pointed out that it was a 
disastrous deal for the province — nothing short of disastrous for 
the province — you then, Mr. Minister, indicated that it wasn’t the 
real agreement, that the real  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2172 
 
 

agreement was coming. 
 
When we pointed out that the signatures of the province and the 
company were in the corner of the schedule, and it was there for 
obviously an executed agreement, you then said, Mr. Minister, that 
something else was coming along, but you won’t tell us what it is. 
 
You never suggested, Mr. Minister, that any other portion of the 
agreement or anything which might follow it will contradict the 
fairly clear provisions of this agreement. Mr. Minister, this is a 
straight give-away; this is a straight give-away. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is ironic that the people you are giving this to is 
George Weyerhaeuser, who is one of the leaders of the new right 
in the U.S. He is someone, Mr. Minister, who believes that people 
should get along on their own; they should get along without any 
government assistance. He comes to Saskatchewan, and he takes, 
for nothing, a quarter billion dollars in assets. I say that represents 
the hypocrisy of the Conservative element sin North America. 
Nothing could better illustrate the hypocrisy of Conservatives in 
the U.S., in the Canada, in this deal. The leader of the right-wing 
in the U.S. comes to Saskatchewan and fleeces you people. 
 
Mr. Minister, after spending the afternoon telling us there was no 
agreement and then giving us a portion of an agreement; after 
telling us that it was a 20-year term and it turns out to be a 30-year 
term; after telling us, Mr. Minister that it wasn’t signed and it 
turned out it was; after telling us, Mr. Minister, you expected it to 
be repaid and then it turns out that they have to achieve a near 
impossible profit rate before it is repaid; then the member from 
Shaunavon has to withdraw a remark which said, in effect, you 
misled the House. All I can say with respect to that, Mr. Minister, 
is that the rules of this House are pretty arcane. 
 
If, after what we have seen this afternoon, after what we have 
listened to this afternoon, it is then thought to be misleading, then 
the rules of this House are arcane and need to be changed. They 
really are. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was nothing wrong with what the member 
from Shaunavon said. I have said it several times; I will say it 
again several times before my legislative career comes to an end, 
and it is parliamentary. So I say, Mr. Minister, that this whole 
affair has been a complete charade. 
 
You have led the House into a misunderstanding of the Bill. You 
may have done that through incompetency; you may have done it 
through ignorance; you may have done it wilfully, I know not. I 
suspect from the point of view of the taxpayer it doesn’t matter 
whether you wilfully led this House into a misunderstanding of the 
Bill, or whether it was done innocently — you did, you did. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. I 
cannot recall an agreement which comes anywhere near this thing. 
I can’t recall anything which is anywhere near as bad. 
 
Mr. Minister, the agreement with respect to the financing  

of the PAPCO Bill in the first place was, we thought, a bad deal. 
We thought it was a bad deal because we thought the financing 
arrangements were loose. We thought, Mr. Minister, the protection 
of the environment was not what it should be. We thought the 
stumpage rates were not what they should be. But I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that that deal, that the CCF of the day criticized so 
heavily, is a thousand times better than the one you’ve negotiated 
— a thousand times better than the one you’ve negotiated. At 
least, Mr. Minister, when PAPCO was financed initially, there was 
a clear obligation to repay a loan. 
 
As I read these documents, Mr. Minister, if the loan isn’t repaid, 
all you have is a right to the assets which are sold in the first place. 
In the meantime they have been allowed to use them, to enjoy a 13 
per cent rate of return without paying anything on it and to run 
down the assets. 
 
Mr. Minister, there appears to be no enforceable obligation on 
Weyerhaeuser Canada to repay it. Now, Mr. Minister, if that isn’t 
a sweetheart of a deal, I honestly don’t know what you expect, and 
I guess it’s clear what you expect. What you thought was when 
you signed the deal that there was going to be an election. You 
never expected to see this agreement being subject to the 
questioning in the Assembly. You never expected that to happen, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that when you leave here you will scald the 
people who suggested to you that you give us the portion of the 
agreement you did. I know you’re going to find someone to 
blame. All I can say, Mr. Minister, is if you think that you’d have 
got this Bill through the Assembly without giving us some 
information, you’re mistaken. And having seen half of the movie, 
if you think you’re going to get the rest of it through with no more 
information than what you’ve given us, then you’ve got another 
thing coming. 
 
The $10,000, Mr. Minister is what this is costing the average 
Saskatchewan family — $10,000. That, even to this government, 
ought to be an enormous sum of money — it ought to be an 
enormous sum of money. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are going to have the entire evening to think 
about it, and when you are thinking about it, I invite you to have a 
look at what happened to the member from Kindersley when he 
tried to stonewall this House as he did for almost three weeks in 
the 1985 Assembly. I see him sitting in the Assembly now 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
I am going to give him an opportunity to think about it. He is 
going to have lots of time to answer. I invite you to think about 
what happened to the member from Kindersley with respect to a 
sum of money which was trifling compared to this. All that was at 
issue when the member from Kindersley got boiled in oil, as he 
did in 1985, was a mere $28 million. Mr. Minister, that at least . . . 
That at least, Mr. Chairman, was a piece of abject stupidity. 
 
This is an intentional bit of chicanery. They have intentionally 
given away these assets, knowingly given away these assets, doing 
it because they expected that there would be an election before 
they ever had to justify this and thinking, after the election, if they 
were defeated,  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2173 
 
 

it never would have come to anything, and if they weren’t 
defeated, the NDP would be too demoralized to take along time at 
it. 
 
Well I say that justice has a habit of winning out. I say, Mr. 
Minister, and I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that we are going to get 
to the bottom of this. The public of Saskatchewan are going to 
know what the deal is. The minister has said this isn’t the whole 
deal. Well I say, Mr. Minister, go back and get the whole deal, and 
come back here or come back and face the kind of thing that the 
member from Kindersley faced. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll save you the trouble. I move we rise and 
report progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Licensing and  
Inspection of Amusement Rides 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Horse Racing  
Regulation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits  
to or on behalf of Certain Senior Citizens 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 p.m. 
 


