


















































April 28, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 28, 1986 
 

925 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We’re not quite ready yet, Mr. Chairman, 
but soon, but soon. Mr. Minister, just briefly I want to continue 
with something my colleague from Regina South was talking 
about, and that is . . . Regina Centre. South is in such flux these 
days, you never know. But my colleague from Regina Centre 
was asking you about the escalation formula, which there is 
none, as you indicated. 
 
But I want to ask you about the distribution formula, because 
under revenue sharing, there has always been, at least from the 
time when I was involved, a formula that was used to determine 
the distribution of the revenue-sharing pool, and it considered 
quite a number of things: changes in population, ability of 
municipalities to raise local revenues, and a number of other 
things. 
 
Can you tell me what distribution formula is being applied in 
this fiscal year ’86-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The determination was made this year to 
provide a 3 per cent increase to everyone across the board over 
last year’s figure. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I see. Prior to this year, then, maybe — 
because I don’t fully recollect all of the formula — what were 
the factors taken into consideration in the previous formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There is a basic grant, a per capita grant, 
and a foundation grant that go together. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — There is a basic grant, a per capita, and 
the foundation. So now we have been operating for two years 
without applying the formula. You didn’t apply it last year and 
that’s understandable, partially because you froze the grant. 
Although you could have made some adjustments to 
accommodate changing circumstances in some communities, 
this year you’re going to spend $67 million in revenue sharing 
and you’re going to distribute it to municipalities, which 
averages out over the last two years an increase per year of 
about 1.5 per cent per year. And you’re saying that you’re just 
applying a flat 3 per cent. 
 
Why did you choose just to apply the flat 3 per cent rather than 
use the distribution formula, which seems to make some logical 
sense when it comes to applying the whole principle of fairness 
and meeting needs as they exist in various communities because 
of changes in population, for example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We felt it would be appropriate to have an 
across the board 3 per cent increase for all municipalities rather 
than having some reductions perhaps for some municipalities if 
the formula was used. 

We felt it would be appropriate to have that kind of across the 
board increase for everybody at this time when the Local 
Government Finance Commission is looking into this whole 
matter. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I fail to see how you 
can justify that. I can understand where reductions might 
happen because you simply can grandfather it. Nothing difficult 
about that. 
 
But in places . . . And I have here and I’ll give you an example 
of the communities of Martensville, Warman, Osler, and 
Dalmeny, which are communities that presented a brief to you 
during the SUMA convention or just previously before that. 
And also, indeed, I met with them as well. 
 
And they make it very clear what the problem is without 
applying the formula fairly. I mean, they say that in the last two 
years their population has an increase of almost 100 per cent. 
Surely you would agree, Mr. Minister, that when you have that 
kind of a change in the community, you get stresses on the 
ability of that municipality to provide services. 
 
The tax base of these communities — and they’re only 
examples of others — has not changed a great deal. So their 
ability to raise revenues on their own is not improving very 
much. And yet you’re saying, well, we’re just going to apply 
them the straight 3 per cent. We’re not going to consider the 
changed circumstances of changes in population or any other of 
these factors which may have made a difference in the grant 
formula. 
 
How can you justify that? How can you say to communities like 
these four and others, sorry, you probably could have needed 10 
per cent, but we’re only going to give you 3 per cent, because 
we’re not going to apply the formula, even though we’ve 
negotiating now for two years or so. But you’re gong to get a 
straight per cent. How can you justify that, and what’s fair 
about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The issue of providing a 3 per cent across 
the board increase or using some kind of a formula where there 
may have been some significant winners and some significant 
losers was considered when we determined whether or not the 
revenue-sharing pool would increase, and by how much. And 
the decision was made to provide a 3 per cent across the board 
increase to all municipalities, as I indicated previously. 
 
The four that you’re referring to did receive a 3 per cent 
increase. And as I understand, an analysis of their particular 
situation shows that they were relatively well off in terms of 
their local tax situation and also their local debt situation in 
comparison to many other communities in the province. And it 
was felt that a 3 per cent increase was something that would 
certainly be liveable in those particular communities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I asked you, Mr. Minister: have you 
considered the brief which they presented to you some time 
ago? 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

926 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, I met with them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well in light of that you must have a 
short memory, because all of the things that you have just said, 
they have said otherwise. They have said that they have had a 
major change in population — and that’s not surprising. 
They’re near the city of Saskatoon, and a lot of people would 
choose to live in these communities and commute to the city. 
They have not had a significant increase in taxable assessment, 
and the brief clearly has told you that, and I quote: 
 
(1915) 
 

Despite the increase in population, our taxable assessment 
remains relatively low due to the very high proportions of 
residential as compared to commercial development. 

 
All of the things which you mention in defence of your position 
of 3 per cent, Mr. Minister, these communities have refuted. 
Would you like to reconsider your argument here in light of the 
fact that these communities don’t agree with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, their situation was 
reviewed very extensively in discussion with myself and then 
by my officials, and as I suggested to you just a few moments 
ago, the position was taken that the 3 per cent increase would be 
a liveable increase in light of their particular local tax situation 
and debt situation — and the whole matter of the formula and 
how the formula would relate to communities that were 
growing at a faster rate or communities that are losing 
population at a faster rate, that those issues would of course be 
looked at by the local financing commission. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if you had applied the 
formula, the distribution formula, would it have provided an 
increase in money to these communities under the 
revenue-sharing program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We didn’t calculate it for that particular 
community, but had you applied the formula, given the fact that 
you have a static size pool or a certain size pool, you would of 
course have taken away from smaller communities that some 
would say were dying, and giving it to a community that was 
increasing in population. And it was felt that, given the fact that 
we were in these discussions with the local finance commission 
and that they were going to be making recommendations into 
the long range, into the future, that rather than taking from some 
who might not be able to afford it and giving to some others, 
that it would be best to likely provide a blanket 3 per cent 
increase to everyone. That was the most appropriate decision to 
take, in our estimation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I can understand, Mr. Minister, why 
one would want to consider the problems faced by communities 
which may have gotten a reduction. And I’ve already suggested 
to you an alternative, or a solution to that, and that is a 
grandfathering provision. You could have quite easily taken that 
into consideration. 
 
Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that you as a government  

have as a policy that you will punish communities which 
happen to be growth communities? Because that’s what you’re 
doing by not applying the formula. You’re taking communities 
that are growing, and therefore face unique problems because of 
their growth. Along with the pluses there are some problems. 
Are you saying for their growth, your government, because you 
don’t apply the formula, is prepared to punish those 
communities for their growth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, let’s go back to your 
statement about negotiations, or your commission. And it’s 
taking a look at the formula. I want to say that what you have 
said, at least on three occasions here this evening, is incorrect. 
You said your local financing commission is determining the 
distribution formula. Was this local financing commission not 
established at least a year ago, or was it two years ago? How 
long has this commission existed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe the commission came into place 
something less than two years ago, and in a very short period of 
time we expect that they will have their final report in place. 
And of course they are looking at a large number of items and 
we expect that their deliberations will certainly be of benefit to 
us when we consider this whole matter of revenue sharing and 
formula. And of course we’re into discussions with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) on this issue 
during this year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well isn’t that interesting, Mr. Minister. 
The commission was established two years ago. Your 
predecessor, in response to those same questions in estimates 
last year, said to this House the following: he said that we had 
reached agreement with SUMA in regards to the distribution 
formula. 
 
In other words, he said to this House that a formula for 
distribution purposes had been agreed upon and a decision had 
been made. He further said, Mr. Minister, he said that the 
escalation formula would be done in the next year. In other 
words, it was supposed to be ready for this year. 
 
How do you square what you have been saying in the House, 
Mr. Minister, for the last 20 minuets, with what the former 
minister has said, contrary in what you’re saying, in that he 
gave a commitment to this House that a formula would be in 
place by now on the distribution on the escalation formula side, 
and that a distribution formula had been agreed to? What has 
happened in the mean time to destroy this formula for the 
distribution of these grants so that you don’t have one now, 
when in fact an agreement had been reached last year, Mr. 
Minister? What’s changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated to the member opposite, we 
have been in discussion with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association for some time on the whole issue 
during the past couple of years with regards to revenue sharing 
and have reached general agreement with them on this 
particular issue. Now that doesn’t mean that what the Local 
Government Finance Commission is going to say won’t have 
some  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

927 
 

impact on the whole issue of revenue sharing. So to simply say 
that because you may have tentatively reached some particular 
kind of an agreement on some particular issues with the urban 
municipalities association doesn’t mean that you have reached 
final agreement, that you’ve sort of crossed the t’s and dotted 
the i’s and sort of put your signature on — in a sense to say 
that’s going to be it from here on in — when in fact we don’t 
have all of the information from the finance commission yet. 
And when we do receive that, that may very well impact upon 
the discussions that we have been having to date with the urban 
municipalities association as it relates to the formula. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, you did not answer 
the question, and I will ask it again, because in your usual way 
you are now trying to talk around the question. I say to you, and 
if you wish to check it, you can look on page 2848 of Hansard, 
June 3, 1985, and you will discover that the minister of Urban 
Affairs for this Conservative government said — in 
consideration of his estimates when asked by my colleague, the 
member from Regina Centre — what about the formulas? He 
said, “. . . we had reached agreement with SUMA in regards to 
the distribution formula . . . ” He said to this House in 
unequivocal terms an agreement had been reached in the 
formula. 
 
You now say there was no formula, that it was tentative. Mr. 
Minister, who is misleading this House and the public? You? Or 
was the former minister misleading this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Nobody is misleading the House. I simply 
suggested to you that you may have reached tentative 
agreement or something. That doesn’t mean the whole issue is 
cast in stone, because the Local Government Finance 
Commission may very well inject some new information which 
is significant to both SUMA and to both the Department of 
Urban Affairs, which will lead us to revisit the particular 
formula which had been tentatively agreed on or whatever 
words you want to particularly put on it. So there’s no 
misleading here. I think that’s a natural course of action to take. 
You want to wait until all of the information is in that impacts 
upon this particular issue, and then you make a final 
determination. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you’re now dancing in 
your place to try to save your hide with regards to the fact that 
you’re not being quite frank with this House. SUMA, in the 
letter I read to you this afternoon, said very clearly, and I think 
that they were correct, and there’s no reason why anyone would 
want to question their position on it, they said in their letter to 
you from the president of SUMA to the former minister of 
Finance: don’t tinker with the formula until there is some 
decision made by the local government commission. You don’t 
only tinker, Mr. Minister, you have taken an agreement which 
your former minister said was reached with SUMA. That was 
only in last year’s budget and you have broken the agreement. 
The former minister said, we had an agreement. You say, we 
don’t have an agreement. We’re not going to apply the formula. 
Don’t you agree that you therefore have broken the agreement 
with the municipalities because you’ve not lived up to the 
agreement made that the former minister spoke of when  

he talked about his estimates in here last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, there was general 
agreement on a formula that could have been utilized if one had 
chosen to do so. But as I indicated, before the decision was 
made, to go with a 3 per cent, across the board increase so that 
there would be no losers. And in the meantime the Local 
Government Finance Commission is providing information to 
this government, in a few weeks we hope, which will be 
important in terms of the whole issue of local taxation and 
revenue for municipalities. 
 
So once that comes into play, that particular report, with its 
information, this whole matter of a revenue-sharing formula or 
a distribution formula is something that it would be appropriate 
to discuss with the urban municipalities association. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, prior to your decision to 
apply a straight 3 per cent across the board and break the 
agreement that you had with SUMA — which your former 
minister talked about — prior to that, did you communicate 
with SUMA about what the distribution formula ought to be in 
this budget? And did they write to you agreeing with your 
proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — So I think the important thing to indicate to 
the member opposite and to the Assembly is that, in fact, the 
urban municipalities association, as I understand it, while they 
would have like more than 3 per cent this year, has been 
relatively pleased with the fact that there was a 3 per cent 
increase in the revenue-sharing pool here to all municipalities 
— 3 per cent across the board to each one in the province. 
 
(1930) 
 
And as I indicated this afternoon — and perhaps you weren’t in 
your seat — the mayor of the city of Regina had, prior to 
budget time, said to me that well he certainly would be happy if 
there would be a 2.9 per cent increase. Well, in fact, we 
matched that and a little more than that. And I think that, 
generally speaking, municipalities have been relatively pleased 
that they did receive the 3 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, now that you’ve made a 
speech, do you mind answering the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The urban municipalities association did 
not have any formal communication with me in terms of the 
exact amount of money that they wanted prior to the budget, 
nor did I indicate to them prior to the budget the exact amount 
of money that they were going to receive. I mean, that’s a 
budget consideration which comes out, of course, on budget 
night. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you still didn’t answer the 
question. You’ve probably forgotten it. Now that you gotten up 
twice to make your comments, I’ll ask it again. The question 
was not what about the total allocation of revenue sharing, the 3 
per cent. The question was: prior to determination that you were 
going to distribute the revenue-sharing pool — or the increase 
on a straight 3 per cent rather than using the formula — did you 
consult  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

928 
 

SUMA and did they communicate to you in writing that they 
supported that move? Don’t tell me about the 3 per cent; we 
know about the 3 per cent, and so does the public. Now tell me 
whether SUMA agreed, prior to your announcing in your 
budget what the grant is going to be, to leave it at a straight 3 
per cent across the board without applying the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well of course the department has ongoing 
dialogue with SUMA in terms of revenue-sharing issues. I don’t 
know if the former minister had any specific consultation in 
terms of exactly how the money was likely going to be 
distributed irrespective of whether there was a formula or 
whether there was an across the board increase. 
 
I didn’t have any specific communication with SUMA in that 
regard, although at the convention we did make it very clear to 
SUMA that there was going to be some kind of increase in the 
pool. It wouldn’t be zero per cent, and it wouldn’t be 5 per cent; 
it would like be somewhere in between. And of course it was 
somewhere in between — it was a 3 per cent increase. And 
since then of course SUMA has not expressed any displeasure 
with that 3 per cent increase. I think they recognize that, given 
the times, a 3 per cent increase was a reasonable figure to 
expect at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, there you go talking 
about the 3 per cent again. We’re talking about your lack of 
consultation and your arbitrary approach to government. You, 
Mr. Minister, have been the minister of this department since 
December. The decisions, Mr. Minister, which determined what 
kind of distribution formula would be used to distribute the 
revenue sharing was made since December. Don’t try to say 
you don’t know what the former minister may have had in 
communication because it’s got nothing to do with him. This 
decision was made when you were the Minister of Urban 
Affairs. 
 
Are you saying, Mr. Minister, and I want to ask you this just 
one more time, because I don’t want to get the wrong 
impression. Are you saying that since December you did not 
take the opportunity to discuss with SUMA what the 
distribution formula was going to be? Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well what I’m saying is that if you take a 
look at the resolutions adopted by SUMA at their 1986 annual 
convention, if this was a pressing issue in terms of the 
distribution formula, and I think SUMA recognizes that there 
certainly would have been a lot of losers had that formula been 
in place, you don’t even see that concern at all reflected in the 
resolutions brought forward by the various organizations at the 
SUMA convention. So I’m not so sure that it’s all that 
significant an issue. 
 
I think what is of issue is whether or not there was going to be 
an increase to municipalities. Yes, there was going to be an 
increase. We did mention that in discussions with SUMA at 
their annual convention. We indicated it would not be held at 
zero, nor would it be increased 5 per cent — likely somewhere 
in between. That’s exactly where the figure came down — 3 per 
cent. And as I indicated that was a little bit above what the 
mayor of Regina was  

hoping for. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister . . . Surely the point has 
been made, member from Moosomin who speaks from his seat 
again. The point has been made. This minister has been 
deceiving this Assembly and he’s been deceiving the public by 
pretending that there are negotiations are under way, or have 
been negotiations under way, to determine what the distribution 
formula was going to be, when, in fact, there has not been those 
discussions. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would SUMA pass a resolution with respect 
to this in their 1986 convention in January when they wouldn’t 
have known then that you weren’t going to apply the formula? 
Why would they have known that? Why would they have done 
that? And how would they have known that if you yourself, as 
you have admitted, have refused to consult with them as to what 
the distribution formula should be? 
 
You’re saying you don’t know whether the former minister has 
done it. Mr. Minister, stop making your decisions on this kind 
of funding for your own political reasons and do it on the basis 
of what’s fair and just and use some kind of a formula that 
applies to everybody equally. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, 
why have you not taken the time? 
 
Well I think I’m going to stop, Mr. Chairman, because the 
member from Moosomin is making so much noise, I can’t hear 
myself speak. I don’t know that the minister can hear me, and 
he’s sitting right beside him. As soon as he settles down, we 
will continue, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I’ll tell you why I’m on my feet. The 
member for Regina North East is trying to ask the Minister of 
Social Services questions. That’s what he should be doing. 
What is happening in the NDP benches, Mr. Chairman, is that 
they are all visiting and babbling with each other, and I can’t 
hear the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. This is not a point of order; it 
is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, we are here to try and do 
the people’s business. If the member from Moosomin and his 
colleagues over there are here thinking that this whole thing is a 
joke, and they want to make it look like a joke, that’s fine by us. 
The public of Saskatchewan and the people who pay taxes have 
a right to be able to get the answers from their government, 
whether it’s that government or whether it’s some other 
government. The member from Moosomin’s antics just now 
show how lightly those people take it, and the responses from 
the Minister of Urban Affairs has been giving show that they 
really don’t care. And so I come back to him again on this 
question. Mr. Minister, why did you not think it important 
enough to consult SUMA and the municipalities about the 
distribution formula prior to announcing in this budget? Now 
that’s got to be precedent setting. That’s got to be precedent 
setting, and I submit to you it’s a very, very dangerous 
precedent. Why did you not take the time to consult with them? 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

929 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, I think 
the significant thing here is how much of an increase is there 
going to be for the municipalities. And of course my department 
officials have ongoing discussions with people in the urban 
municipalities association. It’s not as if they never meet. There 
are discussions that go on. 
 
In terms of the actual distribution formula, the decision was 
made by this particular government that there would be an 
across the board 3 per cent increase for everybody. Rather than 
having some that would be substantial losers and would get no 
increase or would see a significant reduction if the formula were 
applied, we felt at this particular point in time that it would be 
in the best interests of everybody to get a 3 per cent increase. 
We indicated that when we met at the convention and told the 
entire delegation of people, over 800-and-some delegates, 
however many were there, that there would be more than a zero 
and less than 5 per cent. And there seemed to be general 
acceptance at that time. 
 
As I indicated, the mayor of Regina wanted a 2.9 per cent 
increase. In fact we were able to accommodate with even 
slightly higher than that, 3 per cent increase. And when I met 
with the executive members of SUMA just prior to and on 
budget night, and discussed with them the general outlay of 
where the dollars were going, there was reasonable satisfaction 
with that. There has been reasonable satisfaction since. And I 
think that what this government has done in terms of providing 
an across the board 3 per cent increase is exactly what should 
have been done in this particular instance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t going to raise 
anybody in particular, but you seem to continuously choose to 
use the mayor of Regina as your example of support for the 
budget. Well, the mayor of Regina does a pretty good job for 
Regina. And he does a pretty good job because he tells your 
government when he thinks something is wrong. Let me tell 
you what the mayor of Regina has said to your government in 
the form of a letter to the Premier. On the basis of last year’s 
budget, and this one isn’t any better, Mr. Minister, here’s what 
he said: 
 

As a follow-up to our letter to you on June 4, 1985, and 
your response July 31, 1985, a very serious issue has come 
to light which Regina City Council feels you should be 
cognizant of. There appears to be a major discrepancy 
between total funding allocations from the province to 
Regina vis-à-vis Saskatoon for 1985-1986. Our figures 
indicate the City of Regina will be receiving 
approximately 1.7 million or 5 per cent less in total 
provincial grants for 1985-1986. 

 
Now how you can pretend that the mayor of Regina would be 
happy with that, I don’t know. And I know that he’s not. 
Because if he says, as my colleague said a while ago to you, 
that things are okay, he sure is not saying that publicly. And 
he’s not saying that to the Premier. 
 
You have caused your problems, Mr. Minister — your 
government. And you’re only one of the ministers here. But 
we’ve seen the same thing with the Minister of Health, and 
we’re seeing it with you. And I suspect we’ll see it with other 
ministers as we proceed through these  

estimates, that you don’t talk to the people who are going to be 
affected and jointly determine how you’re going to affect them. 
You did not discuss with anybody the distribution formula. You 
made an arbitrary decision as a government to do it that way. 
 
Now maybe they would have accepted it. How do you know 
they wouldn’t have agreed to it? Maybe they would have. 
That’s not what I’m arguing. I’m arguing about the approach of 
your government, which I suggest to you and to the member 
from Moosomin, who I know is interested, is a wrong approach. 
It’s an approach of arbitrariness and ad-hociness. You don’t 
have a plan for the future; you stumble along from crisis to 
crisis. You get to a situation that you’ve ignored for a long time. 
You’ve got a problem and then you charge into it to try to deal 
with it. 
 
And that’s what you’re doing with these formulas. You don’t 
have a formula for determining the amount of the fund. You 
don’t have a formula for determining the distribution. You 
make decisions around a cabinet table that affect everybody else 
in the province and you never even ask them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, let me ask you a follow-up question here. 
You have continuously this evening referred to the Local 
Government Finance Commission. And you have said that the 
Local Government Finance Commission is deciding on what 
the formulas ought to be. 
 
Now tell me, Mr. Minister: how do you suggest that the Local 
Government Finance Commission is going to make this 
decision when both SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) have pulled out of the 
commission and are no longer part of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Local Government Finance 
Commission is not going to dictate a formula. I suspect that 
they are going to make comment on a variety of issues that 
pertain to local government financing, in other words to the 
orbit of concern that relates to urban municipalities, and that 
there will be a great deal of what they say that will have impact 
for revenue issues pertaining to local government. 
 
And in light of that, some of that may have implications for 
what the senior government will do with regards to funding for 
municipalities. So either directly or indirectly it has 
implications for revenue sharing and for distribution formulas. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You didn’t answer my question, Mr. 
Minister, again. Will you tell me, Mr. Minister: how will 
SUMA and SARM’s concerns be met when they have both 
stopped being active participants with the commission, because 
whatever reasons they have — and I’m sure that they’re their 
reasons — but they’re no longer part of this commission. 
You’ve got this commission running around making decisions. 
And what I think the municipalities are afraid of, as we are, is 
that getting some recommendations from this commission, you 
are then once again going to make an arbitrary decision as you 
have done this year and last year, arbitrary decisions that meet 
your own political agenda needs and not the needs of 
municipalities. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

930 
 

(1945) 
 
How can you assure us, Mr. Minister, that the views of SUMA 
and SARM are going to help determine what the new formulas 
are going to be when they’re not part of this commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the Local Government 
Finance Commission, as I indicated, is going to provide what I 
suspect is some very significant information and input and 
comment — suggestion with regards to local government 
financing. 
 
They may not satisfy the concerns at all of SUMA or of SARM 
or of SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) or 
others who are concerned about local government financing, but 
they certainly will provide information. They certainly will 
make suggestion and comment, and provide advice and 
recommendation that relates very definitely to this particular 
area. That’s why they were established in the first place. 
 
And it may very well be that SUMA will make comment on the 
recommendations that the Local Government Finance 
Commission is bringing forward to the government. And they 
will say, yes, we agree with that; no, we don’t agree with that; 
we think that the formula, as it generally was agreed to 
previously, is the best way to go. Or they may say, well in light 
of this particular recommendation that we hadn’t given all that 
much consideration to previously, we may change our mind. 
 
We don’t know about that. We’re not about to predict or 
prophesy exactly what is going to come down in that particular 
report. I don’t think anybody should. And as a consequence, it 
certainly would be wrong to somehow suggest that that report 
will not have any significant thing to say that might not impact 
one way or another upon SUMA’s concerns or upon SUMA’s 
position. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the city of Regina has 
petitioned, has addressed a request to you for an amendment to 
the legislation with respect to store hours. I’d appreciate a 
statement, Mr. Minister, of this government’s position on that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We do not intend to amend legislation 
while the entire issue of store hours — both the Sunday issue 
and the constitutionality issue as it pertains to night shopping 
and The Urban Municipality Act and so on — we do not intend 
to amend legislation until those particular issues have been 
decided in the courts. And we will be intervening to assure that 
our particular interests in terms of the position that we believe is 
most appropriate, that being that the provincial government 
should have jurisdiction to regulate with regards to store hours, 
we will be intervening to support that position, both with 
regards to the Ontario Supreme Court case and also the cases 
that will be coming forward here in Saskatchewan that are 
based on charter arguments — a charter which I might add was 
brought in and supported by your particular party. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, to the extent that it played any 
significant role in national affairs, the Canada Act was 
supported by the Conservative Party, too. 

Mr. Minister, do I understand that to be a statement that so long 
as the matter is before the courts, which might last years — is 
likely to last years on this issue — your government intends to 
sit on its hands and do nothing? Is that a statement of your 
position? 
 
I think I should ask the Minister of Justice directly, since he’s 
coaching the . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well there’s no sense really amending 
legislation when the whole issue is before the courts to 
determine what role the provincial government can play in the 
whole area of store hours. As a lawyer, you would likely know 
that. So we expect that judgements will be coming in due 
course concerning the Sunday issue, out of the Ontario case. 
And, of course, the other issue may take longer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that is quite a proposition — that any 
citizen can send this government scurrying for cover by simply 
launching an application that a law might be unconstitutional. 
That, to put it mildly, falls somewhat short of being decisive 
leadership. 
 
Given the breadth of the decisions with respect to the 
constitution, it is likely that a great many subjects about which 
this legislature deals are going to be under review by the courts. 
If you’re only going to deal with those issues which are 
sacrosanct and not under review by the courts, then there’s 
going to be a great many pressing problems that won’t get dealt 
with. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, for you to take the position that the only 
proper course is for the government to wait until all 
constitutional challenges in a given area have been laid to rest, 
is about as weak an excuse for doing nothing as I have heard. 
The government of this country, almost on a daily basis, make 
the best guess they can with respect to the constitutionality of 
legislation and then proceed. And we are in the position as 
legislators of defending our legislation and knowing that a 
goodly amount of our legislation is going to have to be 
defended. 
 
Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that for however long it takes — two, 
three, four years — for the matter to wend its way into the 
Supreme Court . . . This is so academic, because you’re not 
going to be here for more than a few months. But let me ask a 
wholly academic question: if you should remain in office, if you 
should be re-elected for a further term, do I take it to be your 
position until the Supreme Court of Canada deals with the 
subject, or an appeal period expires somewhere, or the matter is 
no longer being litigated, you intend to do nothing about store 
hours in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — After that long, convoluted statement by 
the member, would he be so kind as to specifically ask his 
question? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If the minister would be so kind as to 
specifically listen to it, I wouldn’t have to repeat it. But for the 
benefit of the minister, who was getting advice from the 
Minister of Justice . . . I can understand why you’d be confused 
with that kind of an adviser. I think you’d do much better to get 
advice from your right than advice  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

931 
 

from your left, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: do I take it, so long as the 
question of store hours is before the courts, this government 
tends to sit on its hands and do nothing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I think the appropriate decision to take, of 
course, is to intervene in those court cases, which we have 
decided to do to protect what we believe is our constitutional 
right to pass appropriate legislation, whatever we would deem 
appropriate. We are in fact intervening on the Sunday issue in 
Ontario, and we certainly will be intervening in those particular 
issues here which will be based on constitutional questions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take that to be a convoluted way of 
saying, yes, we intend to do nothing with respect to legislation 
until the Supreme Court renders its decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well intervening is certainly doing more 
than nothing; it’s taking a very significant position. And that is 
that we believe that the provincial government should be able 
to, in fact, be involved in this particular area; and of course that 
is what we are doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I do not believe any court 
has said you can’t be involved in the area of regulating store 
hours as distinct from Sunday hours. If you ask the Minister of 
Justice, I believe, if he has any integrity, he will tell you that no 
court has rendered a decision on (a) the constitutionality of a 
municipality being delegated power to regulate store hours as 
distinct from hours on Sunday; and (b) no court has rendered a 
decision on our Lord’s Day Act. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: do I take it that you intend to do 
nothing, whether or not there’s a court decision with respect to 
these matters — you intend to do nothing so long as you can 
fabricate any semblance of an excuse that the matter is before 
the court. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well because we would be bound by 
whatever court decisions come about on these particular issues, 
and we know that court decisions are going to come about on 
these particular issues, it would not make much sense to pass 
legislation which is not going to have any effect, because you’re 
going to be bound by a court decision which is going to rule on 
those particular issues anyway. 
 
So we have decided to take the particular position that we will 
not be amending any legislation at this particular point in time. 
We will be waiting to determine what the courts say about 
provincial jurisdiction in this particular regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
gather from the minister’s comments that the Crown is 
intervening in the case in Ontario dealing with Sunday store 
hours, and I ask the minister whether or not he feels that the 
position being taken by the Government of Saskatchewan is 
sound. Are you intervening because you think that the position 
you’re taking is sound? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If the issue is going to be determined down 
East on the religious, Sunday, or Lord’s Day Act  

basis, then the argument may not be a sound argument. And we 
don’t know how the court is going to go on this. On the other 
hand, if its’ based merely on the issue of rest or of the 
provincial governments having the authority to regulate based 
on non-religious determinations, then it may very well be that 
the position is in fact a sound one from a legal point of view. 
But I am not a lawyer and that issue likely should more 
appropriately be addressed to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I gather from that that 
you’re intervening to support the position taken by the 
Government of Ontario, that it is within the provincial 
competence to regulate store hours, including Sunday, and I ask 
you: if that is the position you take before the courts, why is 
that not the position you take in this legislature? And why will 
you not propose legislation, if need be, based on the position 
which you’re arguing in the courts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That legislation is presently in place here 
in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are 
you satisfied with the legislation as it is enforced now in 
Saskatchewan, i.e., is your government satisfied with the 
legislation which you say is on the books and which is being 
enforced by your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the charter is now posing a threat to 
that particular legislation, and of course it was the charter that 
you were actively involved in bringing about. So the legislation 
is in place here in the province. It has been before the courts 
here in the province, in fact on one or two occasions, and was 
successfully used to prosecute. Nevertheless, it is now — the 
principle is being challenged down East and that is, of course, 
why we are intervening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
sorry that I’m not able to make my question clear to the 
minister. I asked you, sir: are you satisfied with the legislation 
and the enforcement of that legislation as it now exists? Are you 
satisfied with our legislation, and are you satisfied with its 
enforcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, I’m personally satisfied with it. 
Whether or not the courts are going to determine that it can 
remain that way in this country is something that has yet to be 
determined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now let me . . . Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister, let me understand the minister clearly. He is satisfied 
with the law, I took that, and he’s satisfied with the enforcement 
of the law. And he’s satisfied with the situation as it now exists 
with respect to shopping hours on all seven days of the week. 
That is the position you are putting before this committee; I 
understood that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The member was asking questions relating 
to the issue of Sunday intervention, the case that is in eastern 
Canada which we have decided to intervene on, and if he wants 
to talk on broader issues, that’s fine. I was addressing my 
comments to that particular area. 
 
(2000) 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

932 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will 
try again. I ask you, sir, not about the law that is being before 
the courts in Ontario — and I’ll try to use exactly the same 
words as I used before: are you satisfied with the law of 
Saskatchewan, as passed by this legislature, with respect to 
store hours; and are you satisfied with the enforcement of that 
law? I thought that’s almost exactly what I said in two earlier 
questions. If not, I apologise to the minister and ask that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the charter that the 
Leader of the Opposition supported may determine that it 
doesn’t make one whit of difference what anybody in this 
legislature thinks about store hours — absolutely none. That, in 
fact, may be the result of the charter here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and right across the country. 
 
As it relates to the particular legislation here in the province at 
present, there certainly are substantial indications of support 
from the public that they are interested in more liberated 
shopping hours in the province. That’s obvious. People 
everywhere are voting with their feet, clearly, and we know 
that. At this particular point in time the issue from a legal or a 
legislative point of view is: what jurisdiction do provincial 
governments have? Nobody knows that at this particular point 
in time until the courts rule on that particular issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will 
try again. I ask you, Mr. Minister, and in order that you may 
understand it or I may make myself clear, I will divide it into 
two separate categories: shopping from Monday to Saturday. 
Are you satisfied with the law of Saskatchewan as it now exists 
with respect to shopping from Monday to Saturday, inclusive? 
And are you satisfied with its enforcement? 
 
I ask you that question, and I hope you will agree with me that 
that issue is nowhere being litigated in Canada on the grounds 
of the charter. I hope you will agree with that proposition, and 
then answer the question: are you satisfied with the law as it 
exists, and with its enforcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It’s clear that there likely will be some 
revamping that will be necessary. As I indicated, the public is 
overwhelmingly voting with its feet in favour of liberalized 
shopping hours. 
 
And as we indicated, it doesn’t seem to be very appropriate to 
make any significant changes to legislation, whether one is 
consulted with groups, as I have done, or not. 
 
The issue here is that the charter is going to substantially 
determine whether or not provincial governments have any 
jurisdiction in this area. And that of course was the charter that 
you people were so very instrumental in bringing about — the 
same charter which now appears is likely very well going to 
result in people who have been jailed getting the vote. 
 
I’m not so sure that the charter is going to have all of the  

kinds of positive effects that we want it to have. In fact, if may 
have some very deleterious effects on society. And one would 
have hoped that perhaps you would have thought through those 
issues a little bit more before you supported it. 
 
Nevertheless we have taken the position, as I indicated a 
number of times now in this particular discussion, that the issue 
is going to be decided in the courts. Amending legislation, 
regardless of my personal position on store hours or regardless 
of the public’s position on store hours, is not the issue at this 
particular point in time. The issue is to determine exactly what 
authority the provincial governments do have in this particular 
area. Once that has been determined, then the whole matter of 
what the legislation should say is the next step. 
 
But as I indicated, the whole issue may be academic, and in fact 
the charter that you people were so interested in bringing about 
may have taken the store hours regulation issue right out of the 
hands completely of provincial governments. And I’m not so 
sure you thought about that when you supported the charter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will 
not be led astray by the minister’s straight perversion of the 
answer. 
 
I asked you, sir: are you saying to this House — are you saying 
to this House that any litigation involving the charter of rights is 
in process affecting store hours from Monday to Saturday, 
inclusive? If there is, would you kindly inform me where and 
whether your government is intervening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, the Sunday issue is already at the 
Supreme Court, and the Minister of Justice informs me that we 
have received notice on the other issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
think the minister will be aware that Sunday does not fall in the 
Monday to Saturday, inclusive, category. I am going from 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and not the other way, so that I 
am meaning to exclude Sunday. I’m counting forward. 
 
Now are you telling me, sir, that there is litigation involving 
your government, or to which you have had notice, involving 
Monday to Saturday store hours where the charter is an issue? 
Are you telling me that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m informed that we have received notice 
on the Monday to Saturday issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would 
you kindly advise me of any litigation on which you have 
received notice involving Monday to Saturday and involving 
the charter of rights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m informed by the Minister of Justice 
that under the Act we have received notice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that 
is a little less than helpful. You will not tell me notice of what, 
from whom, or in respect of what sort of an allegation, and 
more particularly, in respect of whether or  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

933 
 

not the charter of rights is involved. 
 
I put it to you, Mr. Minister, that with respect to Monday to 
Saturday there is no effective challenge of provincial 
jurisdiction with respect to store hours. I put that to you. I also 
ask you, sir, whether or not in the light of that clear statement, 
that clear fact which I suggest is not challenged, and in the light 
of your supposition, your proposition, your proposals that store 
hours during those six days be extended, have you a proposal to 
lay before this House dealing with extended store hours so that 
stores could operate within the law and not outside the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Minister of Justice indicates that we 
have received notice under The Constitutional Questions Act. 
And it may very well be, therefore, that it will be determined 
that no one in fact is acting unlawfully at present, because it 
may very well be determined that our legislation is 
unconstitutional. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I’m amazed that you and 
your colleague, the Minister of Justice, would take the position 
that you have no jurisdiction with respect to store hours from 
Monday to Saturday, and that, accordingly, you do not wish to 
take action. 
 
I understood you to say, and I think I fairly understood you to 
say, that there was considerable public sentiment for a 
lengthening of the store hours as they currently are provided for 
in statute. And I believe that’s a fair statement of what you were 
suggesting. 
 
Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that it is undesirable to have 
major stores, and I’ll say Safeway, operating its stores at times 
which on the face of the law is illegal, and yet you not putting 
forward any proposal whereby store hours might be somewhat 
changed so as to allow Safeway to operate legally. Do you not 
feel that it is undesirable for major chains of that nature to be 
operating illegally, when — at least if I can understand their 
public position properly — they have no wish to operate 
illegally, expect that they must meet the competition and no one 
is enforcing the current law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we of course would be very 
interested to hear the Leader of the Opposition’s position with 
regards to store hours since he seems to have been strangely 
silent to date. The issues that he seems to be getting at really 
don’t seem to make much sense when you consider that the law 
as it presently stands may not in fact be acceptable. In a sense it 
may not be law because it may violate a higher law, and we in 
fact are intervening in these particular cases. There of course 
has been notice under The Constitutional Questions Act as I just 
indicated previously. We in fact are taking a particular position, 
but your position seems to be that you should go ahead and 
amend the Act which now is being challenged as to its very 
constitutionality itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes  

indeed, that’s my position. Virtually every law on the books can 
be challenged on the grounds of constitutionality now that we 
have a charter. That is the nature of having a charter or any 
other body of law which is superior on the face of it to federal 
and provincial legislation. That is the nature of a charter. 
Therefore, all the laws in the books are subject to challenge. 
 
And I would have thought that you, sir, would have got that 
advice from your colleague, the Minister of Justice. It is simply 
not acceptable, in my judgement, sir, for any government to 
say, since it may be challenged, therefore we will not act. Since 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . All right, Mr. Minister, I 
understood you to say, “It is being challenged.” I simply want 
to ask you whether or not the store hour law in Saskatchewan as 
it relates to Monday to Saturday is being challenged under the 
charter of rights, and by whom. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated, we have received notice 
under The Constitutional Questions Act on one case pertaining 
to constitutional matters. I’m informed that in fact there may be 
another one that may be coming forward as well. That seems to 
be reasonable indication that the process is in fact starting. And 
that seems to be a fairly significant consideration to take into 
account when you decide whether or not you should now be 
amending legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
sorry I didn’t understand your answer. Are you stating that the 
current law with respect to store hours in Saskatchewan has 
been challenged on the grounds of its unconstitutionality and 
that you have received notice of that? And if that be so, Mr. 
Minister, would you give me the name of the person who is 
challenging the law? And it could hardly be done without you 
knowing. After all it’s the urban legislation which is under 
challenge. I suspect it would have found its way to your desk. 
And would you tell me who is challenging the law saying that it 
is unconstitutional for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
regulate store hours between Monday and Saturday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We have received notice and we 
understand that it is SuperValu; and as I indicated, we expect 
that there may be more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
I want to be very clear on this. You’re telling me that the law, 
that the statute of Saskatchewan, is being challenged — not a 
Regina city by-law. We’re not talking now about a by-law, 
whether a by-law is ultra vires. That has nothing to do with this 
legislature. We’re talking about whether SuperValu is saying 
that the Government of Saskatchewan can’t pass a law 
regulating store hours between Monday and Saturday. That’s 
what you’re telling me; and I am surprised to hear it; and I’d 
like you to confirm it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Minister of Justice informs me that 
because the by-law is at challenge here and because the by-law 
is, of course, directly related to The Urban Municipality Act, 
that in fact The Urban Municipality Act, in terms of its 
constitutionality, is called into question in  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

934 
 

this particular time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I hope you received a 
garbled communication from the Minister of Justice. That’s all I 
can say. I hope you received a garbled communication. Because 
if you are saying that simply because someone challenges a 
by-law that this in some way places the legislation under which 
the by-law is passed under a constitutional cloud, that is a legal 
proposition which will surprise many of the Minister of 
Justice’s colleagues at the bar. 
 
But it does indicate what the Minister is saying, that if someone 
attacks a municipal by-law about store hours, he is saying, oh, 
it’s before the courts; I will do nothing. That is the position he 
is taking. Nothing could be clearer than that this Minister does 
not wish to indicate whether he likes the current legislation or 
whether he proposes any changes in the current legislation. And 
I think we’ll leave it at that because nothing could make it 
clearer. 
 
I turn now to the Sunday option — the Sunday option — and I 
believe with the Minister that there is litigation in Ontario 
which might affect the Sunday option. It is difficult to know. 
The legislation will be differently worded. And efforts have 
been made, I believe, to make our Act not rest upon any 
religious basis, but rather upon a general societal basis. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister: is it your position that you are supporting our 
current legislation with respect to Sunday closing? And if 
you’re supporting it in the courts, do you also support its 
enforcement? Or do you support it in the courts, but not enforce 
it on the ground? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I indicated some moments ago my 
particular position with regards to the Sunday issue. And I 
indicated then that I suggest the legislation was appropriate. It 
has been challenged here in the province and in fact has resulted 
in certain prosecutions. But what is going to happen now and in 
the future may very well be academic, because the whole issue 
may very well be determined to lead to a situation where it 
doesn’t make any difference what my position or your position 
or the position of this Legislature is with regard to Sunday 
opening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have 
any of the prosecutions to which you have referred been 
launched by your department or by any agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan at the request of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, this has been an interesting 
exercise. Let me preamble my comments with this comment. 
Clearly one of the things that governments do is lead. You are 
providing no leadership on this issue whatsoever. 
 
As a matter of fact, if anything, this government of which you 
are a part, this Devine government, doesn’t lead; it flounders. 
You never know from one day to the next what position you’re 
staking out. And that’s why you’ve lost so many arguments. 
That’s why you’ve lost with the federal government every time 
they want to put the screws to  

Saskatchewan. That’s why you lose in every field, because you 
never know what your position is. 
 
In October — and I will refer to the former minister of Urban 
Affairs again — in October your former minister of Urban 
Affairs for this government said: the province will consider 
changing laws which Saskatoon aldermen say have hamstrung 
their attempt to regulate store hours. They he was quoted as 
saying — the paper is quoted as saying: 
 

“Saskatchewan’s urban Act may be changed if it lets 
council establish an enforceable store hours by-law”, 
Urban Affairs Minister Ted Embury said in an interview 
Monday. 

 
It indicates that he had changed his mind when he said that 
since August . . . when he said that the Act was flexible enough 
to allow the city to regulate store hours on it’s own. And he said 
he said this after getting legal advice from obviously the 
Department of Justice. First of all the law was okay. Then he 
said, the government is going to change the law. Now you come 
into this House and you say, no, we’re not going to do anything. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you this question: when will you have 
a proposal on this issue so that you can satisfy the 
municipalities — and in this case it happens to be particularly in 
Saskatoon and Regina, but it may expand — what their position 
is going to be? When will your government come forward with 
a proposal which states your government policy and indicate 
what action you’re going to take to enforce your policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well because the underpinnings of the law 
are being challenged at present, when it is determined by the 
courts what we have authority to do or not to do, at that 
particular point in time if there are changes that are deemed to 
be appropriate, they would be made at that time, given whatever 
authority the courts determine we have to make. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That, Mr. Minister, is a remarkable 
prescription for inaction. If you are saying that any time an Act 
is challenged — or indeed you’re going further than that — that 
any time a by-law under an Act is challenged, that’s an excuse 
for inaction. That, Mr. Minister, is something quite different 
than what I would think of as decisive leadership. 
 
You have a situation in Regina which nobody is happy with. I 
don’t think anyone is happy with the situation we have now. 
We have a duly elected city council which has taken the 
position that a second night of shopping would ease the 
pressure and would permit them to get the genie back in the 
bottle — would permit them to get the stores to comply. And 
they’ve asked for that. 
 
And a moment ago I had the copy of the resolution from the 
Regina city council, and they passed that resolution asking for a 
second night of shopping within months of the time of their 
election. 
 
You have a number of consumers who want unregulated 
shopping — want to be able to go and shop on Sunday morning, 
at 11 o’clock Sunday morning, at 3 o’clock  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

935 
 

Monday morning. They are not a whole lot happier with this 
situation either. I think everyone would rather the situation were 
clarified than for the present confusion to continue. 
 
I just pray, Mr. Minister, that you don’t mean a word of what 
you said. I pray that you weren’t enunciating the policy of the 
government when you said you were going to wait and see the 
constitutionality of this thing come to an end before you act. I 
also pray that you were not confused. 
 
I really pray that what you really meant to say was that you 
haven’t got the guts to deal with the issue in advance of an 
election. Whether or not you would afterwards is problematic. 
But I really hope what you meant to say was, we haven’t got the 
courage to take a position of leadership on an issue about 
which, admittedly, there are diverse opinions, but which I think 
as well, admittedly, no one’s happy with. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you just admit that is what you intended to 
say all along; you did not intend to make the nonsensical 
statements with respect to the constitutionality and your 
response to the constitutional challenge that you just made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as I have indicated on numerous 
occasions here tonight, the public of Saskatchewan, and 
certainly the residents of Regina, are voting overwhelmingly 
with their feet, night after night, in favour of liberalized store 
hours. 
 
And all you have to do is go knock on a few doors in this city 
and you will know that. The vast majority of people in this city 
want to see liberalized store hours. They want to see it six 
nights a week, I suspect, in this city, as a number of them, of 
course, have been enjoying in Saskatoon for some time. That is 
simply the fact. 
 
Now whether or not you or I think that that is in the best 
interests of everyone is another issue. And you might very well 
want to see legislation here which permits one more night of 
shopping, or two, or three, or five out of six, or four and a half, 
or you might even want to cut it back to have no nights of 
shopping. 
 
The fact of the matter is, it is now passed beyond what you 
think should be here, or what I think should be here. It is now in 
fact in the purview of the courts. They are going to determine 
what authority this particular legislature has to determine the 
store hours issue. 
 
And at that particular point in time, once that decision is made, 
then if it is deemed appropriate or necessary by the government 
of the day to amend The Urban Municipalities Act to change 
the store hours provision, then I suppose in due course those 
decisions and determinations will be made. 
 
But at this particular point in time the issue is before the courts 
and to amend the legislation today or tomorrow or whatever, 
while this particular process is going on, does not in fact seem 
to be leadership, in my estimation, as you would suggest. 

Mr. Shillington: — Well it’s not leadership, it’s a vacuum of 
leadership. I think, Mr. Minister, we may close the subject by 
saying that it is a fair assumption that the people of Regina and 
the people of Saskatoon have concluded with respect to this 
problem, as with respect to so many others, nothing but a 
change in government is going to resolve it. I think that’s a fair 
assumption of their views. And one could, I think, fairly read 
that into the recent polls which have shown your government 
massively behind in both cities. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get back to the funding provided by 
your department to local authorities. I note that the Wakamow 
Valley Authority — I don’t know how it could happen with 
such sterling representation as Moose Jaw sent to the legislature 
— but I note that the Wakamow Valley Authority is actually 
getting 42 per cent less in 1986-87 than they got in 1982-83. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, what remains of the Wakamow Valley 
Authority in light of that slashing of its funding — and no other 
word but slashing would describe it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I haven’t personally had that much 
direct contact with Wakamow Valley Authority, but I am 
informed that they are alive and well. They’re doing some great 
things, working in the local area to provide the kinds of services 
and opportunities to the people in that area that they want to 
provide. They are actively involved in local fund raising 
campaigns. They did have some initial start-up money which is 
not available to them now. But certainly, like all of other 
authorities in the province, they are alive and they are well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad to know that there 
has been no funeral for the Wakamow Valley Authority. I 
wonder though if you would tell us why you think it is 
appropriate for the Moose Jaw version of the Wascana Centre 
— if I can be forgiven for phrasing it in that fashion — why 
you think it appropriate to cut their funding by 42 per cent over 
the term of this government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as you indicated, there was some 
start-up capital, and it was not appropriate to continue on with 
the start-up capital. Start-up capital is start-up capital. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The project . . . You have got the figures 
backwards, Mr. Minister. Wascana Centre, which is largely 
developed and which has little need for further capital 
development, although there’s some, has by comparison been 
richly dealt with. Over the term of your office, they’ve only 
suffered a 6 per cent cut in funding. 
 
The Meewasin Valley Authority, which is further developed but 
certainly has not reached any stage of maturity, has suffered a 
17 per cent cut in funding. The Wakamow Valley Authority, 
which is just getting started — and one would therefore assume 
that its capital needs are higher, because it is just starting — had 
its funding cut 42 per cent. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: how can you justify those figures 
for developing authorities whose needs for capital  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

936 
 

must be considerable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I understand it, your NDP 
government was going to provide $200,000 in capital start-up. 
You were able to provide two $50,000 allotments before the 
massacre some time back in ’82. Since then we have provided 
two additional $50,000 allotments in terms of capital start-up. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — For an authority which is just beginning, 
their need for capital is greater rather than less. The Wascana 
Centre, which is largely mature, has suffered only a 6 per cent 
cut in funding. This one, which is just beginning, has suffered a 
42 per cent cut in funding. The Meewasin Valley Authority, 
which is somewhere in between, has suffered a 17 per cent cut 
in funding. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, why you didn’t maintain their funding? 
Is it because your government lacks enthusiasm for these 
authorities? Is that a fair assumption, that you don’t have the 
enthusiasm for the Wascana Centre, and the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, and the Wakamow Valley Authority? Do I take it 
that you don’t have the enthusiasm for these authorities that the 
former government did? Is that why their funding has been cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Not so. I just met, in fact, with the 
Wakamow Valley Authority people not that long ago — I think 
within the last two or three weeks — and we had a good 
discussion concerning their particular funding situations and 
talked about the possibility of increased funding opportunities 
for that particular authority in the future. So certainly we are 
actively interested in that particular authority and in all 
authorities here in the province. We’re glad to see that they are 
active in their particular local community, raising funds; we 
encourage that. Certainly it’s a very worthwhile thing. It’s a 
very worthwhile addition to the cities that we’re talking about 
where the authorities are located, and we are supportive of 
them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it that you are privatizing the 
funding of these authorities? Is that an assumption from your 
comments, that you expect them to get the money to develop 
those authorities from somewhere other than your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I understand that it was at 
Wakamow’s initiation that they decided to initiate fund-raising 
activities at the local level. That certainly is something that I 
don’t have any problem with. I think it’s something that is very 
worthwhile for any particular organization at a local level, at a 
municipal level, to attempt to raise funds at that particular level. 
And as I indicated, there is a significant commitment in terms 
of dollars to Wakamow — $100,000 capital that you people 
provided in terms of start-up, and 100,000 that we are 
providing. I think that’s fairly significant. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s also, baldly put, a 42 per cent cut in 
funding. Mr. Minister, the realistic possibilities of a government 
authority raising money through donations is ever so slight. 
What is going to happen to these authorities when you privatize 
their funding is exactly what happened to the hospitals when 
you privatized their funding and asked them to go pick it up 
through lotteries.  

They are going to be . . . just as the hospitals deteriorated, so 
these authorities will deteriorate and stagnate. 
 
So I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the only appropriate 
source of funding for an authority such as this is a level of 
government, not private fund-raising. They are no more going 
to be successful in making up the shortfall through private 
funding that the hospitals were, and precisely the same kind of 
result is going to ensure. They are going to deteriorate; they are 
going to stagnate, and a noble vision of a very considerable 
improvement in the quality of life in the major cities of this 
province will be lost. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider this nonsense about them 
going out and raising it in the community. I suggest they’re not 
going to be successful in doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it’s typical of you to call into 
question the ability of local people and local organizations to 
band together to use their own initiative and drive to raise 
money, because you are of the opinion that it is only the 
provincial government that somehow can do everything for 
everybody. That’s the position that you typically take. 
 
It seems to me that this particular organization has shown that it 
is very capable in terms of raising funds at the local level. I 
understand that through its own charitable fund-raising 
activities they have initiated the Devonian trail project quite 
successfully. They have, in addition, raised tens of thousands of 
dollars at the local level on their own initiative. 
 
Now I think that is something that is very commendable, very 
worthwhile. It is typical of you to consign these people to the 
trash heap because you don’t think the provincial government is 
giving them enough money. Well I would suggest to you that in 
fact they are doing a very, very commendable job of raising 
funds at the local level. And the amount of money that we are in 
fact providing to them this year, $96,620, is a very significant 
contribution from the provincial taxpayers to the Wakamow 
Valley Authority, to the people of that particular local 
community. 
 
So I think that when you consider the amount of money that 
they have received from the provincial government, when you 
consider their very own energetic fund raising drive, which is 
something that we certainly commend and we encourage 
because we believe in local initiative and we believe in 
volunteerism — something, I might add, that you people don’t 
seem to talk very much about . . . Now it may be that you don’t 
have anything against volunteerism, but you sure don’t talk 
very much in favour of it. You sure don’t seem to be all that 
much in support of something that seems to be very common 
impulse here in Saskatchewan. You sure do seem to spend a lot 
of time, however, suggesting that big brother government 
should do everything for everybody. That seems to be your 
common approach. 
 
It certainly isn’t the approach of this particular government. We 
believe in working with communities, working together — the 
charitable impulse on one hand, government on the other hand, 
providing appropriate funds. That is the way to go. You may 
not like it, but I think  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

937 
 

that’s in the tradition of this particular province and that’s what 
we’re going to continue to do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The tradition of this province, which is 
becoming firmly established, is that once every 50 years the 
public make a fatal mistake and elects Conservatives. And it 
happens once every 50 years. All I can say is, the public might 
be gratified that in the normal lifetime of most people, you only 
have to go through this experience once. 
 
Mr. Minister, if your funds . . . if the money which they got the 
last year we were in office, since that seems to be the figure you 
like to use, if it had kept pace with inflation, they would be 
getting $212,000 — $228,000. They are now, Mr. Minister, 
getting $90,000. Do I take it therefore that you believe the 
major responsibility for funding the Wakamow Valley 
Authority rests on the local people, and that you have now 
become a minor partner in the project? Do I take that to be your 
position is that you no longer believe you’re a major partner in 
the project for the city, you now believe you’re a minor partner, 
and the major responsibility rests with the local people? Do I 
take that to be your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — What you can take my position to be is that 
we believe that the provincial government has a responsibility 
to assist particular local organizations in communities as 
appropriately as possible. And this year, to provide $96,000 of 
taxpayers’ money from across the province is a very substantial 
commitment to that particular community and to that particular 
organization. And these particular individuals, I understand it, 
since July of 1984, their energetic volunteer development fund 
committee has in fact secured $385,000 in pledged support 
from non-government sources to the Wakamow development 
fund campaign. 
 
Now I take it that your position would be that we should see 
less of that volunteer activity taking place down at Wakamow 
so that they in fact would raise less money at the local level, 
and then the provincial government would put in more money. 
And what we really should do, therefore, is to increase taxes for 
everybody in the province of Saskatchewan as a result. Now 
that’s the position that you seem to be taking when you say to 
that the provincial government should be providing more and 
more funds. You know, why don’t you say what the real 
consequence of that is, and that the taxpayers across the 
province would in fact have to see their taxes go up. And that’s 
the position that you people have been taking all night — 
increase funds here, increase funds there, increase funds over 
here — and in fact you never talk about taxes having to be 
raised. 
 
(2045) 
 
Well I can tell you that the people were not wrong in 1982. One 
of the reasons why they turfed you out was because, in fact, you 
were taxing people as high as you were. You raised their 
income tax substantially; you raised their gas tax substantially; 
you refused to provide them with the kind of interest rate 
assistance that they needed. And the people were not wrong 
back in 1982, as you suggest they were. 

This particular government believes that the appropriate 
approach to take is to work in conjunction with the local 
community, to encourage them to raise funds at the local level, 
as I do everywhere across the province when I meet with local 
communities. A fundamental principle of funding of this 
particular government is that if you can get support at the local 
level, then there certainly is going to be support as well from 
the provincial level. And we encourage that. 
 
And I think the people of the Wakamow Valley Authority and 
district need to be commended for their very substantial 
volunteer, fund-raising effort today in the magnitude of 
something like $385,000. And if you want to see taxes 
increased in the province of Saskatchewan, because you’re not 
interested in seeing that degree of volunteer activity, then you 
just go ahead and say it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m not sure I know what the minister is 
ranting and raving about, and I’m not sure I know why he can’t 
deal with a subject without flying off the handle, as you did. I 
suppose it might be called panic. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is our position that local authorities have a right 
to share in the revenue of the provincial government, and their 
percentage of the share of the revenue of the provincial 
government should not be drastically decreased. It should not 
go down as drastically in real dollars as the revenue sharing did, 
which we spent the afternoon on and which I think you finally 
admitted had dropped catastrophically as it is with respect to the 
funding of these urban parks — if that’s what you want to call 
them. They’re more complex than that, but they are intended to 
enhance the life-style of the communities. 
 
It is our position that the provincial government should 
maintain a certain . . . set aside a certain percentage of its 
revenues for these local authorities. I have stated, Mr. Minister, 
over the period of time you have been in office your revenues 
have increased by 32 per cent, your expenditures have increased 
by 33 per cent. And what has happened to these local 
authorities? Have they got their share of that? Their share has 
dropped and dropped very, very dramatically, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, your revenues have outpaced inflation. For all the 
weeping and gnashing of teeth that has gone on on the treasury 
benches over there about drought and grasshoppers and all the 
ills that have beset you — and potash and oil — the truth of the 
matter is that your revenues have increased faster than inflation. 
During the period of time you have been in office, inflation has 
increased 27 per cent; your revenues, according to these if they 
can be believed — have increased by 33 per cent. You have not, 
Mr. Minister, given a fair share of that to local authorities. 
 
We spent two weeks with the Minister of Health. Part of the 
time was bringing, I think successfully after a period of time, 
the Minister of Health to the realization that the federal 
government is passing on a tax burden to the provinces. That is 
precisely what’s happening with EPF (established program 
funding) funding. They are passing on their fiscal problems to 
the provinces, because they’re bailing out and leaving the 
provinces to carry the can. But  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

938 
 

while the Minister of Health was determined to resist the 
conclusion, I think it was finally obvious to everyone including 
him. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, are doing exactly the same thing to the 
municipalities. You are solving the fiscal mess which you 
created by passing it on to the municipalities, and they’re 
developing a problem. Their services are deteriorating. They’re 
having difficulty holding the line on mill rates. And some of the 
public are asking those municipalities: how is it that our taxes 
are increasing and our services are deteriorating? How is it that 
the streets of towns and villages and cities in this province are 
not fit for anything more delicate than a jeep? 
 
Mr. Minister, I think fewer and fewer people are asking that, 
and more and more people are recognizing that the major reason 
why municipalities are having the problems they are having is 
because your government has decided in the crassest possible 
fashion that you can get away without giving them their fair 
share of a tax dollars. You can appropriate unto yourself those 
tax dollars and keep them, and the municipalities will have to 
face the music. And the schools will. 
 
The minister gets up and rants and raves about what a sorry 
state the hospitals were in before this government came to the 
rescue. All I can say is, you left some people unconvinced about 
the hospitals. You have left the doctors, the nurses, the hospital 
administrators, the patients, and the general public of 
Saskatchewan unconvinced that you were the saviours of a bad 
system. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re going to get to the schools whenever this 
government has the courage to call Education estimates. Suffice 
it to say, the schools have also found this government 
appropriating the provincial revenues to itself and not passing 
on a fair share to those local authorities. And school boards and 
school units are developing their problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem, though, has been severely faced by 
the municipalities. When you give municipalities less and less 
and less money in real dollars, you’re passing on a tax burden. 
Unless it is your position that the municipalities are providing 
too wide a range of services, then, Mr. Minister, when you . . . 
when the grants which you give to local authorities decreases in 
real dollars, then you’re passing on a tax burden. You’re doing 
to the municipalities what the federal government is doing to 
you. 
 
I have never seen a government as unconscious about the major 
events and the major developments that are affecting it. You 
don’t seem to realize what the federal government is doing to 
you, and if you can be taken at your word — and I’m not sure 
that that is a wise thing to do — you don’t seem to realize what 
you’re doing to the municipalities. You are doing exactly the 
same thing. You are passing on a tax burden. 
 
This government came into office with the most wildly 
irresponsible campaign that the province has ever seen. I still 
have a copy of those election promises. You introduced, Mr. 
Minister . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well, we see the members over there yelling and ranting and 
raving. All I can say is, it does not matter how much noise you 
make, these estimates are going to go on. These questions are 
going to be put to the ministers. And we are going to get some 
answers. And the member from Saskatoon Sutherland can make 
all the noise he wants from his seat. But these questions are 
going to continue. You can scream and yell if you like, but the 
questions are going to continue to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs. 
 
You are doing to the municipalities what the federal 
government is doing to you and you don’t seem to be conscious 
of either. If you are conscious of what the federal government is 
doing to you, you’re not admitting it. You’re not going to the 
federal government and laying Saskatchewan’s case before the 
federal government. Rather than . . . Part of the problem is to be 
fair to the Minister of Urban Affairs. A good part of this burden 
has to be borne by the premier of the day. And you do not have 
a leader which can diplomatically but firmly can put 
Saskatchewan’s position in Ottawa. All we have is a Premier 
who goes to Ottawa and says, good work, Brian. 
 
Well it may come as a surprise to this government, but the 
salary that the Premier of this province earns is high and it is 
high enough to justify something more substantial than that 
idiotic comment, good work, Brian. One of the major roles of a 
premier is to . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I don’t think the conduct or 
the ability or the non-ability of the Premier has anything to do 
with these estimates, and would you please get on with the 
estimates that pertain to Urban Affairs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will abide by your 
ruling. Suffice it to say, though, that a major part of the 
financial problems this government has, and it affects Urban 
Affairs estimates, is that there is no one in this government in a 
position of leadership who can go and put our position in 
Ottawa, unlike the ’70s when this province had a leader who 
could do so and who did so in such a distinguished fashion that 
he and this province earned a national reputation. Part of your 
problems here in Urban Affairs, as in every other department, is 
you don’t have anyone who will stand up for this province. 
 
Not only are you having it done to you by the federal 
government, you in turn are doing it to the urban municipalities. 
So you’re perpetuating the problem. This country’s and this 
province’s financial problems are not going to be resolved by a 
series of governments which attempt to pass the problem off on 
someone else. And that’s what you’re doing with respect to the 
urban municipalities. This province’s and this country’s fiscal 
problems . . . I admit they are there. This government had had 
its credit rating lowered twice in two years and I and a goodly 
number of other people, some of whom — many of whom — 
are better informed than I, suspect that it’s going to happen for a 
third time in three years this year. 
 
These financial problems are not going to be resolved by 
passing them off on somebody else. They’re going to be 
resolved when the public, after the next election, when the 
public elect a government with the courage and the energy and 
the leadership ability to take the bit in its  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

939 
 

mouth and deal with the problems themselves rather than trying 
to pass them off on someone else. 
 
Ottawa, Mr. Minister, is not solving its fiscal problems; it’s 
passing them off. I will venture to say that over the period of 
time that the Mulroney government is in Ottawa their revenues 
will outpace inflation just as yours have . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . 
 
I don’t know why the member for Moosomin continues to yell 
and rant and rave from his seat. I’m not sure what he thinks he’s 
contributing. All I can say is that it may well be frustration at 
having played such a pointless role in the government after 
having spent so many years in opposition. The member from 
Moosomin does seem to be getting a tad excited. . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . 
 
Well it is getting difficult to outshout the member from 
Moosomin. He’s good at something. I will have to say that. 
 
But Mr. Minister, you’re not going to solve this province’s 
fiscal affairs by trying to pass the problem off on someone else, 
just as the national government is not going to solve this 
country’s fiscal problems by jiggering the established program 
funding. 
 
You’re going to solve them when — and I don’t expect that to 
happen within the short lifetime of this government, because 
there’s not much of it left — but it’s going to happen when a 
government is elected that is able to deal with the problems and 
solve them themselves and not try and make someone else into 
a scapegoat. That, Mr. Minister, is when this province’s fiscal 
problems — which everyone, whether they are in Regina or in 
New York, acknowledge — that is when this province’s fiscal 
problems are going to be solved. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are doing to the municipalities what Ottawa 
is doing to you. Both, Mr. Minister, are making a solution to 
this country’s fiscal problems more difficult to achieve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The member opposite talks about fiscal 
problems. I would simply remind him that your present leader 
who four years ago thought that interest rate relief was not 
appropriate, when interest rates were going sky-high, could not 
exercise one iota of leadership to help the people of this 
province who were suffering. Today he decides that we need an 
interest rate relief program. And he is now promising literally a 
billion dollars worth of election promises, literally a billion 
dollars worth . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talked about 
leadership. Now I’m going to take a couple of minutes to talk 
about leadership. He’s now promising a billion dollars worth. 
How’s that going to impact, Mr. Chairman, on municipalities? 
How is that going to impact upon the revenue of municipalities? 
He is now promising a billion dollars worth. Editorial writers 
are saying he is promising the moon. People don’t want the 
moon; they want good government. They want good 
government. And I can tell you, taking over potash mines and 
not creating one new job was not good government. To promise 
the moon today in the order of a billion dollars in election 
promises is not good government. Certainly that is not good 

government. 
 
Now we believe good government is assisting people when they 
need assistance, and they certainly needed assistance in 1982 
when interest rates were dramatically high. And this 
government acted and responded, and people remember that. 
They needed assistance when inflation was very, very high — 
and the gas tax came off, and people remember that. Few 
people had the opportunity when inflation was running double 
digit to do something about it. But you chose not to. 
 
(2100) 
 
And now you say the people were wrong in 1982 when they 
voted in favour of 8 per cent money for farmers. You say they 
were wrong in ’82 when they voted in favour of interest rate 
relief for home owners. You say they were wrong when they 
voted for inflation protection and getting ride of the gas tax. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, was leadership then; it is leadership 
today; when we are providing the kind of assistance to 
municipalities, a 3 per cent increase — very substantial; when 
we provide assistance to Saskatoon to provide a new 
multi-purpose arena for that particular municipality, and the 
people of Saskatoon voted in that municipality 2:1 in favour. 
And my understand is the NDP in that city were opposed to it. 
 
It was leadership, Mr. Chairman, in this municipality, in which 
I happen to represent the people of the constituency of Regina 
Rosemont, to provide funding to fix up the taste and odour 
problem of Regina’s drinking water. You had 11 years to solve 
that problem; you did nothing. Oh you talked about a 
constitution, and you talked about your wonderful family of 
Crown corporations, but people turned on their taps and what 
did they see? Water that they couldn’t drink. And they said, an 
NDP government really doesn’t care about our particular 
problems. And they were right. 
 
Well today when we take the tax off clothing, people say, they 
do care about our particular problems. When we provide 6 per 
cent money to farmers, and that helps every municipality 
around the province, people say, we do have a government that 
is responding to our particular problems. This government 
responded in 1982. We are responding today. And I can assure 
you after the next election we will continue to respond to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Sure you will respond after the next 
election. You’ll have the sobering experience of being in 
opposition to assist you with that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some of them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A few of them will, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take it from your own estimates, filed by 
yourself, the grants to local authorities and third parties, the vast 
majority of which would have gone to municipalities, was 
$87,903,770 in ’82-83. By the year 1986-87 the grants to local 
authorities and third parties was 79,161,400. Even if you take 
out assistance for water  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

940 
 

and make every conceivable assumption in favour of the 
government — one of the programs which, in doing my 
calculations, I took out, for instance, was grants to cities 
pursuant to The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act. My 
guess is that that particular program hasn’t suffered any 
increase in funding. In fact I suspect it might have disappeared 
in the shuffle. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you began giving the municipalities 87 
million simply because you inherited the fiscal framework 
which we left you at a period of time when your revenues 
increased by 33, 32 per cent; you have decreased their funding 
by a fair whack. How on earth, Mr. Minister, do you claim that 
that is fair treatment to municipalities? 
 
How can that be anything but what . . . doing to the 
municipalities what the federal government is doing to you? Do 
you enjoy what the federal government is doing to the 
provinces to make them the scapegoats? Do you think the 
municipalities are going to enjoy it? I suspect they’re not. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to address the serious decrease in 
funding to third parties. Do you think . . .  have their expenses 
decreased? Do they have a lot of frivolous programs? Would 
you tell us how you expect them to get along on very, very 
significantly less in absolute dollars — never mind real dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, if we could quote some statistics 
momentarily to the member opposite, I understand actual 
expenditures in ’82-83 were around the 8,374,500 — pardon 
me, 83 million figure. And budget for ’86-87, the estimate is 
around the almost 90 million figure in terms of total grants. 
 
It would have been higher if we hadn’t, in fact, concluded the 
expenditures on the water treatment plant for Regina. So it is 
down slightly because that project has come to a conclusion. 
And of course we’re very pleased that it has, because the taste 
and odour of Regina’s drinking water has been substantially 
improved — something which should have been done years 
ago, of course. 
 
And so in fact we do see an increase, significant increase, in 
terms of what we are budgeting this year compared to actual 
expenditures back in ’82-83. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this year you’re budgeting 79 
million. We’re going to get to capital grants in due course, 
therein lies another horror story. But let’s at the moment deal 
with grants to local authorities and third parties. It is stated this 
year to be 79,161,400. Taking off from ’82 the assistance with 
respect to water and the ambulance services, one is left with a 
figure which is still a few hundred thousand dollars more than 
you gave the municipalities back in ’82. 
 
What is it you think has changed? How do you anticipate, 
during a period in which time inflation has been 27 per cent, 
that they’re going to get along with fewer absolute dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if you take into account the funds 
which are in the employment development subvote,  

you’re comparing $86 million in ’83-84 to around $96 million 
in ’86-87. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We will get to the Employment 
Development Agency in due course. Those, I think it is 
conceded, are largely capital grants. If you are . . . And I may 
say you have been very clever at hiding those. It took me some 
time to find the PCC fund. Foolish me! I did not think to look in 
the Employment Development Agency for funding to 
municipalities. 
 
But in any event that, I assume, is by and large capital funds. If 
it’s not, if the PCC fund is something other than capital funds, 
then the program really has been perverted. 
 
Deal, Mr. Minister, if you will with your own estimates, both of 
which you prepared. This is your first; this is almost certain to 
be your last. You state in your first that the grants to local 
authorities and third parties — you’ve stated in your first — it 
was $87,903,770 million. Subtracting from that your assistance 
with respect to water and the municipalities, you still come up 
with a figure which is a few hundred thousand dollars larger 
than what you’re giving to municipalities now. 
 
I haven’t got into the question of funding from the Department 
of Highways to municipalities. Suffice it to say, and I think it’s 
relevant to note that this is a double whammy. While the 
funding from the Department of Urban Affairs to municipalities 
has decreased markedly, you are positively lavish in your 
generosity compared with the Department of Highways. The 
funding which the municipalities get for highways from the 
Department of Highways is 25 per cent of what it was when 
you took office. That has virtually been abolished. And 
somehow or other they’re supposed to repair and maintain those 
streets out of a budget which is shrinking, because it’s shrinking 
from you. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you want to start including like moneys, we 
could do that, but I think if you include the Department of 
Highways and you include the Employment Development 
Agency, you’re going to find that the municipalities are much, 
much worse than it would appear from just looking at your 
estimates. So if it is appropriate to get into all departments, we 
will do those sums and do them quickly, and we’ll compare that 
figure. But it will look a lot worse than what it does if we just 
stick with your estimates. 
 
Dealing with your estimates, Mr. Minister, how do you 
anticipate that they’re going to get along with less money now 
than they got from you when inflation . . . when the cost of 
living was 27 per cent lower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I mean, you go back to 1982-83, and you 
had interesting things in there — various grants to Sask 
Housing and so on. And I’m sure that you can take your 
particular figures to mount your particular argument, and we 
will take my particular figures to mount my particular 
argument. The point is that, when we do that, we disagree. You 
mount your particular position, and I take mine. 
 
Our opinion is that we are providing significant assistance to 
municipalities: a 25 per cent increase in the  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

941 
 

capital fund; a 3 per cent increase in revenue sharing this 
particular year; special funding for things to fix up Regina’s 
drinking water, for example, and to provide Saskatoon with a 
new multi-purpose arena. 
 
Clearly we are providing significant dollars to municipalities. 
You don’t say it’s enough. We think, given the present fiscal 
climate, that this is an appropriate amount of money to be going 
to municipalities. And I guess we’ll just have to agree to 
disagree. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s interesting to learn 
that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is now a local 
authority. That’s what you seem to suggest when you say that 
this figure is jiggered by the fact that Housing was in it. All of 
those grants are to the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
through . . . Those are grants to local authorities through the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. They are not included in 
this figure. And if you don’t know that, then it is time you spent 
some time coming to terms with your department, and perhaps a 
little less time frantically running around your riding trying to 
stave off what appears to be a near-certain election defeat. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me take something that you may find less 
confusing. Let me deal with the annual reports. One, ’81-82 . . . 
that wasn’t quite the one I intended to pick up. ’82-83, the first 
one that you filed, which was tabled in due course — and what 
do you know? — was transmitted to the Legislative Assembly 
by the Hon. Tim Embury, Minister of Urban Affairs. The name 
appears on it. Compare that with the last one that you filed. The 
same Tim Embury appears to have sent it to us — a picture of 
him being wildly cheered before SUMA. Who knows . . . well, 
guess what, the letter of transmittal is the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
I ask you: if you don’t like your own estimates, can we deal 
with your annual report where the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation doesn’t interfere? Once again, the total of grants to 
local authorities was $100 million in 1982-83. In ’84-85, which 
is the last annual report we have, the grants to local authorities 
is 80.908 million. I’m sorry. It’s 94 million. That’s better — it’s 
94 million. 
 
(2115) 
 
I am using your annual report. You don’t want to use the 
estimates. It’s page 5 of the annual report in ’82-83; it’s page 9 
of the annual report of ’84-85. Once again, you provided grants 
of $100 million, in round terms, to the municipalities in ’82-83 
to local authorities. The grants to local authorities three years 
later were $6 million less. 
 
Now, agreed, if you take out water and ambulance you come to 
a figure which is somewhere close. But you’re still giving, in 
absolute dollars, less to municipalities now than you did when 
you assumed office, and they have to deal with a rate of 
inflation which has been 27 per cent nationally. And I expect 
it’s been higher than that for municipalities. 
 
So I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to deal with the question and 
stop trying to avoid it. How do you feel municipalities can get 
along with less money now than they had when  

you came into office? What is it that’s changed? Are some of 
their programs frivolous? Should they be cutting back on police 
services? What is it, Mr. Minister, you think they’re doing 
wrong? Why is it you think that they should be living on so 
much less, when the government lives on so much more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, when you compare statistics — and 
as I indicated, the member opposite can compare any statistics 
he wants to, I’m sure, to develop his particular point of view — 
when I compare statistics showing actual expenditures in ’82-83 
of around $83 million to an ’86-87 budgeted figure of around 
$89 million — all of these dollars are of course going to assist 
the municipalities of the province (urban municipalities), then I 
think that’s indicative of a fairly substantial commitment on the 
part of this particular government — a 3 per cent 
revenue-sharing increase this year; special funds for special 
projects. 
 
I think that’s the appropriate direction that a government should 
take, even though there have been difficulties in fields like 
agriculture, for example, and they have needed substantial 
amounts of money. And because of that, as a consequence we 
may not have been able to provide to municipalities all of the 
money that they might like. 
 
And as I indicated before not everybody is able to receive what 
they would like. It’s quite common that they always want more 
than is actually available. I’m sure that that’s a phenomenon 
that was present under your administration and that has been 
present under this administration. I expect it’s a universal 
phenomenon, and that no government will satisfy the interests 
of everyone, contrary to the suggestion of the member from 
Shaunavon. But I think that the increase from 83 million actual 
to 89 million budgeted — and of course that doesn’t take into 
consideration that some even have the special project money 
which has been provided — suggests that there is a significant 
commitment to meet the fiscal needs of municipalities. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder if the minister would deal with 
the question. How do you expect the municipalities to get along 
on so much less money? Even assuming your figures are correct 
— and you don’t tell me how you arrived at that — but even 
assuming your figures are correct in real dollars, that’s a very 
substantial decrease in grants from the provinces. How do you 
expect municipalities to make do with so much less? What is it 
you think that they can dispense with? What programs do you 
want to see the municipalities cut — police, fire, health 
department? What is it that you want to see them cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, in 1982-83 actuals for 
example, for the city of Saskatoon, 20 million approximately — 
budgeted ’86-87, 24 million, which does not include, I believe, 
a $4 million commitment for an arena which the citizens of 
Saskatoon have overwhelmingly voted in favour of. So if you 
throw that in you’re now at around $28 million. But even just 
forgetting about the arena, we’re talking about a 24 million 
expenditure compared to a 20 million actual back in ’82-83. So 
there’s a significant increase over a time for the city of 
Saskatoon as an example. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

942 
 

Mr. Shillington: — But the minister is mixing capital dollars 
and operating dollars. What you are doing in your desperation 
to make this story sellable, you’re adding your operating dollars 
to your capital dollars, and you’re saying that’s greater than the 
operating dollars in ’82-83 — of course it is. But the figures, 
Mr. Minister, which you have in your own estimates are . . . 
$87,000,903 in ’82-83 when you took office. Now, Mr. 
Minister, four years later, you’re asking them to make do, $79 
million. Admittedly if you take out the assistance with respect 
to water, which you claim to have transferred to the water 
corporation, and the ambulance service, the difference gets 
much smaller. But the difference for operating dollars is still, 
Mr. Minister, less now in absolute dollars than it was in 
1982-83, and in real dollars it is a walloping decrease. I ask you 
again, Mr. Minister, what do you think the municipalities are 
doing wrong? Where do you want to see them cut back? What 
is it, or do you think local taxes should be increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I don’t think they’re doing anything 
wrong. I think they’re doing an excellent job. They, of course, 
would like to have more funds. They make their own spending 
priority decisions at the local level. Regina here has come under 
some criticism because of the way that they have decided to tax 
and to spend and so on. 
 
But be that as it may, I use the example of the city of Saskatoon 
again, for instance, increasing from around the 16 actual, to 
around 24 million budget — a very significant increase — a 3 
per cent increase in revenue sharing this year; an increase in the 
provincial capital fund over a two-year period of time. 
 
Now I know that you would like to see more dollars going to 
their urban municipalities. You have made that point very clear 
in the last two or three hours, or five or six hours, or however 
many we have been debating. The point that you have been 
attempting to make is that you believe the provincial 
government should provide more funds to municipalities. And 
the point that I have been making is that, given the fiscal 
situation that faces us all, and given the agriculture situation and 
so on — a 3 per cent revenue increase this year, a provincial 
capital fund increase of 25 per cent over two years, and as an 
example Saskatoon going from 16 million actual in ’82-83, to 
24 million actual in ’86-87 — is an indication of a significant 
commitment. You think it’s not high enough — that’s fine. 
That’s your position. 
 
We think that, given the priorities of the government of the day, 
and given the fiscal realities which face the province, that it is 
an appropriate commitment, and I think that’s likely where 
we’re going to have to leave the argument. If you want to 
continue reiterating that you would like to see more money 
spent — fine. You can stand up and continue to say that, and we 
will continue to say that, and we will continue to discuss the 
issue back and forth. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well indeed I am, indeed I am, Mr. 
Minister. I note more than one resolution, in the resolutions 
passed by the 81st annual convention of SUMA in this March, I 
notice more than one deals with  

funding. Indeed, at least two of them deal with funding. And 
they aren’t satisfied, and they are saying — let me just read a 
couple of whereas-es out of one which I think states it very 
well. It’s resolution no. 11, from this March’s SUMA 
convention: 
 

Whereas the economic health of our cities, provinces, and 
country is influenced by the state of municipal 
infrastructure; and, 
 
Whereas local government officials have identified that a 
serious infrastructure problem exists across Canada; and 
 
Whereas funding inadequacy has been cited as a principal 
cause of municipal infrastructure deterioration . . .  

 
And then on it goes. 
 
Mr. Minister, it isn’t just us who thinks that some serious 
problems are being developed by inadequate funding; the 
municipalities also say so. They say so in their solemn body 
which they meet, which meets every year. They are also 
complaining about the very same thing, the fact you’re solving 
the mess you made by trying to pass it on. 
 
At least I can say with respect to the Mulroney government 
they’re trying to solve a problem that they largely didn’t make 
— previous governments made it for them. They are trying to 
solve a problem which they inherited by passing it on. We say 
that that is no solution whatsoever. You’re even worse than 
that. You are trying to solve a problem you created by passing it 
on to local governments. You are not attempting to deal with it. 
You are not attempting to clean up the mess you made. You are 
trying to make it someone else’s mess. And you’re succeeding. 
 
The municipalities are developing serious problems, serious 
problems, Mr. Minister, and anyone who has spent any time 
with local government knows that there are some very serious 
problems developing. Streets are the most visible problem. But 
that’s only the most visible problem. That’s the one that is the 
most notorious. There are any number of other problems the 
municipalities face, and you don’t have to look a lot further for 
those problems than this budget, and this budget and the series 
that was introduced before. 
 
(2130) 
 
It is irrational, Mr. Minister, to give the municipalities less 
money now than you were giving them five years ago. Their 
responsibilities haven’t decreased. There is little inefficiency or 
waste in the municipalities. I think we all acknowledge that they 
run an efficient operation. All they can do, Mr. Minister, is to 
cut programs. And I wish you had the courage to stand here and 
tell us what programs you’d like to see them cut with the 
decrease in funding. I wish you would tell us and tell the 
municipalities what you think they ought to do to cut back 
because cut back they must. Either that or increase the taxes. I 
think it is common ground that they are an efficient level of 
government and there are few . . . There is little waste at the 
local level to be cut back. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

 

943 
 

So I wish, Mr. Minister, you’d deal with what you think the 
municipalities ought to be doing and save us the nonsense about 
all the problems you’ve had. Your revenue has increased faster 
than inflation. Your revenue situation has not deteriorated. In 
the face of some adversity, it has held up remarkably well. 
 
Your expenditures, in spite of the fact that the public services 
are collapsing, your expenditures have held up even better. 
They’ve increased faster than revenue. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the issue and tell the 
municipalities where you think they ought to be cutting back 
since they are getting fewer dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I would simply remind the 
member opposite that overall budget expenditures, $83 million 
to municipalities in ’82-83, upped to 89 million in this year’s 
projected budget, a substantial increase. I would also remind the 
member opposite that, as it relates to resolution no. 11, that our 
government is certainly actively involved in attempting to 
engage the federal government to be involved in some kind of 
cost-shared funding approach to the enhancement of municipal 
infrastructure here in Canada and in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:33 p.m. 
 
 


