


















































March 21, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 21, 1986 
 

85 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next ask the government following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985, to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Elrose Review. 

 
I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government 
the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Balcarres Local Exchange. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Assiniboia Times. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Biggar Independent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Big Muddy Roundup. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Birch Hills Gazette. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 
MIn the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs in the Canora Courier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Carlyle Observer. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Carnduff Gazette Post-News. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Craik Weekly News. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Cut Knife Highway 40 Courier. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Davidson Leader. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Esterhazy Potashville 
Miner-Journal. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in the Estevan Mercury. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. All members will be aware that 
oral notices of motions and questions have long been permitted 
in this House under routine proceedings. However, I want to 
point out to the member for Canora, and to all members, that 
this has been a courtesy extended to members, and is not a 
required part of the notice procedure. Also, oral notice, by 
itself, is not sufficient to constitute official notice. I refer all 
members to rule 38 in our Rules and Procedures which reads as 
follows: 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

86 
 

Forty-eight hours' notice shall be given of a motion for first 
reading of a bill, resolution, or address, for the 
appointment of any committee or for placing a question on 
the Order Paper; but this shall not apply to public bills, 
after their introduction, or to private bills, or to the times of 
meeting or adjournment of the Assembly. Such notice shall 
be laid on the Table and be printed in the Votes and 
Proceedings of that day. 

 
It is clear from this that the rules provide only for written 
notice. There is no provision for oral notice. As I said earlier, 
oral notice is a long-standing practice of this House, but is 
permitted only as a courtesy to members. 
 
I also want to refer members to Beauchesne's Rules and Forms, 
Fifth Edition, page 143, citation 395, as follows: 
 

Oral notices for future proceedings do not generally exist 
in the House of Commons. It is useless for a Member to 
say: "Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I will move a certain 
motion tomorrow." This would not give him any 
precedence on the next day and he would not thereby 
acquire the right to speak on matters not standing on the 
Order Paper. 

 
To go on at great length reading oral notices into the record, 
when this is not necessary to effectively give notice, appears to 
me to be an abuse of a courtesy traditionally extended to 
members. A practice that is permitted as a courtesy only should 
not be permitted to obstruct the regular business of the House. 
 
I thereby direct the member for Canora to submit any notices 
that he wishes to give by laying them on the Table as provided 
in rule 38. This in no way interferes with the member's rights to 
place items on the order paper. It is not my intention to prohibit 
the reading of oral notices in the future, but only to remind 
members that oral notices are permitted as a courtesy and will 
not be permitted to be used as a means of obstructing the 
House. 
 
I would ask the member now to table his notices, and we'll 
move on to the next order of business. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — You can't have points of order during question 
period. If the member wishes a point of order, he may rise 
before orders of the day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of my colleague, the MLA for Turtleford and the 
Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources, I'd like to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly a group 
of 30 grade 12 students from Debden High School. They are 
accompanied today by Sister Estelle Lavigne and Mr. Gerald 
Baron, as well as their bus driver, Mr. Richard Tremblay. 
 
I'd ask all members to welcome them here today and to express 
our wish that you have a very enjoyable visit, and 

I'll be pitch-hitting for Mr. Maxwell later on for pictures. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to 
join with my colleague in welcoming the students from Debden 
school. I had the opportunity of running into a few of them as I 
was hobbling up the steps on my crutches. They gave me a 
cheerful greeting, and we had passed a little time to discuss the 
hardships of the legislature. They thought I had a really rough 
day yesterday, so I'd just like to welcome them on behalf of my 
colleague, and good luck and a safe trip home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Domotor: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to this Assembly, a group of grade eight students 
numbering 25 in total, seated in the west gallery. They're 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Jmaeff, and Miss Stang, and 
chaperons Mrs. Ellis, Mrs. Pfiel and Mrs. Pulvermacher. 
 
I'll be meeting with them at 10:30 for photographs and drinks. I 
hope they find the question period informative and interesting 
and their day in Regina very satisfying. I wish them also a safe 
journey back. I wish all members to welcome them here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the legislature, some guests I have 
sitting in the Speaker's Gallery. These people are from the 
Western Christian College located just outside of Weyburn at 
north Weyburn, Saskatchewan. They are Dan Wiebe, who is the 
dean there, Ray McMillan, who is the chairman of the board of 
governors at the Western Christian College, and John Murray, 
who is the director of the building program. 
 
For the members of the legislature's information, this college is 
a world-recognized college, and there are students from all over 
the world who attend there and certainly, obviously, from 
south-eastern Saskatchewan. It has a long and distinguished 
history. But they are also the kind of people who don't rest on 
their laurels, and they are, at this very moment, undertaking a 
very exciting expansion program. Weyburn and area is very 
proud of this college. We're very proud of the faculty and the 
staff there, and the students who greatly contribute to the life in 
our community. They are indeed a classic example of building 
for our youth's future. 
 
I am going to be meeting with them in approximately one-half 
hour and I would ask all members of the legislature to join me 
in giving them a warm welcome here this morning. 
 
Hon Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I would like to join with the member from 
Weyburn welcoming the students from Western Christian 
College. I'm very familiar with the college and 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

87 
 

the people who run it, and my husband is as well. So I hope the 
member from Weyburn won't mind that I put my oar in and say, 
"Welcome friends." 
 
Hon Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Salary and Expense Arrangements with Westank-Willock 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
minister responsible for Sedco, and with the government's 
record of bringing in outside help at some pretty fair prices. My 
question to you, Mr. Minister, is, and it deals with 
Westank-Willock, a Regina manufacturer which Sedco took 
control of it in the early '80s, '84, in fact, and which since that 
time the take-over has run up more than $6 million of additional 
losses. This company is now owned by the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, through Sedco, and how it spends its money is of 
great interest to all of us, particularly to the taxpayers. 
 
Can the minister inform this Assembly of the salary and the 
expense arrangements that you've made with the president of 
Westank-Willock, a Mr. Gordon Campbell? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have that 
information, obviously, available now. I think the record of 
Westank-Willock, I think, is to be commended in the sense that 
over the last couple of years, work, particularly for the member 
from Regina North. They've been able to save 160 jobs at 
Westank, get them through some difficult times, Mr. Speaker, 
now to the point of having a very, very good opportunity to 
capitalize on some very exciting work in northern Canada, 
particularly in the Yukon, Mr. Speaker, where they look to have 
some great progress. 
 
But with regard to the question, I will take your question under 
advisement. I will find out the information from 
Westank-Willock and get the information back to the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can the minister confirm that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, through Sedco, are paying Mr. Campbell about 
$8,000 a month plus his expenses, and that in addition, until 
very recently, you paid him a trip a week back to Toronto, 
flying him back to Toronto every week. And further, can the 
minister confirm that until recently Saskatchewan taxpayers 
paid for a fully-furnished apartment for Mr. Gordon Campbell? 
And can you provide the cost of that additional arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Campbell was hired 
by Westank-Willock; he was not hired by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. That's number one, Mr. Speaker. Number two is, 
the NDP when they were in power wanted to shut that company 
down. This government did not shut that company down but 
tried to breathe life into that company, have in fact breathed life 
into that company, have preserved 160 jobs, and have allowed 
Westank-Willock now to become . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the minister 

 indicates that he can't remember the arrangement that he has 
with Mr. Campbell, and apparently therefore has a relatively 
short memory. May I remind the minister that on February 27, 
less than four weeks ago, you wrote a letter, sir, to Mr. Gerry 
Van Wachem which reads in part in this regard: 
 
Regarding the handling of Westank by the current president, 
Gordon Campbell, after reviewing his expenses and salary for 
the year ended September 30, 1985, they do not seem 
unreasonable for the head of a company the size of Westank. 
 
Now therefore when you wrote this letter on February 27, you 
had reviewed the salary and expenses of Gordon Campbell. 
Have you no recollection of what you reviewed when you wrote 
this letter less than four weeks ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker. I was visited 
prior to that letter by one Gerry Van Wachem, wanting the 
Government of Saskatchewan to pay to him some tenfold more 
than was paid to his father to buy out minority shareholders. At 
that point in time he indicated if the government were not going 
to pay some tenfold price for those shares, that he would use 
whatever authority he had to try to blackmail it out of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. I indicated to that particular 
person that this government was not up to listening to blackmail 
by him or anybody else, and I stand by that and I'm proud of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, whatever your dealings are with some member of the 
public may presumably be your dealings. What I am asking is 
this: did you review the expenses and salary of Mr. Campbell 
some time immediately prior to February 27, 1986 and can you 
remember what your review showed; and do you deny that they 
showed that Mr. Campbell got $8,000 a month plus expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I am not involved in the 
day-to-day working of Westank-Willock. But what I do look at, 
Mr. Speaker, is this: if a company can take a situation of having 
a very large loss in a corporation, turn that corporation around 
to the point where this year they will probably have a 
significant profit, create a lot of jobs, maintain a lot of jobs in 
the city of Regina, whoever the management is that can do that, 
if he can accomplish that, make a profit and turn it from a loss, 
then jolly well good for him. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, will you deny that (a) Campbell is paid $8,000 a 
month in expenses, or was until very recently; and (b) if you 
deny it, or say you don't know, are you telling me that there are 
perhaps other people in your organizations that get $8,000 a 
month plus expenses that haven't yet come to your attention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated that I do not 
know what the man makes. I will undertake to find out what the 
man does make. I can, Mr. Speaker, advise this. I can advise . . . 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

88 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise, Mr. Speaker, I can advise 
the Assembly this, that this particular person is turning this 
company around. And I don't know what he's making, but I'll 
find out and bring it back to this Assembly. But I can assure 
you this: he's making a lot less than David Dombowsky made 
and Jack Messer made, from the Government of Manitoba to 
peddle some phoney potash industry. And he's making a lot less 
money than David Dombowsky did when he worked for the 
minister, when he worked for those people when they were in 
government. Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to get that 
information. Any time somebody can take a company and turn 
it from a serious debt to a profit, and if he can get some money 
for that and do that, then jolly good for him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Do I take it then, Mr. Minister, that 
you are denying that this man gets $8,000 a month, or are you 
saying that you don't know? And secondly, I ask: is this the 
same person who was at the helm of Westank-Willock during 
the period 1984 and 1985, when their deficit, the accumulated 
deficit rose from $6.8 million to $9.4 million? Is that the same 
person who is turning the company around? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will return and advise as 
to how long this person has been there. But I hope the hon. 
member would not expect that you can hire somebody and a 
day later he turns a negative return into a positive return. 
Business does not work that way. The members opposite 
somehow do not understand the way business works. They have 
no understanding, appreciation, or compassion for the way that 
business works in this world. Mr. Speaker, Westank-Willock is 
an important industry to the city of Regina. This government 
stands behind it. This government stands behind the protection 
of those jobs, and this government stands behind any company 
that can turn a negative situation into a potentially positive, 
ongoing, strong corporation in this city. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, do you acknowledge that 
the loss of Westank-Willock in the year ended September 30, 
1981, was $152,000, and that since that time, accumulated 
losses since that time have exceeded $6 million, under the 
guidance of your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise, Mr. Speaker, the 
following. I can advise the following, Mr. Speaker. This 
corporation, when it was drifted into negative situation, was run 
by the Van Wachems, the friends of Allan Blakeney. It was 
turned around by the member that would be referred to . . . is 
now turning that around and making a positive out of that 
company. And any time a Gerry Van Wachem comes to this 
government, tries to blackmail it, tries to blackmail it for 
money, we will not stand for it, nor should anybody else stand 
for blackmail here or any place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you 
are closing down hospital beds, you are unable to assist 
ordinary people with their living expenses, and people are going 
hungry in this province, how do you 

 justify $8,000 a month plus a living allowance? How do you 
justify that, in view of your frugality on virtually every other 
front, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, in the last four 
years this government has not closed down hospital beds. In the 
last four years this government has opened and created a lot of 
hospital beds. It has also created a lot of nursing home beds, 
Mr. Speaker, again something that we're very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

Operation of Nipawin Dam 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a 
question, I believe on Tuesday of this week, from the Leader of 
the Opposition. The question was relative to the Nipawin 
hydrogenerating facility. 
 
Dealing with that question, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition indicated that the plant was operating at about 40 
per cent capacity, and what was the cost to SaskPower, what 
was the cost to consumers, and what steps have been taken to 
make the non-Canadian designer live up to his commitments, 
etc. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, in order to answer it, I 
thought I'd put the question on the floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is as follows. There 
were two units at Nipawin hydroelectric station, have been 
available for operation at less than full load since 1985; 
November 18th for no. 1; December 11th for unit no. 2. These 
two units have produced in excess of 75 per cent energy 
available in the river flow since that time. 
 
The non-Canadian designer and supplier has been very diligent 
and has spared no effort to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The 
supplier has done a considerable amount of testing at the 
factory and has worked very hard when work was being carried 
out on the units. All the work has been done at the 
manufacturer's expense. 
 
The order for the turbines, Mr. Speaker, was placed by the 
previous administration. There were provisions to recover 
damages from the supplier; however, SPC has not taken any 
steps to initiate action in view of the responsible manner in 
which the supplier has pursued the problem. 
 
There was a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, and that 
was: when will the plant return to 100 per cent capacity? And 
the answer to that is, number one, unit number one is available 
to operate at full load at this time, but there is still some work 
required to finish the project completely. Modification to unit 
number three will commence on March 25th of '86 and will 
require 28 days of work. Modification to unit number two will 
require 28 days of work and will take place during May. By 
mid-June the corrections will have been made to all three units. 
 
Based on current projections, Mr. Speaker, of river flows, these 
modifications will not result in any loss of generating capacity. 
This type of problem is not uncommon in hydraulic turbines 
and has been 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

89 
 

experienced by many other utilities, including Manitoba Hydro, 
Ontario Hydro, and utilities in the United States and South 
America. 
 
I hope that answers the Leader of the Opposition's questions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Shortage of Nurses 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with the all-candidates forum 
held in Estevan last night. Yesterday when I was driving to the 
Assembly I heard a news report that the minister wouldn't be 
able to make it to the meeting last night, but I'm sure that one of 
the reasons that we didn't sit was so the minister could attend 
the meeting. I wonder, could you bring us up to date, give us a 
little report on how that forum went and whether you made any 
announcement about the shortage of nurses which we're facing 
across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think, if one would realize 
that on many occasions the union of nurses have had 
opportunity to come to my office and discuss the concerns that 
they have over the past number of years, I had no intention of 
attending the meeting last night. The House was not sitting 
because of that situation. 
 
And I have indicated in writing that I will be attending one of 
their meetings, and that at that point in time I will again explain 
to the union of nurses, and whoever else wants to attend, the 
position of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it should be brought to the attention of you 
and the members of this Assembly that, rather than attending a 
number of meetings, what I and my department are doing are 
sitting down and making the concrete plans of where and how 
the utilization of the nurses that have been allocated under the 
$100 million will be applied to the hospitals of Saskatchewan. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that serves the public interest much 
better than me running around the province to some type of 
all-candidates meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Health concerning his public announcement yesterday from his 
office that he would not be attending the meeting in Estevan 
because he would be sitting in the Assembly. This is a press 
release or a press report that was carried on the media, that you 
would not be attending the meeting in Estevan because you 
would be in the Assembly. 
 
Now I want to know which of your answers is the truth. Which 
one is the truth? And I won't say that one of them is a lie, 
because that's unparliamentary, but will you tell me which of 
your stories is accurate — that you don't want to go to Estevan 
because you don't want to meet with the nurses, which is what 
you're saying today, or that you were going to be in the House? 
Which one of those stories is accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems rather 

 ironical that the member opposite should at least try to say 
anything about the truth . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That's the last gentleman that should talk 
about the truth . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I just asked for order, and it's 
impossible to hear what the minister is answering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite is concerned about 
nursing positions. I would just remind, Mr. Speaker, you, the 
member opposite (who doesn't like to hear this), the Leader of 
the Opposition — I will remind them that in 1976, July 1st, a 
letter here right in my hand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — He directs St. Paul's Hospital that they 
should decrease the nursing component by six registered nurses, 
by 2.5 certified nursing assistants, and by 2.5 nursing aides. 
That was on the 1st of July, 1976, when the Leader of the 
Opposition thought it was in the better interests of the people to 
put the money into potash mines and reduce the staffing 
standards in the hospitals in Saskatchewan. That's a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Since that time, Mr. Speaker, we have put 
over 450 positions back into the hospitals of Saskatchewan. I 
have announced that there will be 500 enrichment positions. I 
have said that I'm sitting down with my department in 
consultation with the hospitals of this province and the SHA, 
deciding where those bodies will go, and that's what I'm doing, 
and I have indicated to the SUN in writing that I will attend one 
of their meetings, and I will explain the position of the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I was at the meeting in Estevan 
last night and there was grave concern that the member from 
Estevan nor the Minister of Health were at that meeting. 
 
Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, there was discussion on the $40 
million that's been put into the system. Where was it put in, and 
where is it going to be spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the member and 
anyone else in this Assembly to come to the meeting where I 
will present the government's viewpoints, and they will hear the 
answers right then. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The concern raised is that the $40 million 
going into the system will not arrive at the delivery end of the 
system, will not be used at the bedside for patients, but will be 
used to be spent on hardware — typewriters, computers, word 
processors, and other hardware in the hospital — much of 
which isn't used. The nurses indicated that this has been the 
record of this government. They suggest this $40 million, there 
will be a 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

90 
 

scrap over this by several bureaucrats in your department, and I 
ask you, sir, can you promise the nurses of this province and the 
patients in this province that this will be used for delivery of 
health care and not for hardware in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, obviously the member's statements 
are sheer, utter nonsense. He did not listen to what I said 
previously that over the last four years we have put in more 
than . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have put in more than 450 positions 
into the hospitals of Saskatchewan. I have indicated that there 
will be 500 enrichment positions, as well as many other 
positions, because of expansion to hospitals that are taking 
place under this government, because of expansions to nursing 
homes, where there was moratorium before, that are taking 
place under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can assure you that the decisions of where those positions will 
go will be made in concert with the hospitals of Saskatchewan 
because after all, Mr. Speaker, after all —and some of the 
members don't realize — that we have autonomous hospital 
boards out there that are charged with the responsibility of 
staffing the hospitals, and I detect in this Chamber here that 
some of the members opposite feel that those members of 
hospital boards do not have the best interests of patient care at 
heart. I would like that to go on the record because that seems 
to be what's coming through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Can the minister promise the patients in this 
province that that $40 million will be spent on the delivery of 
health care and not on hardware — typewriters, word 
processors, computers, and other hardware — that isn't staff in 
hospitals, but will be spent on health care at the delivery end of 
the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
would have read the news release that I put out, it indicated 
where the money was going to be spent. Five hundred nursing 
positions to my mind is not typewriters. I can't see the 
connection. The member opposite is so ignorant of the 
technology in medicine, when I say there will be equipment, he 
thinks that's a typewriter. Mr. Speaker, that's an ultrasound, and 
there's quite a difference, my friend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Five hundred nursing positions do not cost 
$40 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, if my friend would take the time 
to read and to understand before he babbles, he might learn a 
few things. The news release, Mr. Speaker, indicated that the 
money would be into staffing enrichments and staffing 
complements; that some of the money would go for new 
technologies, i.e., ultrasound. 

And if you would like to know what ultrasound is, come and 
see me after the question period and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, last summer this government 
was hiding from farmers. This spring you're hiding from nurses. 
If you people don't soon call an election, you're going to be 
hiding from small children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, Order, please. 
 

Availability of Hospital Beds in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question has to do with 
the availability of hospital beds in Saskatoon. If you're too 
frightened to go to Estevan, perhaps you've been in Saskatoon. 
Can the minister tell the Assembly the size of the waiting list 
for a hospital bed in the city of Saskatoon, and the size of the 
waiting list for elective surgery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I can't give you that figure 
today. It changes from day to day, as you well know. But I can 
tell you this . . . I can tell you this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I've indicated that that 
number changes constantly. I think anyone who understands the 
hospital system realizes that. So to say what is that figure today, 
I can't do that at this time. But will tell you and the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, that two floors on the University 
Hospital, that an addition to St. Paul's, and a new City Hospital 
in Saskatoon will address those waiting lists considerably, and 
also in the $100 million announcement for staffing and for 
equipment and also for initiatives to reduce the waiting list. 
 
So to indicate that there's nothing being done on the waiting list 
is certainly a misconception and an attempt to lead the people of 
Saskatchewan, or to try and influence them in the wrong 
direction, because I can tell you that over the four years of the 
Devine government there has been more money into staffing 
than ever before in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Change of 
Name Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, and by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

91 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill respecting Small Claims 
in the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Small Claims Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Small Claims Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention of the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill respecting the 
Application to Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil 
Aspects of International Child Abduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! When we're doing business in 
the House and the Speaker is on his feet, I'm going to ask 
members to maintain silence. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, on behalf of the 
hon. member, first reading of a Bill to amend the Statute Law. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'm going to ask the member for Regina 
Centre to maintain silence. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Trade 
Union Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table, 
pursuant to section 14(1) of The Provincial Auditor's Act, the 
Provincial Auditor's annual report. 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I believe your ruling earlier in question 
period this morning was somewhat unfair in that it does 
effectively muzzle a tool that the opposition in this legislature 
has, and has traditionally had . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's a method of abusing the rules. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And it's a method, certainly, of abusing the 
rules of the House, by the Chair, I suggest, because . . . Well, 
we were only on our feet for 15 minutes. I think the discretion 
of the Chair to limit our debate and certainly put the questions 
forth to this Assembly was somewhat unfair, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, just to ask that gentleman over 
there to shut up while I'm speaking. And I realize you have the 
support of this House. But I believe in British tradition that the 
opposition does also have some rights, and 15 minutes of 
questions before question period is an abuse of those rights. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask your Chair for an apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would refer the member to the citations that 
I quoted to him and the different rules that were quoted in my 
ruling. My ruling is not here for debate. The ruling is for the 
direction for the House. And I would ask the member to go and 
study what I have said and then to act accordingly in the future. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I refer items 18 to 72 
inclusive to motions for returns debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Items 18 to 72, items for returns debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to take 
part in this debate because I think it's clear that we're about to 
have a provincial election and that the people of Saskatchewan 
expect their political leaders to discuss the issues which will be 
offered and debated by the citizens during that provincial 
election. 
 
Unfortunately the government's throne speech failed to deal, in 
my judgement, with the issues which are uppermost in the 
minds of the public. The speech did not offer a plan of action 
for the future; it simply attempted to justify the record of the 
government over the last four years — what I would say are the 
shortcomings of the government over the last four years. It 
reads like a 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

92 
 

campaign speech, and not a very good campaign speech at that. 
It was long, no one can deny that — perhaps the longest throne 
speech we've every heard — but almost devoid of content as to 
what will happen in the future; a great deal of content about 
what has happened in the past; next to nothing about what will 
happen in the future. 
 
As I've travelled this province over the last four years, I have 
found a deep sense of disappointment with this government, 
with its performance. There is no question that in 1982 they 
promised a great deal, and there's equally no question that since 
that time they have failed to deliver on most of those promises. 
 
Saskatchewan people keep telling me that they feel let down. 
Some of them say "betrayed" by a government which failed to 
keep some of its essential campaign promises. And we all 
remember what the essential promise was during that campaign 
— that, as they said, it's going to be good times for everybody 
— there's so much more we can be. Remember that slogan? 
"There's so much more we can be." No question that was their 
promise. And what have they delivered? 
 
Well, I think we can ask very properly whether some of the 
specific programs they offered in furtherance of their program 
have been delivered. They promised a 10 per cent cut in income 
tax. Have you seen your 10 per cent cut in income tax? Rather, 
have you seen an increase in your income tax with the brand 
new flat tax, and a very unfair flat tax at that. No one can deny 
that with the flat tax as it now exists a person who is able to use 
a tax shelter for investing in the manufacture of films and video 
clips, whatever their content may be, is able to deduct that from 
his income before he calculates his flat tax; but if his brother 
makes a contribution to his church, that's not deductible. If 
someone else gives some money to OXFAM to relieve hunger 
throughout the world, that's not deductible. If someone else 
faces huge medical expenses and therefore has much of his 
income consumed by extra medical expenses, the normal 
deduction that income tax provides for that is not deductible for 
the purposes of the PC flat tax. 
 
That is what they have selected as a fair method of taxation. 
And I say it's grossly unfair, and we will not stand still for that 
tax. We will act, as I will indicate later. 
 
They promised to eliminate the provincial sales tax. Then they 
extended it to used vehicles. They collected the money. They 
recognized their error but said, we're keeping the money. They 
promised balanced budgets, and they gave us five straight 
deficits of a size that this province has never seen. Certainly in 
the last 40 years this province has not seen deficits that in the 
accumulated period would add up to any one of those Tory 
deficits. Those are massive deficits, deficits which will be paid 
for by our children and grandchildren. 
 
They promised to stand up for Saskatchewan at Ottawa. Then 
they failed to defend citizens when the Ottawa government 
proposed to de-index old age pensions; in fact, they suggested 
that this was a great idea. And the member for Kindersley, the 
then minister of finance, wrote another one of his letters saying 
that this government, this PC government, proposed a 

re-ordering of pensions so that pensions would be de-indexed 
for many of our senior citizens. 
 
They failed to fight the record tax increases in the Mulroney 
budget. And they failed to say a word about the disastrous 
recommendations in the Nielsen task force report with respect 
to western agriculture. And they failed to say anything with 
respect to the proposals in the Nielsen task force and the 
proposals in the Wilson budget about the withdrawal of federal 
funds for medicare, hospital care, and post-secondary education. 
This is the government which said they would stand up to 
Ottawa and have not done so. 
 
They promised a more business-like government, and they gave 
us Pioneer Trust, the Pocklington give-aways, record losses of 
our public companies — and we've reviewed another one today 
— and more debt in the last four years than has been seen 
accumulated throughout the life of this province. 
 
They promised so much, but they didn't deliver. And with days 
to go before the provincial election, what are they doing? Are 
they attempting to deliver on their 1982 promises? No. Are they 
going to attempt to keep faith with the electors who sent them 
there in 1982 by reviewing their promises and saying, we will 
act? No, not a chance. They're out there offering some yet new 
promises, and we're going to have many, many announcements 
between now and election day. 
 
I have no doubt that the Minister of Health will be announcing 
CAT scanners which he should have provided two or three 
years ago. I suspect by Monday or Tuesday he'll be announcing 
those. I have no doubt that he will announce extra staff. Four 
years after he becomes Minister of Health, he finds out that 
there's a problem and makes what — money available? Oh, no. 
No. An announcement — an announcement that he's going to 
do it. 
 
I think that people are no longer satisfied with announcements 
from the government. They want to see the action. And if and 
when the government acts, they will mark that up to their credit; 
and if the government doesn't act, they will mark it up to their 
debit. And they have been marking it up, because four years is a 
long time. 
 
Four years is a long time to deal with the problems that this 
province faces. And we have not seen them deal with the 
problems which they identified in the 1982 campaign to their 
satisfaction and have left undealt with. I could instance many, 
but I just take waiting lists. 
 
In 1982, they waxed eloquent about waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan hospitals. And I would like any member in this 
debate from the opposite side to stand up and tell us, what 
major hospital has a shorter waiting list than it had in 1982? Is 
there a single one in Saskatoon? Of course there isn't. Is there 
one in Regina, any one of the major hospitals? Of course there 
isn't, because they haven't dealt with those problems. 
 
Saskatchewan will not be impressed by another group of 
promises from a government which did not keep the last 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

93 
 

group. And I think that people will ask whether or not the 
Progressive Conservative Party is essentially trustworthy when 
it goes to the public and speaks of what it's going to do. 
 
People are saying, not again. People are saying, we are going to 
judge this government, not by what it says it's going to do, but 
what it has done when it had the chance for four years. People 
are telling us they can't afford four more years like the last four 
years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . four more years of unkept 
promises, of rising taxes, of record deficits, of incompetent 
financial management, and of a government which won't stand 
up for Saskatchewan in Ottawa. 
 
And what I intend to talk about this morning are a number of 
positive commitments that our party will offer to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I don't want to spend my time talking about the 
shortcomings of the government because, frankly, that would 
take a great deal of time and would perhaps not be very 
productive, since that government is not gong to be the 
Government of Saskatchewan for very much longer. 
 
I will talk about commitments which our party makes, 
commitments which we believe we will honour when we next 
form this government — commitments which will deal with a 
fair tax system; new jobs and new job opportunities; protection 
for those in need, such as the unemployed or hard-pressed 
farmers; and a strong voice at Ottawa. These commitments 
come from people who have met with us, talked with us, and 
told us what they want their government to do for them. They 
believe things should be changed in this province. And as I go 
about talking, it's overwhelming —the comment by people that 
there have got to be changes; things are not going as well as 
they could, and we want some change. 
 
So I'm going to outline a series of proposals to get the 
Saskatchewan economy growing and working again by 
supporting Saskatchewan families and small businesses and 
farmers. Saskatchewan people are telling me they're fed up with 
the current government's record of unfair taxes and rising 
unemployment and financial mismanagement and weak 
leadership. And they're asking, what are your alternatives? And 
I'll attempt to say what they are. 
 
Under a New Democratic government, large corporations and 
the wealthy will be made to pay their fair share of taxes in order 
to get the Devine deficit under control and to ease the heavy 
burden of taxes on low- and middle-income earners. 
 
The unfair flat tax will be repealed. I want to emphasize that. 
The flat tax as structured by the government opposite, which is 
grossly unfair, and which nobody over there attempts to defend 
except the member for Estevan who, in his attempts, says what 
the tax is supposed to accomplish but will not direct his 
attention to who pays under that tax and who does not; that flat 
tax as currently 

structured has got to go. And under a New Democratic 
government it will be gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Property tax relief for home owners, 
farmers, small-business people and renters will be restored. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We believe that the costs of education 
should be borne to a greater extent on the basis of taxes related 
to ability to pay, and to a less extent on property taxes. We 
believe this is particularly true at this time when many farmers 
and small-business people are hard-pressed and are being called 
upon to pay a much greater proportionate share of the cost of 
education because they pay greater property taxes per capita. 
We don't think that's fair in this time. We would like to see 
education paid to a greater extent from taxes based upon ability 
to pay, and we will do that through property tax rebates, and 
they will be restored. 
 
The money collected from the unfair sales tax on used vehicles 
will be returned to the people from whom it was wrongly taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say in 
the weeks ahead about fair taxes, but from what I have already 
said, you will observe that I feel that the current government 
with its policy of loading more and more taxes on lower- and 
middle-income people and allowing many of the wealthy to go 
virtually untaxed — that's an unfair policy, and it will be 
reversed. 
 
Now with respect to new jobs and new opportunities, it's 
disturbing to note that close to one in ten of Saskatchewan 
people is either unemployed or on welfare. New Democrats say 
it doesn't have to be that way. Under a New Democratic 
government, Saskatchewan small business would be 
encouraged to grow and create new job opportunities. And we 
will do this by giving to small business a long-term guarantee 
that interest rates will not exceed an agreed figure. 
 
When I talk to small-business people, they tell me that one of 
the things which inhibits them from expanding their business, 
either by building capital assets or by increasing the amount of 
their base inventory, is that they do not want to risk the 
problems of fluctuating interest rates. If they could be given an 
assurance that for seven or ten years they would know what the 
interest rate was, they would act. They're not asking for large 
subsidies; they are asking for security that they will get, under a 
policy to be introduced by the New Democratic Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we will work with 
municipal governments to eliminate the burden of municipal 
business taxes on Saskatchewan business. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

94 
 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, so you're all for business now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I note some comments 
from members opposite, and I've talked to a great number of 
business people in this province, and most of them have a very 
low tolerance for levels of political rhetoric, and a very great 
affection for nice black figures at the bottom of the profit and 
loss statement. And they know when their profit and loss 
statement looked good to them, and they know when it doesn't 
look good to them, and they know that under the PCs they have 
not made the money they made before . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And they want a restoration of a 
climate where they can do business and make a reasonable 
profit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would introduce a policy of Saskatchewan 
first, contracts for Saskatchewan business, and jobs for 
Saskatchewan workers. Far too much of our tax money has 
been spent to do jobs that need to be done, but which has not 
resulted in contracts for Saskatchewan business or jobs for 
Saskatchewan workers. 
 
It has been reported to me that a plant to be constructed in 
North Battleford is going to be designed by Alberta designers, a 
contract is going to be let to an Alberta construction company 
without tender, and that many of the employees who will 
construct this building will be Alberta residents. I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it is fair to us Saskatchewan taxpayers to 
provide sums to out-of-province business when those 
out-of-province businesses don't even have the common 
decency to build their facilities here by calling for tenders, so 
that Saskatchewan contractors at least have a shot at the job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — This is what they tell me. If this isn't 
true, I know I will be straightened out, but I suspect that what I 
say is true and that Saskatchewan tax money is going to people 
who, as I say, offer not even the chance to bid to Saskatchewan 
business, and the chance of a job to many Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would build public facilities that we all know 
we will need in the future. These would provide jobs for today 
and hard valuable assets for tomorrow. I look at Regina and I 
look at a hole in the ground that was there for the Regina 
General Hospital in 1982, and if any work has been done, it's 
been done in the last short number of weeks. Nobody denies 
that we need the hospital facilities. Some of the facilities which 
are to be replaced were build in 1908. But this government has 
simply not got around to building those facilities and providing 
the jobs which are needed. I talked to construction workers, and 
I've talked to some this morning who say that in his lifetime — 
and it was a person who knew the situation of his construction 
union — in his lifetime he has never seen more unemployed 
tradesmen in this city in his particular trade than he sees today. 
He was an ironworker, people who erect the iron framework for 
buildings. 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that when we have a hole in the ground 
which has not moved, nothing has been done for four years, and 
when we have tradesmen who are out of work, and when we 
have hospital facilities that have been there since 1908 and 
desperately need to be replaced, and when we have a 
government that can't put that together and provide better 
facilities for Saskatchewan people and jobs for Saskatchewan 
workers, then we have an incompetent government that needs to 
be replaced, and will be replaced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, turning to 
protecting farm families. The fundamental problem facing 
Saskatchewan farm families today is price. Our farmers are not 
getting a decent price for the commodities they produce; a price 
which will at least give them some sort of a return on their 
investment and some sort of a return for their labour. Well, I 
don't know whether anyone in this House would deny that. Our 
farm families know that provincial governments can't do much 
of significance with respect to commodity prices, at least for 
grain. They don't really expect the provincial government to 
offer them some sort of a support price for wheat, oats, and 
barley, or other grains. They know that this is a national and an 
international problem, and believe you me, it is. 
 
They know that European farmers gets massive subsidies from 
their federal governments or their central governments. They 
know that U.S. farmers get massive subsidies from their 
government, and that these are now going to be so structured 
under the new U.S. farm Bill that, not only will the farmers get 
massive subsidies, but that the subsidies will not be in the form 
of higher prices for their product, and the product will be sold at 
low prices. That's the import of the U.S. farm Bill, and that is 
what it means for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
This is why we must have a federal government in Canada 
which will stand up for Saskatchewan farmers. Heretofore the 
U.S. government has, in effect, supported the price of wheat, 
and the U.S. support price — I'll call it that —meant that the 
world price of wheat was supported. That support price has 
been drastically lowered. We can confidently expect that the 
world price of wheat will drop significantly. 
 
(1115) 
 
The short question now is this: what is the federal government 
going to do for our farmers? Is it going to act as European 
governments have, as the United States government has, and, 
according to some news reports, as the Australian government 
is now doing? And we have had no indication. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our party favours action by the federal 
government along this line, and we would accept either one of 
two approaches. The first would be a parity price for a given 
number of bushels. And you will be aware, Mr. Speaker, that 
that's the proposal put forward by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities at their recent meeting. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

95 
 

This has the advantage of providing a floor price for a given 
number of bushels for Saskatchewan farmers. It would be for 
Canadian consumption, and it would in effect be paid for by 
Canadian consumers as opposed to the federal treasury — a 
simple parity-pricing proposal for those commodities consumed 
in Canada. I am using wheat as an example, but I'm not 
proposing to confine it to wheat. The same principle applies 
with respect to other commodities produced. 
 
Another proposal has recently been put forward by the 
Canadian Wheat Board advisory committee with respect to 
wheat board grains, and that proposal is for a deficiency 
payment. That would mean that farmers would get a lesser 
amount, $6 a bushel, but for a larger number of bushels. Either 
will serve to give farmers a minimum return on their investment 
and something for their labour. One of them is urgently needed 
to be acted upon by the federal government and it will not be 
acted upon unless pressure is mounted by the prairie 
governments to have the federal government act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I say that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has the responsibility, the clear responsibility to 
select one of these options to press the federal government to 
act, so that this basic problem of farming in Saskatchewan, the 
price of our commodities, is dealt with and is dealt with by the 
federal government in support of our farmers as it is by the 
federal government of the United States, the national 
governments of Europe, and as it is reported by the national 
government of Australia. 
 
But yet I've heard nothing from members opposite, nothing to 
indicate that this pressing problem is being acted upon and that 
action by the federal government is being urged by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
If you consider it for a moment, it is really grossly unfair to ask 
Canadian farmers to compete with the treasury of the United 
States government, the treasury of the central governments in 
Europe, and in the course of so doing get disastrously low 
prices of their products. This is what is being asked of Canadian 
farmers by the PC governments at Ottawa and Regina and it is 
grossly unfair. It is a new situation. It is a situation which has 
arisen only since the U.S. farm Bill. It will only come into 
effect on July 1, if I have my date right, and only at that time 
will you see a substantial drop in world grain prices. You can 
already see it on the Chicago futures market. They know what's 
going to happen. They know that Canadian farmers are being 
asked to compete with the United States treasury and the 
treasuries of national governments. I say it's unfair. I say it's 
time that the Government of Saskatchewan pressured the 
Government of Canada to do what other national governments 
are doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A member opposite has asked, what is 
our solution. We have suggested that as a minimum measure, as 
a minimum measure, Canadians ought to be asked to pay fair 
prices for the agricultural products grown in Canada and 
consumed in Canada. Now that's the idea of parity prices . . . 
(inaudible 

 interjection) . . . Well members opposite suggested it would be 
10 per cent. Even if it's only 15 per cent and they only got $10 a 
bushel on 15 per cent of their production, that would be of some 
assistance. 
 
Another possible approach is the deficiency payment to bring 
farmers up to $6 a bushel on a much larger percentage of their 
total production. One is proposed by the SARM as a reasonable 
solution; the other is proposed by the wheat board advisory 
committee as a reasonable solution. We are not here saying, we 
are wedded to one and only one. 
 
We believe that the parity pricing one is reasonable for two 
reasons: one, it asks consumers not to live off the backs of 
farmers who are having their prices driven down by an 
international contest between the United States government and 
the EEC. We are seeing a game of vigorous international 
competition, based not upon costs of production, but upon the 
length of the purse of each of those major countries in the 
world. And I think that under those circumstances it's not 
unreasonable to say to other Canadians, well at least it's only 
fair that you pay the costs of production. 
 
The fact that the EEC and the United States are in a war 
because the United States has got fed up with the EEC 
marketing agricultural products which are hugely subsidized, 
and they're determined to discipline the EEC by driving down 
international prices — and that's what's going on — I ask 
whether or not it isn't reasonable for Canadian consumers to pay 
a fair price based upon the costs of production for the food they 
consume that is grown by their fellow citizens, the farmers. 
 
And I think that that is reasonable. And members opposite are 
suggesting that it's a socialist solution. I take it that they would 
equally say the same with respect to the current dairy farming 
set-up we have in Canada, and that if they had their way they 
would dismantle the Canadian Dairy Commission and put it all 
up for competition, and they would allow American dairy 
producers to clean out our dairy industry. 
 
I take it they would do the same with respect to poultry and that 
they would not have any price supports for poultry. And I see 
the member for Prince Albert nodding his head — yes, indeed. I 
take it the Canadian egg marketing agency would be gone. 
 
I take it he does not approve of the activities of the Canadian 
Wheat Board to the extent that they take grain off the market 
and hold it and try to sell it at a time which is opportune for the 
farmer. They're stating their belief in unrestricted free enterprise 
agriculture. And I say that that is unfair to our farmers. It would 
be all right if everyone was competing on a level field, but 
there's no competition competing on a level field when our 
major competitors in the EEC and the United States are 
subsidized to a huge extent by their governments. 
 
Well I say that when a country like Canada sees its major 
producers under attack, not because of anything we have done, 
but because of a war between the EEC and the U.S., our 
government, our national government, has an obligation to step 
up and give them some help. And 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

96 
 

certainly we would pressure the Government of Canada to do 
just that. 
 
I turn now to a further question and that is the question of input 
costs. While farmers do not expect their provincial government 
to guarantee to them a price for wheat sold on international 
markets, they do expect the provincial government to act with 
respect to input costs which are able to be affected by that 
provincial government. 
 
We have a provincial government that has an opportunity to act 
with respect to utility rates, with respect to fertilizer costs, 
chemical costs, fuel prices. And I want to say that utility rates, 
fertilizer, chemical costs, fuel prices have all gone up in recent 
years when the value of farm commodities has gone down. 
 
It's time for the government to take action with respect to these. 
It's time for them to do what they can to assist farmers with 
respect to input costs. And I can tell you that a New Democratic 
government will act to assist farmers at this difficult time with 
respect to input costs. We will reduce the price of farm fuel by a 
minimum of 32 cents a gallon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We will introduce measures to cut the 
cost of farm fertilizers. We will pressure the Mulroney PC 
government to make possible the development of low-cost 
generic farm chemicals. It is pretty clear, I think, that the 
generic farm chemicals — their day has come. Generic 
chemicals, when they were developed in Canada, with respect 
to pharmaceutical generic chemicals or drugs, kept down the 
price to a very significant extent. And no one denies that. Now 
the time has come for us to have generic farm chemicals, dealt 
with on the same basis as generic pharmaceutical chemicals, 
and we will see a significant drop in the price of farm 
chemicals. And it can't come too soon for hard-pressed farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the matter 
of the Nielsen task force report. I wonder if members opposite 
have taken the opportunity to look at that report and see what it 
offers for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I know that the view across the road, across the aisle here, in the 
hands of the members of the Progressive Conservative Party, 
they seem to feel that the PC government at Ottawa is doing 
just fine; that the proposals put forward are just fine. Keep up 
the good work, Brian, I think is the quote attributed to the 
Premier. Well I want to point out what some of this good work 
consists of so far as the Nielsen task force reports is concerned. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, Mr. Nielsen is not just 
anybody, he's the Deputy Prime Minister of Canada. He's Mr. 
Two — number two in the Mulroney government. And here is 
what his reports are saying about what ought to be done for 
farming. 
 
Well, "accrual accounting should be implemented." Here's an 
interesting one, "accrual accounting should be 

implemented." Some farmers have calculated just what that 
would mean for them. In any year when they have a good crop 
but cannot sell all of that crop, they would have to pay income 
tax on the crop in the bin before they've got money for it. Now I 
think that that is pretty difficult for farmers at this stage of the 
game, to suggest that they ought to turn to accrual accounting. 
That's what the Nielsen task force says. 
 
Here's another. If the Canadian Wheat Board sells grain to 
customers whose credit worthiness is not high and there is a risk 
of loss, we are asked by the Nielsen task force report to accept 
the proposition that the Canadian Wheat Board should have to 
pay a risk premium to the government for all credit grain sales, 
the same as private firms. 
 
(1130) 
 
Well I don't think that's a good idea. Members opposite may 
think that's a great idea, but I think that the Canadian Wheat 
Board does not have a bad record of credit sales, and nothing 
that I have seen suggests that farmers should undertake yet 
another load of premiums to be taken off the amounts they'll get 
from the Canadian Wheat Board simply to satisfy Deputy Prime 
Minister Nielsen and his report. 
 
Then we come to western grain transportation. Here is another 
proposal. They don't care for the $660 million Crow benefit 
subsidy at all. They say that first the subsidy shouldn't be paid 
at all; there's no economic rationale for it. Secondly, if it is paid, 
it should be paid to the producers and not the railway 
companies. And I want to point out the consequence of that. If 
it's paid to the producers and not the railway companies, the 
Government of Canada will have no opportunity to pressure the 
railway to give proper service to western Canadian farmers. If it 
is paid to the railroad companies, that sort of a hammer will 
allow the federal government to require the railways to serve 
western farmers as they have not always done in the past. That 
is point number one. 
 
Point number two is that if we have subsidies, as they will be 
labelled, the Crow benefit paid to farmers, we cannot expect 
other countries with whom we negotiate under the GATT 
negotiations, which have been referred to in this House —and 
the Premier has said we must have GATT negotiations on 
agricultural products . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The member opposite asks whether I 
agree that we should have GATT negotiations on agricultural 
products, and I emphatically agree. I say this: but if we pay 
subsidies directly to our farmers, that makes our negotiating 
position much harder. And if we pay them to the railway 
companies, it makes their negotiating position much easier, 
because half the countries in the world subsidize their 
transportation systems and cannot suggest that is a subsidy to 
producers. But not half the countries in the world pay direct 
payments to their producers, unrelated to production. And that, 
I suggest is one major reason why, at this time when we're 
moving into international trade negotiations, we should 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

97 
 

not be paying that Crow benefit to farmers directly. 
 
Now one other point needs to be made with respect to Deputy 
Prime Minister Nielsen's report, and that is that he proposes that 
federal money for rail rehabilitation in rural Saskatchewan be 
discontinued. And I think that rail rehabilitation in western 
Canada is important. It's an important national objective, just as 
surely as building ports on our east coast and west coast are 
important national objectives, just as surely as building airports 
all across this country are important national objectives and 
have been paid for by federal money, just as surely as building 
the St. Lawrence Seaway was an important national objective 
built by federal money. 
 
These transportation facilities were paid for by all of us as 
Canadians. There's no reason why our basic railway network 
should not be paid for similarly. And I think when Nielsen 
suggest this, he is suggesting that benefits which Saskatchewan 
people and prairie people ought to get from their transportation 
system be withdrawn, and there is no similar proposal that 
benefits from a nationally financed transportation system be 
withdrawn from people in Vancouver or Halifax or elsewhere. 
 
Now I turn to PFRA, and here's another one that I have not 
heard any quarrel or demur come from members opposite. The 
proposal is to totally dismantle PFRA. The proposal is that 
small water projects and tree seedling programs be discontinued 
totally. And as for community pastures, they be turned over to 
the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I would like permission to 
introduce a class. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for allowing me to interrupt his 
address. 
 
I'd like to introduce 12 students and their teacher, Mr. 
McHenry, and chaperon, Mrs. Smith, from the Wolseley High 
School, who are visiting our Chamber today. I had the very 
good fortune of meeting with them a little earlier, discussing 
some of the aspects of government, and touring the building. I 
hope you enjoy your day here and have a very safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize to 
the member. I just didn't see the note. In the course of my 
remarks I didn't see the note indicating the member's students 
had arrived. 

I was turning to the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration 
and the PFRA, and noting that Deputy Prime Minister Nielsen's 
report would have us dismantle that and discontinue the tree 
seedling and the small water projects completely, and that so far 
as community pastures were concerned they would be either 
provincially owned or privately operated. 
 
Well I don't see any great problem with having them 
provincially owned, but I certainly think that the private 
operation of community pastures, except on a co-operative basis 
by producers, would not work to the benefit of Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
I now turn to western grain stabilization and the further 
proposals of the Nielsen task force report with respect to that. 
And it says the government should not permit higher limits on 
the coverage above $60,000, and I'm not at all sure that that is 
for the benefit of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Moving down to crop insurance, they want higher premiums for 
farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 20 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, if the premiums escalate by more 
than 20 per cent, participation may drop. But we can get another 
20 per cent out of the farmers if we try hard; a longer-term 
federal objective should be to shift the higher share onto the 
producers. This is offered by Deputy Prime Minster Nielsen's 
report. There's been no demur from government opposite, no 
suggestion that these proposals are not in the best interests of 
western agriculture. 
 
They're talking cash advances. They don't want interest-free 
cash advances. They say this subsidy does not have a positive 
development impact. And we have not hear of any demur from 
members opposite with respect to whether or not the cash 
advance program, interest-free cash advances, should be 
dismantled. And this is what the task force proposes. 
 
On fuel tax rebates. And I want to read to you, Mr. Acting 
Speaker, just what is said about this: 
 

There is no convincing rationale for continuing to subsidize 
farm energy costs in this manner. 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, at this time in the history of our farming 
industry. Subsidizing is . . . That is the word they use to talk 
about the rebate of taxes otherwise collected. And they say 
there's no convincing argument. They're not convinced that 
farmers are in trouble. They're not convinced that our farmers 
need a fuel rebate. And they're certainly not being encouraged 
to be convinced by anything being said by members opposite. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, it is time we had a government in this 
province who is prepared to stand up to Ottawa, prepared to 
speak for Saskatchewan farmers in Ottawa, and when there is a 
New Democratic government in this province, as there will 
shortly be, there will be a government which will stand up for 
farmers in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

98 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I now turn to other 
aspects of our program. While this government has talked a lot 
over the past four years about family and compassion, its 
actions have hurt Saskatchewan families who are most in need. 
Rising unemployment, a crushing tax burden — these have put 
increased pressure on many, many families. Each month in this 
province, thousands of families depend upon the food bank to 
get their food for their families — food banks which weren't 
even in existence in this province four years ago. I applaud 
those people who are operating food banks, but I deplore the 
circumstances created by the government opposite which make 
food banks so necessary for the very survival of so many 
families in this province. 
 
In the world's bread basket, people are going hungry. That's 
remarkable, that's immoral, and that’s wrong. And it's time we 
had a provincial government dedicated to providing 
opportunities for all, opportunities for ordinary families who are 
now having to depend, some of them, on the food bank, and not 
just opportunities for other big-business men, whether it is 
Manalta Coal or Peter Pocklington or some other friends of 
theirs who is getting a multimillion dollar gift from the 
government opposite. 
 
Under a New Democratic Party government, there will be 
changes in our approach to seniors. Saskatchewan seniors, age 
60 and over, who are often the poorest in our society, will be 
provided with a guaranteed minimum income. I want, Mr. 
Acting Speaker, to explain this. Our proposal is that there be a 
supplement on the incomes of people between the ages of 60 
and 65 to bring them up to the minimum level of income which 
they could expect when they reached age 65. 
 
You will be aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when people in 
this province reach age 65, they have an effective minimum 
income based upon the old age security payment, the 
guaranteed income supplement, and the provincial 
supplementary payment. That, Mr. Speaker, represents a 
minimum income that someone in this province can have when 
they're 65. We believe that there ought to be a supplement 
which brings people between 60 and 65 up to at least that 
minimum income. And we believe the time has come to start 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of people who are undoubtedly going to 
enter the debate are getting over-anxious, but I would like very 
much to explain this proposal because I think the time has come 
for us to say to people who are getting less than the minimum 
they would get at age 65 that we will support them. 
 
Many of these people in times past may or may not have been 
able to enter the work-force, but because of what are surely 
difficult economic conditions they find it very difficult to 
compete in the work-force. And I am not at all sure that we are 
not doing the right thing for everybody to assist them to have 
this minimum level of income — and it's not overly generous 
— so that they would, it they wish, be able to withdraw from 
the work-force. And then they would open opportunities for 
younger people who are also seeking employment. 

We are, in our society, reluctant — and I think properly 
reluctant — to support people who are thoroughly employable, 
who want to work, and to support them by payments which 
might be thought to discourage employment. And that's a 
problem. We don't want to see people suffer, and on the other 
hand we don't want to discourage people from seeking 
employment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We need more jobs now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We obviously need more jobs, but if 
some people have to be out of the work-force, surely people 
between the ages of 60 and 65 who have minimum incomes 
ought to be assisted to leave the work-force if they so wish. 
That is our proposal. We believe it is a humane proposal, and 
we believe it is one which will also indirectly offer job 
opportunities to younger people who are ready, willing, able, 
and anxious to work. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will improve and extend the home 
mortgage protection for Saskatchewan families, and we expect 
to have during the course of the next weeks an opportunity to 
outline in some detail our proposals for dealing with home 
mortgages, not only . . . not only . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. I 
think there's a little bit too much noise in the House, and the 
speaker cannot carry on. Would you please respect the speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We will have an opportunity over the 
next few weeks to outline our proposal, and the proposal will 
deal, not only with mortgages as seen from the position of the 
person who owns or is buying the house, but also mortgages as 
seen by those who would like to see house construction 
stimulated in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, members will be aware that housing starts 
in this province are very sluggish indeed. They will be aware 
that in 1984 housing starts were lower than any year since 1971. 
They will be aware that in 1985 housing starts were almost as 
low as that, just barely moved up. And they will be aware that 
because of difficult economic circumstances in this province, 
partly due to the ineptitude of the government opposite, we are 
going to have to stimulate housing construction. And that will 
be part of our proposal which we will outline in the weeks 
ahead, a proposal which we say will give protection to people 
who are buying houses, and encouragement to those who wish 
to acquire and build houses. 
 
We will increase the health care staffing levels. No one, I think, 
can deny, except perhaps the Minister of Health, that levels are, 
in many of our major hospitals, too low, that they present a 
threat to those who are working there, and very possibly to 
patients who are being served. 
 
And I point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government 
opposite has had four years to remedy any supposed 
deficiencies which they say they inherited — four years to act 
— and no reference to what may have 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

99 
 

happened 10 or 20 years ago is going to wash with the 
Saskatchewan public. You've had your four years to create the 
health system you felt should be there. You haven't done it, and 
you're going to answer to the public for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will improve home care services. 
Members opposite are unaware of what has happened with 
respect to some home care services. I want to recount what has 
happened to me in this province and in my city over the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order please. Order. It's almost 
impossible for me to hear what the hon. member is saying, and 
I'm sure it's almost impossible for the rest of you in this House 
to hear what he's saying. So I ask both sides of the House — 
both sides, both sides — to please calm down and allow the 
speaker to carry on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk 
about home care because something has been brought to my 
attention which I think deserves the attention of the government 
opposite. 
 
People who used to offer a home care service through 
organizations like the Family Service Bureau, and similar 
organizations who offered a home care which had a health 
component but also a family support component, tell me that 
since home care has been transferred to the responsibility of the 
Minister of Health he is unwilling to pay for support services 
for families that do not have a health component. 
 
And many of the organizations which used to be able to help 
families under stress no longer have money because it's been 
cut off by the Minister of Health, who will not pay for support 
for families unless someone in the family is sick. And I don't 
think that's good enough. I don't think that's good enough. 
 
Many people are under stress because . . . they may not have 
specific physical problems; they're under mental stress; they are 
unable to cope with all of the economic and social pressure with 
which they're faced. They need the sort of support which was 
previously available but is now being denied by the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Now we will provide our working families with affordable, and 
accessible, quality day care. And I'm sure that other colleagues 
of mine will have an opportunity to enlarge somewhat on that 
particular proposal of ours. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are just some of the positive 
commitments which our party has made to the people of 
Saskatchewan and which we will be putting forward to the 
people of Saskatchewan over the next short number of weeks. 
They are commitments based upon our consultations with the 
people of Saskatchewan over the last four years. They're 
commitments designed to get our provincial economy moving 
forward again, and they are for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We will be offering a government which has certain very, 

very simple principles, but I think principles which are not now 
part of the thinking of the government opposite and which the 
people of Saskatchewan want to hear about. It will be a 
government dedicated to fair taxation, to job creation, to a 
commitment to financial management, and to compassion for 
those in need — people like the unemployed, people like 
farmers under stress — and committed to standing up for 
Saskatchewan's interests at Ottawa. 
 
Now these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, stand in stark contrast to what 
the public are being offered by the government opposite: a 
record of unfair taxes, of rising unemployment, of waste and 
mismanagement, and big business policies. Is there any doubt 
that people who are being offered guarantees of millions of 
dollars, private firms like Manalta, to buy coal mines we 
already own, this is a big business government and a 
government characterized by preference for the wealthy, and 
weak leadership. 
 
We, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will offer the people of Saskatchewan 
a different alternative, an alternative based upon fair taxes, job 
creation, financial management — competent financial 
management, and standing up in Ottawa for the interests of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
saying that they can't afford four more years like the last four 
years, and that's why they're looking for positive alternatives to 
the government of the day. And we will be putting forward a 
positive alternative of getting Saskatchewan working again, 
getting an opportunity to give our young people some hope for 
the future, and getting the farmers of this province with some 
confidence that they'll be on their farm two or three years from 
now. This is what we need, and this is what our New 
Democratic government will be dedicated to providing. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of this will be discussed on the 
hustings. All of this will be able to be explained more fully, just 
as soon as the government opposite gets enough courage to call 
an election. And I urge the government to pluck up its courage 
— it's already been in office about four years — pluck up your 
courage and give the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to 
pass judgement on your government. Give them a chance. And 
I say, once they have a chance, they will say to you, you have 
had your four years. You have done what you are going to do; 
you must answer for it. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the people of 
Saskatchewan pass judgement on the government which is now 
in power, it will be the government which is no longer in 
power, and there will be a New Democratic Party government 
in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Shortly put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
time is now to call an election. Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that 
some of these issues can be more fully debated, I propose to 
move a motion. I move: 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

100 
 

That the motion before us be amended by adding the 
following after the world "session" in the final line: 

 
but regrets that the government has failed to take immediate, 
positive steps to make the tax system fair for working 
families and farm families; failed to create jobs and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people; failed to stand up for 
Saskatchewan in vigorous opposition to the Mulroney 
government's threat to medicare and threats to Saskatchewan 
agriculture; and that this Assembly therefore calls on the 
provincial government to get Saskatchewan working again by 
immediately repealing the unfair flat tax; refunding the unfair 
sales tax on used vehicles; restoring property tax relief; 
guarantee stable interest rates for Saskatchewan small 
business; to work with local government to eliminate the 
municipal business tax; to reduce the price of farm fuel by 32 
cents a gallon; cut the cost of farm fertilizers; permit the 
development of low-cost, generic farm chemicals; provide a 
guaranteed minimum income for Saskatchewan seniors 60 
and over; and increase health care staffing levels. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's a 
pleasure for me to take part in the throne speech debate of the 
Devine government today. I'd like to begin my remarks by 
congratulating the mover and seconder of the throne speech 
who have taken their time to make comments on the thrust of 
the throne speech that we're here to debate, a document which I 
believe is a building block and a cornerstone in proceeding with 
the progress of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get on with some of the remarks that I 
want to make about the good people of The Battlefords and the 
growth that we're enjoying under a Conservative administration 
in our region, I just simply can't proceed without taking a few 
moments to remark on the previous speaker's comments. 
 
We heard a lot of rhetoric in his comments about how they were 
going to stand up for the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I heard a shudder through the province when he said 
that, because the history of them standing up for this province, 
his national energy program, and it is the constitution and land 
bank and just an abysmal disaster of programs that they've tied 
us to. 
 
We heard them talk about farmers, Mr. Speaker, and their 
solutions to farmers was to buy their land and turn them into 
tenants. We heard them talk about writing off the education 
portion of property tax. They don't even support the ownership 
of private property. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
don't believe that tirade that we just went through and nor will 
they believe it come election time. 
 
(1200) 

I had the opportunity to go through the Regina newspaper, 
Friday, March 21st and the headline is, "NDP election goodies 
sampled." They listed out 18 or 19 things, and the only addition 
on the paper that they didn't list was any other thing we can 
think of to buy your vote. Mr. Speaker, I want to run through a 
few of these things. 
 
They are talking about a guaranteed annual income for people 
60 years and over. When did they suddenly get concerned? In 
the last seven years that they were the government of this 
province, what did they do for seniors on supplement? The 
lowest income senior that we have — $5. Five dollars in seven 
years. What's that? Seventy cents a year. You couldn't even buy 
a cup of coffee on what they gave them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about looking after families, families 
with mortgages. And they say, we'll do better than Grant 
Devine did. Well, Mr. Speaker, when we came to this House, 
mortgage rates were 22 and 23 per cent, and we wrote them to 
thirteen and a quarter per cent. And people said, yes, we need a 
little help. And now that they're down around 12 per cent and 
falling, they say, we'll help you, we'll make it better. 
 
Well where were they when we needed them, Mr. Speaker? 
They said, I'll tell you what. When interest rates were 22 and 23 
per cent, they said, I'll tell you what — if you lose your house, 
we'll buy it back and rent it to you; no problem. 
 
They talk about giving back taxes. When they came to power in 
1971, the personal income tax rate in this province was 32 per 
cent. When they were thrown out, the income tax rate was 51.5 
per cent. They added a tax on gas. They added a tax, Mr. 
Speaker, on everything but fresh air. And the only reason they 
didn't do that was because they couldn't find a way to regulate 
it. 
 
We have removed the tax on gas. We have removed the tax on 
children's clothing. We are working to dismantle an unfair tax 
system that they helped to create. We increased the personal 
exemption for people in their income tax, and we lowered the 
rate of tax from 51.5 to, I believe, it was 50.5 per cent. 
 
And these fellows talk about giving money back. They talk 
about giving money back. Well in 1972 they tried and imposed 
a thing called succession duty in this province. And succession 
duty, Mr. Speaker, is a tax on widows and orphans at the time 
of bereavement when they've lost a loved one. And they taxed 
them to the tune of $28 million. And in 1977 they did away 
with that. And how much do you think they gave back? Not one 
red cent, not a penny. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the talk from these people 
about how they’re going to look after farmers, farmers know 
how they're going to look after them. They're going to make 
them peasants. That's what they're going to do. They're going to 
make them tenants on their own land. That's what they're going 
to do with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about looking after people's home 
mortgages. They know better than that. The people of this 
province know better than that. They talk about standing 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

101 
 

up for this province. Their solution over the years whenever 
there was an issue that faced this province was to run into the 
corner and hide and turn their head and cower — not to have 
the courage to go out and develop markets internationally. 
 
Today the former premier says we have to compete 
internationally. He supports GATT. Well you never know what 
he's going to do from one day to the next, because he's against 
trading with the Americans. And we trade nearly $6 billion a 
year out of Saskatchewan with the Americans. He doesn't want 
to talk to them. Half of the trade that we do is with them. But 
today he kind of thinks that might be a good idea. 
 
Well a few days ago he was on, I believe it was Big Q Country 
in Saskatoon, saying, I'm going to put the tax back on gasoline; 
and I wouldn't rule out other tax increases. Well now he doesn't 
know if he'll do that. And in 1976 he laid off 400 nurses, I 
believe the number was. Well now he's going to put a few more 
back. And then he spent 800 million on uranium mines, and 
now they're going to shut them down. 
 
I mean it depends on who you talk to on what day of the week 
to know what they're going to do. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would like a little more consistency; they'd like a 
few people with their feet on the ground, a little better than the 
gentlemen across the aisle here, to be running this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know that there has 
been growth and development and prosperity in this province 
for the last four years during difficult international times. And 
they will follow in our lead, because they have the power and 
the courage and the belief in themselves to build this province, 
not to follow those guys over there and run into a corner and 
hide every time there's an issue that faces them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in going back, having stood in this Assembly for 
the last four years and looking at what we've done, and reading 
those throne speeches it became apparent to me that this 
government has really developed issues in three different areas. 
 
First, with families. We hear people talk about health and 
education and taxation and all of those things, but really you 
can lump together and you can say: what does it do for the 
family? Well, Mr. Speaker, in my area, in my part of the 
province, we did a great deal for families. At a time when it 
looked like they were going to be losing their home, we saved 
that home with 13 and a quarter per cent interest rate. And a few 
weeks ago when there were a couple of bumps up in the interest 
rate, my phone rang and they said, you know, Myles, I'm 
thinking of going and buying a house, but I'm a little worried 
about the interest rate; and I think that program expired, didn't 
it? And I said, no, we extended it to 1988. And they said, that's 
all I want to know. I can live with 13 and a quarter per cent, and 
if I'm protected to there I'll take my chances. So housing 
purchases continue in our area. We have growth and we see 
that. 
 
In terms of education, Mr. Speaker, we have a school in my 
riding which was built in 1905 or '06. And they tried for years 
and years with the former administration to get a new school 
built in the town of Battleford. And do you 

know what they were told? We'll look into it; we'll do a study. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, during the last couple of winters when it 
was a little cold, the children in that school had to wear their 
boots and mitts. And the gentlemen opposite wouldn't spend a 
penny to give the children of Battleford a new school. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we're building that school, with $2 million. 
And last winter, Mr. Speaker, when they're doing up the design, 
and while the gentlemen opposite's consultant said, oh, we 
really don't need a new school here, the lights were falling 
down — pulling out of the roof. I think they needed a new 
school, and we got them a new school. And we have thanked 
the Minister of Education and her compassion for the young 
people and her vision for what they can be if they have decent 
education and proper facilities to learn in. The young children 
of Battleford are going to have that new school, and it's being 
constructed this spring and this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear an awful lot of talk over there about 
health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, in our riding, in the riding of 
The Battlefords, we have seen advancements in health care 
under this government that we were never able to attain under 
the other guys. 
 
We live in the north-west corner of Saskatchewan in my riding, 
Mr. Speaker, and you're aware of that. We have always been 
required under the former government to run into Saskatoon for 
our needs, anything a little special. We changed that. Diabetics, 
for example, in my corner of the province, now don't have to 
drive to Saskatoon. We run a diabetic awareness clinic out of 
the Battlefords Union Hospital. And the money to run that came 
from the Minister of Health, the Hon. Graham Taylor, because 
he recognized the advantages of giving regional hospitals an 
expanded role in the province of Saskatchewan — that 
everything didn't have to go to Saskatoon and Regina. And he 
has carried on with that commitment to regional hospitals with 
his recent announcements. And we are having greater access to 
health care in this province than we've ever had, and we're 
having it at a regional level where there are also economic 
spin-offs to the local communities. And I support that. And we 
have supported that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — In terms of health care and looking after 
our seniors, Mr. Speaker, in our corner of the world, in our 
corner of this province, we have run pilot projects with home 
care, pumping thousands and tens of thousands of dollars into 
expanding that service to help people in their home. 
 
Through a local initiative I was able to get senior citizens who 
are capable of living independently in their home, I was able to 
get their walks shovelled in the winter-time, Mr. Speaker, for 
them at no charge to them, at no cost. And those seniors who 
shouldn’t have been out shovelling their snow or taking the 
chance to slip and break a hip or do whatever damage they 
could do on there, we've got that looked after for them, to keep 
our seniors in the Battlefords area healthy and in their own 
home and independent, as they want to be. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

102 
 

The Minister of Health has announced more nursing positions. 
And again, in the Battlefords Union Hospital we had an 
intensive care ward, Mr. Speaker, a beautiful ward, fancy 
machines. Fancy machines. I have no idea what they do but it 
looked very impressive when you walked in, fancy gismos, 
rooms all glassed in so the nursing station could watch what 
was happening in the room. It never opened — never opened 
because the former government wouldn't give them money to 
staff it. That's open today, Mr. Speaker, and the cost on that is 
$415,000. Eleven nurses looking after people in an intensive 
care ward in north-western Saskatchewan because the Minister 
of Health cares about the health care of our population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when I campaigned 
I talked to senior citizens in nursing homes, in seniors' 
accommodation, and they said to me, you know, we're not 
doing too badly. We'll get by, and we're old. But we worry 
about our grandchildren. Where are they going to find jobs? 
Why do they have to go to Edmonton, to Calgary, to 
Vancouver, to Toronto? Why can't they stay home? 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I ran over the numbers from the 
Saskatchewan Health statistics the other day. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have 800 more young people from the ages of 20 to 40 
living in Battleford and North Battleford than we did in 1982 — 
800. 
 
And there was a great deal of concern in our area that all we 
were doing was becoming a senior citizens' complex and all of 
the economic activity was rushing into the major centres of this 
province. And we've reversed that trend and we're now a growth 
area in the province. And who do we have to thank for that? 
Did that ever happen when the NDP were in government? 
Never — never. 
 
We have manufacturing taking place in our province, local 
people starting manufacturing shops, employing up to 70 
people, since the change in government. We have a company in 
the town of Battleford run by local people, owned by local 
people, that is manufacturing and exporting not only around 
North America but internationally. I talked to them last week. 
They've got a deal signed; they're shipping products to 
Barbados. 
 
And how old are they? Thirty months old. Thirty months. 
Would they be there when the NDP were there? No, Mr. 
Speaker, and I'll you what. I talked to them. When I spoke to 
them, they were telling me about their deal in the Barbados. 
They're a little concerned. Because they said, you know, Myles, 
if the government ever changed, we'd just have to turn the key 
in the door. And the 24 people from the town of Battleford that 
we hire would be unemployed. And the biggest concern that 
people in the north-west corner of the province have is what 
would happen if there were a change in government. 
 
(1215) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little more about growth and 
development and economic prosperity in The Battlefords, but 
prior to getting into those comments I 

want to talk just briefly on what the member for Shaunavon said 
yesterday in his throne speech debate. 
 
He indicated that the Pawley government in Manitoba had taken 
over a province with one of the highest levels of unemployment 
in the country and had reduced that down, and that the reverse 
situation had happened here. And because he seems to have a 
little trouble with the facts . . . I won't say what they call him in 
North Battleford but I will tell you the facts according to 
Statistics Canada. 
 
In November of 1981 in Manitoba the unemployment rate was 
6.1 per cent. In February of 1986 in Manitoba the 
unemployment rate was 7.9 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Thank you very much. The member from across the way 
indicated that they have the highest per capita debt in the 
country. 
 
One thing he didn't mention in addition to that is that they have 
a tax on employees; they have, I believe, a tax on savings 
accounts; they have a $2 billion deficit; and they have nothing 
to show for it. They have a tax on gas, they have taxes on 
everything else, and they have reduced any taxes to their 
people; they have nothing to show for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in May of 1982 the unemployment rate in the 
province of Saskatchewan was 6 per cent and in February of 
'86, since 1982, it has gone up to 7.6 per cent, so there has been 
a bit of an increase, a moderate increase. But in comparing the 
two I think the thing that one should consider is that the two 
droughts that we've had, terrible droughts in our part of the 
country, have not affected Manitoba. 
 
Now if you look at the tremendous growth in employment that 
we've had and the tremendous growth in job creation and you 
look at the times that we've gone through, the worse economic 
recession in 50 years nationally, internationally; two droughts 
— and people in Saskatchewan are doing better than they have 
ever in history. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in The Battlefords we've benefited from that 
and we plan to continue to benefit from that. And I'd just like to 
quote . . . I had the good fortune to put out a householder to my 
community a little while ago and I'll quote from it: 
 

The number of new businesses in The Battlefords from 1982 
to date had increased dramatically. 

 
And they’re not all big businesses. They don't all employ 20 
people, or 50 people, or 100 people but they employ . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I'll get to him. They employ, 3,6, 10, 
7. Some of them are sole proprietors, but the total of those small 
businesses is 556 people to the end of 1985. And since then 
we've had 15 new companies open and they employ a 
considerable more number of people. 
 
And I believe that when I add the number of employees that 
they have to the number that have opened since 1982, that I will 
climb over the 600 new employees in new businesses in The 
Battlefords, and that is a record. Never before in history has 
there been that much activity. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

103 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — And that, Mr. Speaker, doesn't include the 
expansions that have taken place in companies that were 
operating prior to 1982. And as we all know, money spins off 
money and jobs create jobs. And if we've had 600 new jobs 
created by new companies, then we must have had roughly half 
that many again created by companies who are already in place, 
as they expanded. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to take a minute and go through this little 
document that I published for my constituents. On the inside 
leaf we see ground breaking on two senior citizens high-rises. 
And what did the people of The Battlefords say when we broke 
the ground? They said, we didn't even think we could get them. 
The Mayor of Battleford, who is a highly placed individual in 
another political party, stood up and said, we have Myles Morin 
to thank for this and the Grant Devine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — And he said that in the past we never had 
any access to government. He said when we wanted something 
we had to go to the NDP with our cap in our hands and on our 
knees, with our hands out and beg for a little something. He 
said, you know what, Myles Morin walked into the council 
chambers and he says, fellows, I think we can get this and I 
want you to apply for it, because I believe we can deliver. And 
he says, we thought it was a joke. And here we are a few 
months later breaking ground, and he said, I can't believe it. We 
have to turn them away, he's bringing so much stuff in. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that can happen all 
over this province, if we believe in the future of it, and if we 
believe in the people and the courage that they have and the 
drive and determination that they have. But it will never happen 
if we let those guys across the road regain the reins of power in 
this province. Their attitude is, go and hide in a corner every 
time there's a controversy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've a letter in here from a retired schoolteacher 
and I'd like to read it to you. It's addressed to the Hon. Grant 
Devine, and he copied me on it. It's dated November 1, 1985, to 
the Hon. Grant Devine. 
 

Dear Sir: The Ukrainian community of the Battlefords wishes 
to express its appreciation to your government for the 
$150,000 grant covering part of the publishing costs of the 
first volume of the Ukrainian encyclopedia. Because 
Ukrainians in their homeland are not privileged to develop 
their language and culture, any assistance beyond its border is 
vital to its survival. Your contribution is noted with deepest 
gratitude. 

 
We believe in the culture of this province. We believe in the 
areas that just because my forefathers came from Poland or 
France or wherever they may have come from, that we don't 
have to forget that. We can build on the strength of every nation 
and every nationality that we brought in. 

Mr. Speaker, on the back page of this document, I show 
pictures of our progress. Old buildings, vacant lots that there's 
been nothing happening in for the lifetime that those people 
were in power, are now sprouting new businesses, creating new 
jobs; and, Mr. Speaker, we've only just begun. 
 
On the front page of this — and I don't want to take a whole lot 
more time — but on the front page we talk about Gainers. Mr. 
Speaker, I talked at length about the small-business growth and 
job creation in my community. But what we need in the 
Battlefords, and what we've needed in the Battlefords for years, 
is a corner-stone industry to build on. We could never get one 
with the NDP because any time something came around, any 
time there was an opportunity, they killed it or they bought it. 
Well we landed Gainers bacon plant and we worked hard to get 
that bacon plant. And the mayor of the city of North Battleford 
and myself and the economic development officer and the 
people from this government put that deal together, and we're 
proud of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it tears at my heart when I hear the Leader of the 
Opposition say that an NDP government would kill that project. 
He said that in the paper, and he has said that here today 
publicly in his remarks to the throne speech. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I can't imagine it — 200 jobs for the people of The Battlefords, 
and opportunity to build. We've made that announcement. 
 
I've been contacted by two meat packing plants from eastern 
Canada. I'm dealing with both of them. They think, by gosh, 
with the amount of feed grain you guys grow, and with the 
amount of livestock you produce, that you would be a good 
place to locate. You've got a river and we need water. You've 
got a good quality of life. You've got a good transportation 
network. You're on rail. You've got good people to work there 
with, a good work ethic. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the Gainer's bacon plant and with 
another meat processing plan, there are a million things that we 
can do up there. Mr. Speaker, we can get a packaging facility to 
feed off of two different plants and there will be enough activity 
there to support that. The things that it does in trucking; the 
things that it does for the hotel industry; the things that it does 
for motels and restaurants, and on and on. 
 
It gives farmers an opportunity to feed, to grow a diverse crop. 
It gives farmers an opportunity to walk their grain off the land 
through livestock which they've done in this province for years, 
but haven't over the past few years, while hog production fell 
like a stone under the NDP; when cattle production fell like a 
stone under the NDP. We can build on those things, and we can 
grow, but we can't do it with people over there who are going to 
drive a stake through the heart of every opportunity that we 
bring into this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would like to know why the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Allan Blakeney, is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member in addressing the 
Leader of the Opposition should address 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

104 
 

him as that or by his constituency, but not by his name. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate your correction. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition in this Assembly has tried to suck the life-blood of 
job creation out of our region, and he has proven, proven 
beyond . . . If there was any doubt in the people of The 
Battlefords minds that they cared one iota about our well-being, 
about our future, it's been dispelled. Because not only did he say 
once publicly that he would squash that program, that it was a 
headline in the newspaper, he repeated it here again today. The 
member from Athabasca reiterated that and the whole group 
here seemed to think that the people of The Battlefords don't 
deserve to grow. They don't deserve any opportunity. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe in opportunity and they believe 
in welfare. And I believe the people of The Battlefords would 
rather have an opportunity than welfare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us about housing in your area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — It's booming. The member asks, how's 
housing in your area? It's booming. Thank you very much. In 
fact, since you mention it, I've been talking to the contractors, 
the average and small contractors in my area, and they're so 
optimistic about what's going on in our area this year that they 
figure we're going to have the biggest record year of 
construction ever. And you know what it's predicated on ? I 
appreciate the member raising the question because, you know 
what it's predicated on? Bacon. And I know that the member 
from Regina North East understands enough about economics 
and home building to know that if we squash 200 jobs in my 
riding there won't be a lot of home construction . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Oh, the member for Athabasca says they're all from Alberta. 
Well, I'll tell you I had the pleasure of speaking in the member 
for Athabasca's riding the other day, at a nominating 
convention, and the joke going around was the member from 
Athabasca is frightened because we saw him in town today and 
we haven't seen him for four years. I was a little worried when I 
heard the member from Athabasca speak because I've always 
thought he was a reasonable man, but he's been spending too 
much time with the NDP because he's starting to sound like 
them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity not only in The 
Battlefords but across our province, to build. We have an 
opportunity to realize on the dreams of our forefathers if we 
have the courage to go out there. We can fill the National 
Hockey League with kids from Saskatchewan who compete 
internationally and on a world level and are heroes and winners, 
but we don't believe, because of the NDP, that we can compete 
anywhere else. We can only compete on the ice. My colleague, 
the Minister of Culture and Recreation, a world champion in 
sports, but they don't think we can compete in trade. We live on 
trade — we live on trade — $6 billion a year with the U.S. 
alone, and they want to kill it. 

(1230) 
 
Well, there's nowhere we can't go in this province if we believe 
we can go there, because we have the resources and the people 
and the opportunity to do it. Only one thing can hold us back — 
only one thing — and that's the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne, 
and I will be opposing the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The amendment that was put 
forward by the opposition has a seconder who has spoken prior, 
and therefore we would have to have a new seconder proposed 
for that amendment. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I will second the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a 
pleasure once again to rise in debate on the motion before the 
House. I, too, along with my other colleagues that we've heard, 
would like to congratulate the mover and seconder of the 
address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, the member for 
Regina North and his colleague, the member from Humboldt. 
 
I would like to spend a few moments today in a couple of areas, 
Mr. Speaker. Number one, I'd like to say a few words about 
what our government, the government of Premier Grant Devine, 
has done for the constituency of Weyburn and the people who 
live in that constituency, and as well say a few words about the 
importance of the oil industry in terms of preserving and 
creating jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency . . . And this very morning you 
will know that I met and introduced to the members of the 
legislature some people from the Western Christian College, 
who are busy building a new facility there, several new 
facilities, in fact. And it's an example of the kind of spirit in and 
around Weyburn, where they're building projects for the future 
—future not only of this province, Mr. Speaker, but the future 
of our youth. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, one other major, important area in 
Weyburn is the Souris Valley Regional Care Centre, a very 
high-quality, well-run institution for level 4 patients, Mr. 
Speaker. It's a facility that all the people of Weyburn are very 
proud of. But it's also one that every taxpayer, I would suggest, 
every taxpayer in Weyburn who is aware of it certainly, who 
every time they drive by it they also know —and it bothers 
them — that there's a great deal of empty space that's not being 
utilized in that facility. And every taxpayer believes that it 
would make a lot of sense to utilize that facility. And I too, Mr. 
Speaker, am of that same view. 
 
I know the Minister of Health has had a committee that's 
examined waste space in this province. And I've had an 
opportunity to have many of my colleagues through that 
building and see that available space. And I also know that the 
minister is giving it every attention that he can in 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

105 
 

terms of making fuller use of that space for the people of 
Saskatchewan, for the people Weyburn. And although I cannot 
stand here today and make any commitment about further 
utilization, it is certainly a very, very high priority with me, Mr. 
Speaker, as MLA for the area. 
 
I would also say in passing that it's with regret, in fact, that I 
have learned that Bernie McCallion, who has been the 
administrator there, has moved on to a new job in one of the 
large hospitals here in Regina as the new administrator. I wish 
him all the best as he undertakes this new job. He's going to be 
sorely missed in Weyburn, not only as the administrator there, 
but he was very much a community person, as was his entire 
family. And I can also say, having had consultations on this 
with the Minister of Health, that he is regarded as one of the 
best administrators in Canada. And we are going to sorely miss 
him at the Souris Valley. 
 
There's a lot of things been happening, Mr. Speaker, in 
Weyburn constituency. The priorities of the people there have 
been the priorities of this government. Fillmore, town of 
Fillmore, their hospital nursing home complex which they've 
been working at since 1973, had the cash in the bank since that 
day. Well very shortly, Mr. Speaker, we're going to be turning 
the soil out there on that project as it gets under way. 
 
And I can only congratulate the people of Fillmore for not ever 
giving up. They never gave up on that project, Mr. Speaker. 
They had a vision. They had to get through hurdles — like the 
NDP's government previously had a moratorium, Mr. Speaker, 
as you will know, on building new nursing homes. That was a 
real slap in the face for them. But that project is on schedule. 
Sod will be turned and the $1.9 million contribution from this 
government to make that their vision a reality. 
 
Stoughton. It's the same thing. They're just about ready to move 
into a brand-new nursing home there, more beds, a new facility, 
the Newhope Nursing Home Lodge, virtually complete, Mr. 
Speaker. We expect that the people there will be moving into 
that in this next month. 
 
Education, Mr. Speaker. Fillmore. New facilities at their school. 
Long awaited and much needed. 
 
In Weyburn. Classic example, Mr. Speaker. A classic example 
of using business to create jobs in the province. Business, the 
small, the engine of the economy, creating jobs. Canada Wire & 
Cable. Very exciting times for them, Mr. Speaker. The last 
couple of weeks they've had projects that ultimately over the 
next five years will probably lead into the hundreds of millions 
of dollars worth of contracts that's been awarded to them. 
 
In fact the headline in the local paper, the Weyburn Review, just 
this week, Mr. Speaker, had something to the effect that, 
because of the government contracts, Canada Wire & Cable will 
double the work-force, Mr. Speaker — double the work-force. 
Good news for Weyburn. Good news for Canada Wire & Cable. 
They've been a very good corporate citizen, Mr. Speaker, and I 
congratulate them for their aggressiveness in pursing these 
contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to Canada Wire & Cable in 

Weyburn, it goes without saying that it means jobs, jobs, jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what about the farmers in the Weyburn area? 
I was not that long ago at a meeting that was, for the most part 
as far as I could tell at least, organized by the NDP. They were 
there to talk about how the government —erroneously I might 
add, Mr. Speaker — about how the government of Premier 
Grant Devine has done nothing to help the farmer. 
 
Well there is no need for me to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, what 
Premier Grant Devine's government has done for the farmers of 
this province; no need for me to reiterate because a young 
farmer there said it all. A young farmer at this meeting said it 
all. He listened to all this doom and gloom and negativism 
coming from the NDP supporters there about how the farm 
economy was falling apart, about how we had this crisis, and 
about how the governments weren't helping. And finally he 
could take it no longer, Mr. Speaker, and he stood up in front of 
the crowd there — he was at the back — he stood up, he says, 
I've been farming the farm I am on today for many years, and 
before that it was in our family, I think he said it was in the 
order of 78 years. He said, I want to tell you people here today 
that we've never had as much help from any government in the 
entire history that that farm has been in our family as we've had 
in the last six months from the government of Premier Grant 
Devine and as well from the federal government. 
Unequivocally, Mr. Speaker, never had as much help as they've 
had in the last few months. I think that says it all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that farmer, like many others out 
there, they're not looking for hand-outs. They just want a little 
help to get them through the downturns, whether they be 
drought, or flood, or grasshoppers. That kind of hope and 
optimism . . . The spirit is not broke out there in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; we've helped them get through this 
time. And that kind of optimism, Mr. Speaker, was reflected in 
the Regina Bull Sale this week. 
 
The farmers out there aren't . . . Even though there's been no 
grass for the last couple of years and hay supplies have been 
low, did that break their spirit? Did that cause them to fold up 
their ranches and close up their tents and quit this business of 
farming and ranching? I say, no. In fact, Mr. Speaker, for the 
first time in, I think, 60 or 70 years, I heard on the radio, prices 
at the Regina Bull Sale have been the highest that they've been 
since the early hundreds in this province, reflecting, I think, 
once again the optimism out there. 
 
Well we've been behind the farmers, Mr. Speaker, whether it 
was droughts, or floods, or debt problems, or interest rates, or 
grasshoppers because our government's priorities have been the 
things that I've just described to you happening in the 
constituency of Weyburn. It was health care, in building nursing 
homes. It was the people's priorities; it was the people in 
Weyburn's priorities, and it's our government's priority. 
Education, new schools, jobs — jobs at Canada Wire & Cable 
— and help for our farmers, which leads me to the area of my 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

106 
 

As you will know, it has been experiencing a downturn. Prices 
have fallen dramatically in the world oil markets. It's equivalent 
of, Mr. Speaker — to put it in terms that are more easily related 
to by many of our people — it's like the price of wheat going 
from $5 a bushel down to $2 a bushel in a matter of some eight 
weeks. And it's largely, if not entirely, due to the action of 
Saudi Arabia, one of the major OPEC countries, where they've 
decided to try and discipline the market a little bit out there. 
 
Of course I am like any other consumer; I'm all for low gas 
prices, Mr. Speaker. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this 
causes me very grave concern because of all the jobs that are 
threatened, not only inside the oil patch, but the jobs of people 
outside the oil patch that are impacted upon as well. And I think 
of jobs at Ipsco; I think of jobs at the Saskatoon oil field 
manufacturing. So it's not just an oil patch issue, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a Saskatchewan issue. 
 
Why am I concerned, Mr. Speaker? Well, unlike the NDP we 
view the oil industry and the oil patch as the engine of jobs and 
economic growth in this province. It's vital — not only to the 
life-blood of the province — but it's vital to the life-blood of the 
families and the workers who enjoy their livings from that 
industry. Thousands of jobs, Mr. Speaker, depend on that 
industry staying healthy. Thousands of families depend on that 
industry staying healthy. 
 
And how are we going to attack this problem, Mr. Speaker? 
How have we been attacking it? Well, we're going to use the 
same recipe to solve this problem as we used in 1982. My 
colleagues and myself embarked on meetings across the 
province, meeting not only with the chief executive officers and 
the chairmans of the boards and the Calgarys of the world, Mr. 
Speaker, but we're meeting with the rig workers and the Swift 
Currents and the Estevans and the Weyburns and the 
Kindersleys and the Lloydminsters of the world to get their 
views on what maybe governments can do, albeit that it's 
largely a global problem that we deal with. But it worked in 
1982; we consulted with the industry; they know best. It worked 
then, Mr. Speaker, and I think if there's anything that we can do, 
it'll work again with that kind of recipe. 
 
And I can say, Mr. Speaker, absolutely, unequivocally, that I’m 
not here today to provide answers, because I haven’t finished all 
these meetings yet, but I attack this problem with an open mind, 
and I can say as well, unequivocally, that all options are open. 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because the fundamental fact in 
Saskatchewan today is that this industry has been good to this 
province. It’s our number one source of revenue. It’s a major 
creator of jobs, and there are a lot of communities that enjoy the 
spin-offs from that industry. 
 
And just, Mr. Speaker, as Premier Devine and our government 
stood behind the farmers in their downturns, and just as we 
stood behind the home owners when interest rates went up to 20 
and 22 per cent, we will stand behind the workers and their 
families in the oil patch today; we'll stand behind the Ipsco 
workers, and we'll stand behind the people in Saskatoon at the 
plant there. We are not about to turn a deaf ear on an industry 
that has 

been so good to this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition today stood in this 
House and talked about standing up for the future, standing up 
against Ottawa, standing up for the farmers. But, Mr. Speaker, 
has he once even breathed a mention of a word about standing 
up for the workers in the oil patch? Has he once even 
questioned, Mr. Speaker, about the jobs that are threatened in 
the oil patch because of the world oil price scenario? The 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is: the silence has been deafening, the 
silence has been deafening. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker? Because the NDP view the oil 
companies and the oil patch workers as a threat, as nothing 
more than a bunch of big, bad oil companies. Well at least that's 
what they say when they're in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, or when 
they're in Saskatoon. but now the hon. member for Shaunavon, 
if he gives an interview to Pipeline, which is read in Estevan 
and Weyburn by the oil field workers, what does he say? Well, 
you know, maybe this oil royalty holiday isn't so bad, and 
maybe there isn't a $300 million give-away. But when he goes 
to Nipawin, and if they need some new road or something, hey, 
we'll stop that $300 million give-away to the oil companies, and 
that's how we'll find the money to build your new road. And if 
he goes to another town down the road, the member from 
Shaunavon says, yes, we'll build that for you because we're 
going to shut down that $300 million give-away to the oil 
companies, and we'll build that for you. 
 
(1244) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many times they've spent that 
$300 million give-away that doesn't exist across Saskatchewan. 
But it's a different tune, Mr. Speaker, when they're in Estevan 
and when they're in Weyburn. And I understand the hon. 
member for Shaunavon is going to be in Weyburn as a guest 
speaker at another banquet down there, and it will be interesting 
to hear what he has to say in the heart of the oil patch. It'll be 
very interesting indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, what I have heard as I've toured 
the oil patch. What have I heard as I've toured the oil patch 
since oil prices went down? The two things I consistently hear, 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest threats facing the oil patch today, Mr. 
Speaker, are two things — two things, Mr. Speaker. The first 
one is the threat of continued low oil prices. It has them and me 
extremely concerned, Mr. Speaker. But what is the second 
biggest threat facing the oil patch today, Mr. Speaker? The 
second biggest threat today, Mr. Speaker, facing the oil patch is 
the sniff — even the sniff that the NDP, people like the member 
for Shaunavon, even the sniff that those guys might get close to 
the levers of government again. And I'll tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker — and my words can be checked out by those in the 
industry — capital investment is being held up in this province 
today because there is some view that they may even get within 
a 50-mile radius of those levers of government and the valves of 
the pipelines of this province. That, Mr. Speaker, is as big a 
concern as the low oil price scenario out there for them. 
 
I can see why they say that, Mr. Speaker, because the oil 
  



 
March 21, 1986 

 

107 
 

patch has just come through a banner year, and I'll tell you 
what, Mr. Speaker, we're committed to maintaining the health 
of that oil patch economy out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as they've been hypocrites when it comes to 
dealing with the question of oil resource policy, they've been 
hypocrites when it comes to dealing with farm policy. Where 
were they when farmers were facing 22 per cent interest rates? 
Where were they when farmers were calling for capital gains 
tax removal? Where were they when farmers were dealing with 
high fuel costs? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, needless to say, I'm proud of the record of 
this government. I am proud of the Premier of this province 
because he understands farming, he understands families, he 
understands the life-blood of this entire economy. He 
understands about building for the future, he understands about 
jobs, and he understands about opportunity. 
 
So needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I'll be supporting the motion, 
not the amendment. And although, Mr. Speaker, I have more to 
say and I would like to take . . . I will want to say it at a later 
date. I beg leave at this moment to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just briefly 
describe why this motion is on the order paper. It is simply to 
provide for the putting of the votes on the question of the throne 
speech at Wednesday afternoon, 30 minutes prior to 
adjournment, and then providing for sitting Wednesday evening 
for the delivery of the budget speech. Mr. Speaker, I therefore 
move, seconded by the Minister of Energy: 
 

That in accordance with Rule 13(4), unless the debate has 
been previously concluded, Mr. Speaker shall, at 4:30 p.m. 
on Wednesday, March 26, 1986, interrupt the proceedings 
and forthwith put every question necessary to dispose of 
the address in reply to His Honour’s Speech, and 
 
That notwithstanding Rule 3(3), this Assembly shall on 
Wednesday, March 26, 1986, sit from 2 o'clock p.m. to 5 
o'clock p.m. and from 7 o'clock p.m. to 10 o'clock p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we might 
have leave of the Assembly to proceed with private Bills, 
second readings, so that we can move these two private Bills 
down the order paper. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILL 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Canadian Bible Society, 

Saskatchewan District 

Mr. Baker: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 
01, An Act respecting the Canadian Bible Society, 
Saskatchewan District, be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act respecting Medical Services 
Incorporated 

 
Mr. Glauser: — I move that Bill No. 02, An Act respecting 
Medical Services Incorporated, be now read a second time and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:51 p.m. 
 
 


