


















































April 25, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 25, 1986 

877 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Koskie, from the Special Committee 
on Regulations, presents the fifth report of the committee, 
which is as follows. 
 

Your committee has undertaken an initial review of 1985 
regulations and 1985 professional by-laws. Your 
committee has been presented with supplementary 
information enabling it to reconsider 22 regulations and 14 
by-laws from 1981 through 1984 specifically drawn to its 
attention by counsel. Your committee needs to review 
seven regulations and nine by-laws in order to complete its 
business to December 31, 1985, and is vigorously 
pursuing all issues raised by counsel outstanding since 
1982. No impediments exist at this time that might restrict 
the committee’s ability to fulfil its mandate. 
 
In accordance with its terms of reference, your committee 
has reviewed the by-laws and amendments to by-laws of 
the professional associations to ensure that each has proper 
legislative authority and is in the public’s interest. 
 
The committee also considered further responses from the 
appropriate department or association to nine matters 
outstanding from its 24th meeting of this current 
legislature. 
 
The committee reserves ratification on the following 
by-laws, pending satisfactory resolution of the 
committee’s concerns: 
 
From sessional paper no. 35 of 1981-82, the following: the 
Saskatchewan Association of Architects. 
 
From sessional paper no. 59 of 1983-84, the following: the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists; the Certified 
General Accountants’ Association of Saskatchewan; the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association; and the 
Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association. 
 
From sessional paper no. 16 of 1984-85-86, the following: 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; The Law Society 
of Saskatchewan; the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association; The Chiropractors’ Association of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Your committee recommends that the by-laws, regulations 
and amendments of the following professional 
associations be ratified and confirmed by the Assembly: 
 
From sessional paper no. 59 of 1983-84, the following: 
The Saskatchewan Psychological Association. 
 

From sessional paper no. 16 of 1984-85-86, the following: 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan; 
The Saskatchewan Funeral Service Association. 
 
The committee will be focusing its attention on the 
following regulations and by-laws arising out of the 
addenda to sessional paper no. 2 of 1986: The Physical 
Therapists Amendment Regulations; the Saskatchewan 
Association of Architects; the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons; the Saskatchewan League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents; the 
Association of Professional Engineers; The Institute of 
Chartered Accountants; Regulations under the Dental 
Professions Act (1978); The Law Society of 
Saskatchewan; The Ophthalmic Dispensers Amendment 
Regulations, 1985; the Saskatchewan Association of 
Optometrists; the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association; The Saskatchewan Psychological 
Association; the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Biggar: 
 

That the fifth report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 
leader, the member for Regina Elphinstone, who is unable to be 
present today — and he extends his regrets to the students — I 
am privileged to introduce 12 young people from the Maranatha 
Christian Academy here in Regina. These students are currently 
enrolled in grades 9 to 12 and it’s an Accredited Christian 
Education school, informally called ACE. They are 
accompanied by their instructor, Mr. Todd Harrison. I’m 
looking forward to meeting with you for drinks and pictures at 
about 11, and I think we’ll have a very interesting discussion. 
Send me a note when you’re ready, okay? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the students from Maranatha Christian Academy. My 
brother, Donald White, was one of the founding members of 
this school and did the law work for them. My children go to a 
similar school as theirs, and we work together with this group. 
So on behalf of my family, who has been involved in private 
education such as Maranatha, I would like to welcome these 
students as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very rare 
occasion I get to stand in this Assembly, because of the distance 
I am from Regina, to introduce guests, but unfortunately these 
guests are not from my riding, Mr.  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

878 
 

Speaker. These guests are from my good friend and colleague’s, 
the member from Wilkie, riding. I would like to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to this Assembly, a group of 
grade 8 students from the St. George School, in Wilkie, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that’s quite a distance to travel, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like 
to welcome the people that have taken the trouble to get here to 
this Assembly. I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 
the teacher, Mr. B. Merkosky, and the chaperon, Mr. D. 
Wilgenbusch — is that it? I hope I pronounced it right — and 
the bus driver, Mr. D. Huber. I would ask all members of this 
Assembly to please welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to my colleagues, 12 grade 10, 11, and 12 
students from Sonningdale High School. They are accompanied 
by their teacher Art Klassen and Faith Struhan. Their chaperons 
are Glenna Klassen and Ernie Struhan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a special request that if you have a 
moment that this group would like to have you, when we meet 
at 11:30, would appreciate it if you have the time to come and 
visit with them. 
 
I would ask all members to give them a big, warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan’s Migration Record 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
address a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you may be 
aware that Statistics Canada has already reported that 
Saskatchewan had the worst net migration record in Canada last 
year — 6,000 more people moved out of the province than 
moved in. But I ask the Premier: is he aware that this trend is 
worsening in the first three months of this year? Are you aware 
that between January and March of this year about 8,500 people 
moved out of Saskatchewan while less than 3,500 moved in, for 
a net loss of more than 5,000 people? Are you aware of this 
situation, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m aware that the 
population for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history is in 
excess of a million people, and that has happened since 1982. 
And I’m also aware, Mr. Speaker, that the statistics that the hon. 
member uses are both seasonal and cyclical. So if you put the 
two of them together and you watch the gross . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, listen to them again. I want the 
children in this legislature to watch that individual, Mr. 
Speaker. As I answer the question, I want all the children here 
and across Saskatchewan to watch the NDP, how they respond 
in question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our population is up over a million people. It’s the 
first time in history that it’s over a million people.  

We will have seasonal variations when you’ll have people 
moving in and moving out. Mr. Speaker, I expect 
Saskatchewan’s population to grow in the future as it has in the 
past, and to grow much more quickly under a government that 
is open to allow provinces to come in here than it would be 
under administration that said, no, we’ll nationalize you and 
you can go some place else. We’re open, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
invited children and people home, and they’re happy to come 
and stay in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, our population is 
over the million mark, first time in its history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is the Premier aware that his government’s own 
figures show nearly three times as many families leaving 
Saskatchewan today as are moving in? Is he aware that between 
January and March this year more than 1,600 families moved 
out of Saskatchewan while less than 600 moved in? Are you 
aware at what is happening here under your economic 
mismanagement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
the potential for new job creation, the activity in new job 
creation in Saskatchewan, will rank with any province in 
western Canada, and he knows that. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
unemployment levels in the province of Saskatchewan over the 
last four years have beat anybody in Canada. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, we see our population growing to well over a million 
people, and it never did that under a previous administration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know very well that the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan and outside the province of 
Saskatchewan are excited about the building of upgraders, are 
excited about the building of paper plants, excited about new 
processing activities, new fertilizer activities, power projects — 
something like 5 to $10 billion worth of new projects. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll compare the projects and the employment 
record and the economic activity, the rate of inflation, the rate 
of interest, the rate of protection on mortgages, to any 
jurisdiction in Canada. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the fact 
that in the province of Saskatchewan our population is well 
over a million. The member opposite can take a 
month-to-month figure and say, well for Heaven’s sake, there’s 
been a net decline. Overall, Mr. Speaker, year after year our 
population is going up, and we’re proud of it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further supplement to the Premier. Is the 
Premier aware that nearly half of those people that are leaving 
the province today are young people in their 30s, 20s. Is the 
Premier aware that his government’s own figures show that 
more than 3,000 people between the ages of 20 and 30 moved 
out of Saskatchewan the first three months — a drain of our 
young people from Saskatchewan. I ask you: can you explain 
that development and what economic steps are you taking to 
rectify it? And talking . . . I’ll leave it at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 
member asks what economic steps we’re taking to address this 
. . . 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

879 
 

An Hon. Member: No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s what he asked. Mr. Speaker, I can 
have him read the same question over again. He asked what 
economic steps I’m taking to correct the matter. 
 
Now my response to that, Mr. Speaker, is that I would certainly 
appreciate the support of the opposition, the opposition in this 
legislature, to build projects that create jobs, projects like 
Weyerhaeuser Canada building a brand-new paper-mill. That’s 
300 jobs. They’re against that. And I would like to have their 
support so that we know that that will be there for sure. 
 
I would like to have the opposition’s support for a brand-new 
bacon processing plant in North Battleford, but they’re against 
that. I would like to have their support for a rural gas 
distribution system so that we can provide those jobs and 
economic activity and lower the costs of living in the province. 
That’s the kinds of things that we’re doing, and I would like to 
have the opposition’s support to create those jobs. 
 
I would like to have the opposition’s support to create the 
upgraders, both in Regina and Lloydminster, or to put together 
a new fertilizer plant. Those are the kinds of economic things 
that we’re doing in the province of Saskatchewan to encourage 
people to live and work here. 
 
I would like to have your support for the tax cuts, taking the tax 
off clothes in the province of Saskatchewan, taking the tax off 
gasoline, taking the tax off utilities. I would like to have your 
support to do that to make people comfortable here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he asked what economic things we’re doing to 
change it, and I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, here are the list of 
them, and, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s impossible to hear when 
the members holler the way they are this morning. I would just 
ask for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just reiterate. There are many economic 
projects, and I would appreciate the support of the opposition to 
build these projects so that we can have the economic activity 
and the jobs, which would encourage people both to stay and to 
move into Saskatchewan because it’s a good place and a great 
place for your future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental. I wonder if the Premier 
could indicate how many jobs have been created by that 
non-existent fertilizer plant that you’re talking about. I think the 
only fertilizer that we know of is what’s coming from the other 
side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member asked me how 
many jobs have been created by a new project that we just 
signed. Well isn’t that the idea? Isn’t that the idea, Mr. Speaker, 
that we would put together a project to build into the future? I 
mean they can only live in the past. I mean you’re living in the 
past. The future belongs to those that can have some vision and 
that can look into the future. 

Mr. Speaker, we have created 17,000 new jobs in just recent 
months — brand-new jobs, Mr. Speaker. And when we want to 
create new projects, they’re against it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say 
that we have created jobs in the projects that we have already 
created. We will create jobs on new projects, and I would only 
request . . . I mean it would be a simple thing for the opposition 
to do to support the new projects so that we can create more 
jobs rather than just being doom and gloom and negative all the 
time. 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, yesterday you issued a 
province-wide press release proclaiming May as car care month 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, in that press release, and I 
quote, you say that we must call you as much as we can to 
ensure the safety of the travelling public. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you have issued this 
proclamation, will you now do your part and at least repair 
some of the highways, deteriorating highways, in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t really 
understand whether the member opposite is complaining about 
a very, very good program that is endorsed by the National 
Safety Council, a group of people who have gotten together to 
encourage people to take good care of their vehicles. If you are 
complaining about that, that’s certainly your prerogative. If 
you’re complaining about the condition of our roads, we did 
announce a $100.6 million capital construction program just a 
week ago. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you can make all the press 
releases and speeches that you like, but on behalf of the 
contractors of this province are making it very clear that this 
government is not capable of building or repairing the roads 
that are required in this province. 
 
The latest study from the Canadian Construction Association 
shows that this government is underfunding highway 
construction by at least 20 per cent, Mr. Minister. That is what 
they are saying. They also say that Saskatchewan motorists pay 
an additional $119 a year in fuel and repair costs because of the 
condition of our highways. That’s what the construction 
association is saying, Mr. Minister. 
 
When are you going to do something about this problem? When 
are you going to get ahead with the job of building some roads 
in this province so people wouldn’t be wrecking their cars on 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already stated that 
just a week ago or thereabouts we announced a very, very major 
capital construction program for this province — $100.6 million 
in new capital construction. I can also tell the members opposite 
that an increase in maintenance and rehabilitation to the 
highways of our province, we increased the expenditures 4.3 
per cent this year. 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

880 
 

And I do believe that in those types of dollars, when you look at 
the entire budget of the Department of Highways, something in 
excess of $213 million, that that is definite improvement to our 
highways. And those dollars will be spent in a very, very 
judicious manner and will indeed improve the quality of our 
highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Question to the minister. Mr. Minister, we’ve 
heard that story for four years, and I think the public of 
Saskatchewan isn’t believing that when we look at the 
highways that we have to drive on today. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t you think that rather than issuing the press 
release you did yesterday, that maybe you should have 
proclaimed May as “Fill some pot-holes in Saskatchewan 
month”? Maybe that would do a lot more for car care in 
Saskatchewan than the issue that you did release. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, the type of news release 
that the member opposite purported that we should be releasing 
would be exactly the type of nonsense that the former 
administration would perpetrate. That news release, my friends, 
was a very, very good news release. It’s a very, very good 
organization that is engaged in advising the public to take good 
care of their motor vehicles, to ensure safety in this province, 
which is something that this government is very, very 
committed to. 
 
Now if the members opposite are not committed to taking good 
care of their vehicles and are not committed to safety 
improvements and safety as a high priority, that’s certainly your 
prerogative. But this government is indeed very, very 
committed to safety on our highways, and if we can endorse 
any programs whatsoever that will keep Saskatchewan 
motorists more safe, this government will be in the business of 
doing that. 
 

Query Regarding Absent Member 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister and Mr. 
Speaker, it’s obvious that this minister is not much different 
than the former minister. My question is directed to the Premier 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have a question regarding the former minister. 
We’ve had a number of complaints come to our office regarding 
the member for Wilkie, who, if you look at the time — it’s 
about day 28 of this new session — and the minister, to the best 
of my knowledge — or the former minister of Highways, has 
not been in this House once during that period. 
 
Can you tell the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Premier, and 
the taxpayers of Wilkie constituency, the people that he’s 
supposed to be representing, why the member for Wilkie has 
not been in this House once during this new session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know when  

members, at least on this side of the House, when they’re not in 
the legislature, they’re working for their constituents at home in 
their constituency, and that, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what 
they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. Is there some 
special circumstances that would prevent this member for 
Wilkie from attending this House at least once, and doing the 
duties that he is supposed to be doing in this House — at least 
once in this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, people in this House — 
there’s 64 members — they come and they go. Some are here 
one time, and some are here at other times. But the member 
from Wilkie met with the Minister of Health, for example, in 
his riding just last week to review senior housing 
accommodations and so forth. He’s working in his riding 
which, I suspect, is the kind of thing people like to see done. 
And he may drop into the legislature, Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Canora and Pelly may drop into the legislature 
from time to time. So I suppose the next time you’re out of the 
legislature, I can ask the Leader of the Opposition, well, where 
is this gentleman? 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, people work in the legislature and they 
work in their ridings; they do both. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 28 
days of the session and not once did this member appear in this 
House. And you can say he’s working in the constituency or 
wherever; I don’t know where he is, and the people from Wilkie 
don’t know where he is. Can you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Wilkie if this member is 
currently a resident of Saskatchewan, or has he moved out of 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member of the 
legislature for Wilkie is working in his riding. He’s meeting 
with reeves; he’s meeting with hospital board members; he 
meets with farmers; he meets with the public; he consults with 
the ministers. I’ve met with him myself. He’s working and 
living in the province of Saskatchewan, in his riding. And I 
think it’s fair to say that the people of Wilkie will decide, Mr. 
Speaker, whether there’s representation and good 
representation, and, Mr. Speaker, they will. So he can have the 
responsibility to work in the riding, work in dealing with 
people, coming back and talking to the cabinet ministers, 
talking to me, and he can be in the legislature; he can be both. I 
mean you know that as well as I do. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Premier, it appears that your 
member is either unwilling or unable to do his duties as a 
member of this House and as an MLA for the constituency of 
Wilkie. There is some rumour that he’s even taken up residence 
outside this province. I don’t know if that’s true or not. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, since he hasn’t appeared in this House once 
in this session — and there’s really no excuse for that, 28 sitting 
days and not once did he appear in this House — can you 
inform this Assembly, Mr. Premier, as to whether this MLA has 
been continuing to get his salary and his allowance and 
whatever other payments he may have been getting? Can you 
inform us if he has been getting all of the payments that come to 
an MLA, and 



 
April 25, 1986 

 

881 
 

whether you think that he is justified in getting those payments 
when he clearly neglected to do any of his duties in this 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean question period is 
designed for important issues of the day, whether it’s jobs or 
agriculture or health care and so forth. And the NDP go back 
and they say, well, I mean they want to know how many jelly 
beans crop insurance may have bought, and they want to know 
how many days that somebody from a constituency either is in 
the legislature or if he’s working at home. If a member is 
working at home, Mr. Speaker, that’s where people want to see 
him. I mean it’s surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP — and 
then when you answer they don’t listen; they don’t listen. 
 
I want the public . . . the public should be able to look at them 
hollering and screaming and clucking on the other side. You 
don’t want to have an answer. When we do have an . . . Look it, 
Mr. Speaker, I want the public of Saskatchewan to listen to the 
NDP. Listen to the kind of questions. They have no respect for 
the legislature; they have no respect for principle; they have no 
respect for the public; they have no respect for public 
employees . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I asked you a straightforward, simple 
question, and you refuse to answer it. It displays clearly the 
arrogance of this government when they refuse to tell the public 
— and I’m sure you would agree, Mr. Premier, would you not? 
— that the public should know why any member of this 
Assembly refuses to attend a sitting of this Assembly when this 
House is in session. Do you not agree that the public should be 
at least told why this is happening? And I can name you a few 
other names of that Assembly, or of that side of the House, that 
haven’t been attending this session. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, would you at this point tell the public why 
this member from Wilkie refused to attend, not one day in this 
session, and why he should be expected to receive the money 
that is being paid by taxpayers of this province for being a 
member of this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is saying that 
a member of the legislature can’t have his constituency office 
and work in his constituency, and he can’t do that. I mean that’s 
what you’re saying, that you shouldn’t be with it. 
 
You know, that’s the reason you lost the last election — that 
you weren’t with the people. You thought the whole world 
revolved around being in Regina. Well I’ll tell you what the 
people of Saskatchewan know. They appreciate MLAs, men 
and women, who will be in the constituency office and deal 
with problems and who will be close to farmers, close to 
business, close to young people, close to those that want to 
build hospitals — and not, Mr. Speaker, just say that they’re 
going to be in Regina running all over. 
 
You lost every rural riding but four in the last election because 
you wouldn’t stay at home and work. And Mr. Speaker, I 
venture to say that you might lose every single, solitary, rural 
riding in the next election in Saskatchewan  

because of your attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you are trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan that a 
member of this Assembly, an elected MLA, has no 
responsibility to appear in this House at all during the session. 
What you are telling them, then, is that it is not important to be 
in the session and to discuss the policies of the government or 
the expenditures of it on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
You are saying a member can sit at home and not even worry 
about coming to Regina. I don’t think people will believe that. 
People, Mr. Premier, I think will agree that you are here, and 
every one of us is here, to look after their affairs. And they 
expect us to be here when that session is on. When it isn’t on 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 
statements but not asking questions. If the member has a 
question, I’d like to hear the question. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, do you 
not agree that the member for Wilkie has the responsibility to 
be in this House to look after the affairs of his constituency? 
And if you think that that is not true, Mr. Premier, being in here 
four years where your term is up, will you not call the election 
and give the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to decide 
what kind of members they want in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will call an election in 
Saskatchewan, and the people will decide, and the people are 
always right. But if I was the opposition, I wouldn’t bet too 
much money on them either winning Wilkie or the Pelly 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Commercial Bingo Inquiry 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I have a question to the 
Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. In May of last 
year you announced a public inquiry into the operations of 
commercial bingo halls in Saskatchewan. The three-member 
board of inquiry held public hearings last fall, and the terms of 
reference you published called for a final report from them by 
December 31, 1985. Did the bingo inquiry meet that deadline 
and, if so, will your government be shortly introducing changes 
in the legislation or the regulations governing the operation of 
commercial bingo halls. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I find the question from 
the member opposite rather humorous because last year when 
the bingo inquiry was announced, the whole bunch of them over 
there were ridiculing my department for calling such an inquiry. 
 
As far as the December 31st deadline, it was extended because 
of the overwhelming — Mr. Speaker, the overwhelming — 
response from the public. I have received the inquiry . . . the 
report with its recommendations. It is an extremely complex, 
large report, Mr. Speaker. We are dealing with it in the  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

882 
 

department, and hopefully I will be taking it to cabinet in the 
near future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Madam Minister, have you 
received the report? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Honestly, Mr. Speaker, they ask 
questions and they don’t bother listening to the answers. I said I 
have received the report; the department is dealing with it, and 
hopefully I will take it to cabinet shortly. I might also inform 
the member that there was over 700 oral and written 
submissions. That shows the interest throughout the province 
into the area of bingo. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, will you make that report 
public? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, in due course. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, when will you be making 
the report public and, more important, to those people who were 
naive enough to take you seriously when you said you were 
concerned about it, when will you be acting upon that report 
and doing something about the serious problems that exist with 
respect to commercial bingo halls? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that the 
member opposite is a lawyer. I informed him that in due course 
the inquiry and all its findings and all its recommendations will 
be made public. This is a very serious matter that we are dealing 
with, and my department takes this inquiry, the 
recommendations of the panel, the recommendations that they 
gathered throughout the province, very, very seriously. The 
inquiry will be made public as soon as cabinet has had a chance 
to peruse it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, will you be bringing 
legislative changes to the current legislative session? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are reviewing the 
recommendations. I believe there’s 36 recommendations made 
by the commission. We are reviewing them to see how they will 
impact on existing operations, how they will impact on the 
various clubs and charities that access bingo moneys, and I 
don’t want to say what we will or will not do with it. It hasn’t 
been discussed by cabinet, and I’ll wait till then. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax Credit. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the Establishment and 
Operation of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre for the 

Provision of Rehabilitation and Extended Care Services in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to explain this 
Bill. In September of 1984 a board of governors was appointed 
under The Public Health Act to oversee the development of the 
new Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in Regina. The official sod 
turning for the project was held last October, and construction is 
now well under way on the site of the existing Wascana 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new facility will not simply represent an 
expansion and upgrading of Wascana Hospital. The project will 
result in the establishment of a brand-new $50 million 
rehabilitation centre offering a comprehensive range of 
rehabilitation services and the most up-to-date facilities. It will 
have some aspects of a hospital and some aspects of an 
extended care facility. But it will go well beyond these and will 
be unique among all health care facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, it is important to establish a 
clear and separate legislative base for the operation of this 
comprehensive rehabilitation centre. And that is what this Bill 
accomplishes, Mr. Speaker. It provides for a board to operate 
the centre and sets out its powers and responsibilities, and it 
includes the other provisions necessary for the effective 
administration of the facilities and programs that the center will 
offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre is a reflection 
of this government’s commitment to ensuring that 
Saskatchewan has the best health care system in Canada. It 
reflects our commitment to the steady development of new 
facilities needed to deliver quality health care services to the 
people of this province, and it reflects the fact that we just don’t 
talk about health care, but we get on with the job of providing 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre will be a major 
and valuable addition to health care services in Saskatchewan, 
and I am therefore pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few brief 
comments before I adjourn the Bill, so that we can consider the 
remarks of the minister and consult others who may be 
interested in this legislation. 
 
I do want to say before I adjourn, though, that this Bill does 
highlight some concerns that we have been expressing in this 
legislature, not because the Bill establishes a new board for the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. That obviously is something 
that would have to be done, or you could have had the previous 
legislation do exactly the same function. The Bill probably was 
not necessary to do that. But nevertheless, it is not in itself a 
Bill that I think anyone could object to, but we think that the 
public should have an opportunity to take a look at the remarks 
that the minister has made, and the legislation itself in light of 
his remarks. 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

883 
 

The thing that the Bill highlights, Mr. Speaker, is the whole 
question of the procrastination of this government with respect 
to rehabilitation. In 1982 I will remind you, Mr. Speaker, and 
the House, there was a new rehabilitation centre that was about 
to be built. It had a board that was administering it. It all was 
ready. The designs were there. And this government, Mr. 
Speaker, cancelled it. 
 
So instead of having a Bill in 1986 — into the fifth term of this 
government — to establish a new board, what we should be 
having is a new building. And I really think that it is the legacy 
of this government that is in question with this legislation; the 
legacy of procrastination for four years; the legacy of working 
around election cycles — and I think that that’s unfortunate. 
Working around election cycles does not provide very good 
planning and provision of facilities and services the people 
should have on an ongoing basis. What is even worse, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they don’t even know when they want to have 
an election. And so when you plan against an election that you 
don’t even know when you’re going to call, it is even more 
unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had, from this government, buildings 
built but no staff to do the work in them. Time and time again 
this has brought by our attention by nurses and others. Now we 
have a legislation provided here today, with the Minister’s brief 
remarks, in which we have a Bill to establish a board that 
doesn’t even have a building. So they’ve heard the criticism the 
other way; now they’ve reversed it around and they’re going 
completely the other way around in an opposite direction. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that those kinds of things have to be 
considered when we consider legislation that is brought in only 
after this government has decided that it is too afraid to call an 
election and is going longer than ever in history . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The item that’s being debated here is second 
reading of a Bill, and whether or not there’s an election has very 
little to do with the Bill itself. I would ask the member to stay 
on the subject. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
disagree with you that whether there’s going to be an election 
has an effect on the Bill or not. But the principle of the Bill also 
involves the principle of the actions of this government. And 
the principles of the actions of this government, with respect to 
this Bill and Bills like it, is simply that their legislation and their 
programming, being neglected for four years, now is coming 
four years late. 
 
And I am suggesting to you, Mr. Speaker, that if this 
government had acted appropriately and responsibly four years 
ago, we should have been considering this Bill four years ago 
because everything was in place to have it proceed. This Bill is 
four years late. People have suffered because they have not had 
adequate rehabilitation services, and now on the eve of an 
election we see this legislation to try to bail out the minister and 
his government. That’s the point I want to make here today. 
 

(1045) 
 
Because that’s what the people of Saskatchewan are telling us 
as we travel around this province. And so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
want to take a great deal of time on my opening remarks, and I 
know that my colleague, the Health critic, the member from 
Shaunavon, is going to have other things that he will want to 
say. So at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 
reading of The Small Claims Act. The existing small claims 
enforcement Act permits most matters involving less than 
$3,000 to be heard in the provincial court. The advantages of 
this procedure are obvious. The parties are not put to the 
expense of a trial in the superior court. Procedure in the small 
claims court is informal. The parties do not require a lawyer. 
The higher courts do not become clogged with minor cases. 
 
Existence of the small claims procedure has been extremely 
successful, but those who are involved in the administration of 
the court and those who use it extensively have pointed out 
improvements that could be made. The new Act is a result of 
experience with existing procedures. The new legislation 
maintains the original goals of the existing Act. It also clarifies 
ambiguities in procedure and jurisdiction of the court and 
simplifies procedures. 
 
The new major initiative in the Act is to allow default 
judgement in small claims court where the claim is to satisfy a 
debt or for a specific sum capable of calculation. The 
introduction of a default judgement system will result in a 
considerable number of matters which are presently litigated in 
the Queen’s Bench court being handled instead in small claims 
court. 
 
To ensure that the court remains quite informal and the parties’ 
case does not fail for solely technical reasons, the judge is given 
broad powers to amend any defect or error in the proceedings. 
He is also given the discretion to adopt and apply other 
procedures, providing that they are not inconsistent with the 
terms of the Act. 
 
This Act broadens the authority of the court with respect to 
disposing of cases in a similar fashion in situations where 
circumstances warrant. In addition, litigants will be better 
served by the expanded provisions respecting service by 
registered mail on corporations, on the Crown, on 
municipalities, and on a party’s lawyer. Moreover, the judge is 
expressly given the authority to make an order for substitutional 
service or service by advertisement, if he is satisfied that a 
reasonable effort has been made to locate the defendant, but the 
defendant cannot be found or is evading service, for that matter. 
 
The provincial court judges’ association has had extensive input 
into this legislation. Comment was also received from the 
Queen’s Bench judges and court officials, who were able to 
identify many areas requiring  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

884 
 

fine tuning. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act 
respecting Small Claims in the Provincial Court of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly agree 
with the general principles as set out, as established in The 
Small Claims Act. Certainly it allows the individual citizen 
access to the court, decreasing the amount of formality, and any 
steps to further enhance and improve that facility to the people 
is indeed welcomed. 
 
I want to take a look at the remarks of the minister. I am pleased 
that he has indicated that there has been some input in respect to 
introducing the amendments. However, we want to have a 
further look at his comments and to determine whether any 
amendments are required. I think in principle we will be 
certainly supporting the initiation here by the minister. So at 
this time I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Small Claims Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendment Act is a companion to The Small 
Claims Act. The consequential Act has the effect of changing 
reference from The Small Claims Enforcement Act to The 
Small Claims Act in several Saskatchewan statutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Small Claims Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister has indicated, this 
is a consequential amendment as a result of the previous Bill, 
Bill No. 4, and it would be appropriate to deal with at the same 
time in second reading, and therefore I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
move second reading of The Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral 
Awards Act. This legislation is required to implement in this 
province and in Canada the United Nations convention on the 
recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards, 
commonly referred to as the New York Convention. 
 
Before I go into further detail, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 
the significance of this legislation in light of the fact that 
Saskatchewan is involved in many economic development 
projects that do involve partners, shareholders who don’t live 
within the province. So clearly as we move towards new 
economic development projects which we’re seeing establish 
themselves every year in Saskatchewan, this becomes more 
significant. As  

of January 1, 1986, 69 states were parties to the convention. 
Canada is not yet a party because, for constitutional reasons, 
legislation is required at both the federal and provincial levels. 
 
In the fall of 1984, the federal government approached each of 
the provinces and asked whether they supported Canadian 
accession to the convention, and we’re prepared to take the 
necessary legislative steps for implementation. By 1985, all 
provinces had responded in the affirmative. All provinces and 
territories of Canada are committed to introducing 
implementing legislation. Several provinces have already 
enacted legislation, and others will undoubtedly follow suit in 
the very near future. 
 
Once all jurisdictions have passed implementing legislation, the 
Government of Canada will formally accede to the convention. 
Canada’s interest in implementing this convention is in the field 
of international trade where Canadian business people often 
find themselves at a considerable disadvantage in arranging 
complex foreign transactions because they’re unable to avail 
themselves of the arbitration recognition and enforcement 
provisions of the convention. 
 
The convention will benefit not only Canadians, but also many 
trading partners in the United States, Europe, Japan, since 
arbitration is generally considered a necessary and desirable 
method of effectively settling business disputes. At the present 
time it would appear that foreign arbitral awards are not 
enforceable in Saskatchewan. Implementation of the convention 
would mean that an arbitral award in a foreign state which is 
also a party to the convention would be enforceable in the same 
manner as an award in Saskatchewan. 
 
To improve the effectiveness of the convention, it is desirable to 
have uniform legislation across the country in this international 
area. Thus the uniform law conference of Canada draft uniform 
Bill has served as a model for this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to move second reading of an Act 
respecting the recognition and enforcement of certain foreign 
arbitral awards. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I believe that we will be supporting the 
principle enunciated by the minister here. We would want some 
opportunity to look at the comments that he has made, and I 
would beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have a number of questions that I want to ask you 
today in your Urban Affairs estimates. I want to  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

885 
 

start off with a special grant that I see has been drastically cut 
this year, and that is the grant for infrastructure development. I 
see that you have gone from close to $1 million, and you’ve cut 
it down to $350,000 this year. I’m talking about subvote 22. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you indicate why this drastic drop from 
$918,000 to $350,000 for infrastructure development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify with the 
member opposite. Are you referring to subvote 22, operating 
grant to the town of Uranium City? What particular subvote 
were you referring to? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It’s 22, for infrastructure development. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, in my Estimates book on 
page 102, subvote 22 is grants pursuant to The Senior Citizens’ 
Heritage Program Act. Perhaps the member could clarify 
exactly what he’s referring to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, while my colleague finds 
the right book here, I will just ask a couple of questions of the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the new mill rate for the city 
of Saskatoon has been announced for 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don’t have that information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me whether your officials or 
you are aware of whether the mill rate in Saskatoon has been 
set? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don’t have that information. We’re not 
aware if it has been set yet. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My colleague 
may have asked last night, but I don’t have that information 
with me, so I’m not sure whether it was handled, but can you 
tell me what the revenue-sharing grant for the city of Saskatoon 
will be this year? 
 
Mr. Minister, while you’re checking that, I think when my 
colleague from Regina Centre was asking about revenue 
sharing to municipalities, you had undertaken to provide a 
print-out of the grants for this year. I don’t know whether 
you’re ready to do that today or whether you need more time, 
but if it’s available I would appreciate it if you would send it 
over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Saskatoon figure is $15,242,059. 
We’ll be sending the information over to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I appreciate that. It will help 
us without having, sort of, to waste the time of the committee, if 
we have it handy. 
 
In the city of Saskatoon, can you tell me what the urban 
assistance, the capital urban assistance, will provide for the city 
of Saskatoon in 1986? Urban assistance, the capital, city of 
Saskatoon. This may be something that’s provided through the 
Department of Highways — you  

can correct me, and you might know the answer anyway — but 
what is the urban assistance; what is the amount of urban 
assistance in capital provided for the city of Saskatoon in this 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The urban assistance issue is something 
coming out of the Department of Highways. I think it would be 
more appropriate to direct your questions to that minister. I’m 
not sure that all funding decisions have necessarily been made 
in that regard out of Highways, but I can’t speak definitively for 
them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I understand that, because while you 
were checking for your answer with your officials I did some 
checking as well. Indeed, it is located in the Department of 
Highways, and I think it’s estimated for 1986 to be $1.5 
million. 
 
Let me turn to the question of transit assistance which is in your 
department. Can you tell me what the operating grant for transit 
assistance for the city of Saskatoon is estimated for 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, under the formula on transit 
assistance, I believe Saskatoon would receive the $4 per capita. 
As you know, last year the transit assistance increased from $3 
per capita to $4 per capita. It was a full dollar increase per 
capita, which was a 33 per cent increase in that transit 
assistance last year. So under the formula it’s $4 per capita for 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A quick calculation on my part would 
indicate that the city of Saskatoon operating grant for transit 
would probably be about $960,000. Am I close there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe we’re working off of the 1981 
census figures, so I don’t believe that the figure is what you 
suggested, as I don’t know what number you’re working off of. 
When the new census figures come in, of course, then we would 
be utilizing those. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And when do you expect that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It could be that preliminary results may be 
in by late fall of this year. We don’t know. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s . . . Sorry. Maybe I’m not 
following. I apologize if I misunderstand something. But are 
you saying that you have budgeted for transit operating grants 
to cities for 1986-87? Therefore you must have used some 
criteria in order to determine how much money to put in the 
budget, because I know the Department of Finance wouldn’t 
allocate any funds to the Department of Urban Affairs unless 
you provided them with some evidence to show here is why 
you’re asking for X numbers of dollars. I mean that’s just 
normal management procedures on the part of the Department 
of Finance. The member from Kindersley will tell you that, as 
well as I could. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much did you estimate, in dollars, will be 
going to the city of Saskatoon in operating grants in this fiscal 
year, which is in these estimates which we are now 
considering? Very routine question. I’m finding it difficult to 
understand why it’s taking you so long to answer these  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

886 
 

questions because this kind of information is always provided in 
the briefing books which departments normally prepare, and all 
you’ve got to do is read the line. It’s really unusual that you 
can’t provide the answers. 
 
Okay, if you want some more time, I’ll ask the next question. 
The next . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My question? My 
question is, Mr. Minister, for the third time, how much 
operating grant are you estimating in your budget for the city of 
Saskatoon? I won’t hold you to an exact figure. I’ll allow that 
you may want to discuss it with the city further. But what is 
your estimate in operating grant for the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The information that I have would suggest 
618,000 plus the incentive grant, which would take it into the 
magnitude of around $1 million; but of course we don’t know 
the exact size of the incentive grant at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So when I 
estimated it at about 960,000, I was close. Okay, I appreciate 
that. Can I ask you one more question and then, in order that we 
don’t spend so much time while you find the answers, I’ll give 
you a list of other questions I will be asking later and leave it 
with you, and then, while my colleagues pursue some other 
questions, you can then have your staff find the answers for me. 
 
In transit assistance, under capital, how much capital grant is 
being provided or estimated to be provided for the city of 
Saskatoon for this fiscal year, 1986? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don’t have a specific targeted capital 
grant for transit assistance. What we did have is a 25 per cent 
increase during the two years on the provincial capital fund, 
going from $20 to $25, and that of course is unconditional 
moneys which the municipalities can spend as they so choose. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that under 
the transit assistance budget for cities, that you have done away 
with what was a special or was a capital grant program, you’ve 
done away with it. It no longer exists. Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We have transit capital for the disabled, 
but the old capital grant for transit assistance, that program 
stopped when the new provincial capital fund came in with the 
25 per cent increase over two years. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s rather interesting. In other words, 
for transit assistance capital in your budget for the city of 
Saskatoon you have zero. That’s what you’re saying. Because 
for you to say that it has been transferred to the community 
capital fund, or whatever you call it these days, is really saying 
that you’ve cut out this provision and you’ve added it onto a 
program which isn’t new; it’s a replacement for other programs 
that existed before. So we’ve established here today that for 
transit capital assistance for the city of Saskatoon — and 
therefore I assume it’s for other cities as well — you have no 
money at all. That’s clear. 

But you did say you have assistance for transit for handicaps. 
What is your estimate for the city of Saskatoon for the transit 
for handicaps, in capital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well you can play with words all you 
want. The reality is that, rather than continuing on with the old 
transit assistance capital grant program, and not being able, 
likely, to increase as much as we would have wanted to the 
provincial capital fund unconditional program, we chose to in 
fact increase substantially the amount of money available 
through the unconditional capital program for municipalities. 
 
So you could have, in fact, continued on with a program and 
increased one somewhat, or you could have reduced this 
particular program and increased the other substantially, at the 
same time providing municipalities with greater funds for them 
to spend unconditionally — and that was the decision that was 
taken. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. When did this imaginary increase 
come about — this year, last year, the year before, three years 
ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — This is the second year of the two-year 
provincial capital fund program. Last year was its first year. It’s 
a two-year program, a 25 per cent increase available over that 
two-year period of time. And when this new program 
commenced with the 25 per cent increase in unconditional 
funds, that was when the old transit assistance capital grant 
program was terminated. This provides greater unconditional 
revenue available to municipalities to do with what they choose. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t going to raise this 
today — I simply wanted the facts — but since you raise it, I 
feel that I must. 
 
You talk about an increase and, quite frankly, you’re about as 
accurate on your increase as you were last night about the 
gasoline tax the municipalities supposedly had to pay, which 
you had to backtrack off yesterday evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, listen carefully to this. I have here a letter that 
was written to your predecessor by the president of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association last year. The 
president of SUMA refers to this increase that you are talking 
about. And that’s why I referred to it earlier as the imaginary 
increase because there was no increase, there was a reduction. 
 
These aren’t my words. These are words from an association 
that I know and you know is extremely concerned about 
municipal funding, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. And in the letter I quote to you word for word 
what the president of SUMA said to your predecessor, and I’m 
sure that you’re aware of it: 
 

We understand the increase of $5 per capita in the 
Provincial Capital Fund came from this former urban 
surface transportation estimate (which was gone), however 
if we calculate approximately 680,000 urban dwellers in 
the province at $5, we find to be something in the order of 
$3,400,000 

  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

887 
 

which is $2,000,000 short of the amount that was slashed out 
of the urban surface transportation estimate. So, once again 
we appear to be losers in the shuffle. 
 
Letter from the president of SUMA, Mr. Minister, stand up in 
this House when you answer the questions, keep away from the 
politics and give straight answers. You did not have an increase. 
You juggled the figures; you changed the estimates; you moved 
some of the subvotes around, and then the net result was a $2 
million cut. You know it. Your officials have told you that. 
Why don’t you admit it? This started happening last year; it’s 
continuing again this year; and the result has been that property 
taxes, as we discussed yesterday, have had to increase 
dramatically. 
 
Now because I know that others want to ask some questions, I 
am going to just give you notice of questions I will be asking on 
this same subject later on, and then if your officials will take 
some notes, they can get you the answers and we won’t spend a 
lot of time on it. 
 
We’ve discussed for the city of Saskatoon the revenue-sharing 
estimate for 1986, and you gave me that number and I 
appreciate it. I would like you to be able to give me the 
revenue-sharing grant to the city of Saskatoon for 1981 and 
1982, when it’s convenient. I hope maybe later today. 
 
We also discussed the capital urban assistance for the city of 
Saskatoon. You said it’s about $1.5 million, with some loose 
change. I would like to know what the capital assistance for the 
city of Saskatoon was in 1981 and 1982. 
 
We also discussed transit assistance, both operating and capital, 
for 1986 for the city of Saskatoon, and you gave me the figure 
and I appreciate that as well. I would like you, not right now but 
at some future time when we get to this subject again, to tell me 
what the operating grant to the city of Saskatoon for transit 
assistance was in 1981 and ’82, as well as for capital. And I’ll 
leave this for now because I know my colleague, the member 
from Cumberland, has some questions he would like to be 
asking you . . . or Athabasca, I’m sorry. The habit of the 
chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
requested information about transit for the disabled program. 
And the capital last year, as I understand it, was around 290,530 
in the budget, and that is increasing substantially to 
approximately 386,530. So a fairly significant increase in the 
capital requirements for transit for the disabled program. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
get back to the right estimates here now. And I want to first 
start off by the special infrastructure development grants, and I 
see that this year there is no money allotted for that special 
fund. Has that been cut off or has that been put into another 
subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m still not sure what program and 
subvote you’re referring to. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, for your information, 
it’s on page 102 and it’s on the top of the  

page: grants to local authorities and other third parties, and 
grants for the town of Meadow Lake for infrastructure 
development. Last year you spent $560,000 for that 
infrastructure. This year I see there’s nothing allotted. I’m just 
wondering, have you cut that program off or has that been 
transferred to another subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the member’s information, that never 
was an ongoing, province-wide program. That was a special 
three-year arrangement with Meadow Lake. That particular 
arrangement has now come to an end. The dollars committed 
were spent. And that’s why you see the figures in the blue book 
as they are today. It is not an ongoing provincial program. It 
was a special, single, one-time arrangement with the town of 
Meadow Lake that has now come to an end. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that 
there are no other towns in the province that had the availability 
of the funds that went for infrastructure development in this 
province — that it just went to Meadow Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, we deal with the 
infrastructure needs of the province through our regular capital 
programs. And if there are special or pressing infrastructure 
needs in any particular community that are such that they 
demand special attention, then of course the provincial 
government would deal with those on a case-by-case basis, 
determining whether or not indeed this is a special priority that 
demands special attention, also taking into consideration the 
ability of the local municipality to raise funds on its own — in 
other words, taking a look at its own fiscal position to 
determine the health, fiscally, of that particular municipality. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I only have the figures for 
two years and that would be ’84-85, ’85-86. And I see that 
Meadow Lake received $1.310 million under grants for 
infrastructure development. Could you indicate what the 
amount was, the total amount that was given under these special 
needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — To Meadow Lake, 1.810 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. I’m sure, Mr. Member, that there 
would be many towns in this province that would appreciate a 
$2 million special grant for infrastructure development. How 
many other communities in the province, Mr. Minister, utilized 
this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I indicated this is not a program. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — How many other communities in the 
province were given grants of this nature? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Meadow Lake situation, as I indicated 
earlier, was a special and unique situation in light of the 
geographical location of Meadow Lake — being just south of 
the old DNS line and having many of the similar concerns and 
problems that would face some of the northern communities, 
and yet not having access to double the capital funding as some 
of the northern communities of course do in terms of the capital 
fund. 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

888 
 

And for that reason, it was deemed that this was indeed a 
special situation justifying special attention. Certainly the soil 
conditions in Meadow Lake were such that the situation 
certainly was justified. 
 
There are other situations around the province that are justified 
as special needs from time to time. You will remember I 
indicated last night, if you were in the Assembly, that Regina 
has had a pressing water problem here, the taste and odour of 
Regina drinking water, most abhorrent to those people who 
lived here for 11 years. And one would have expected that the 
former government would have solved that problem, would 
have recognized it as a special problem. 
 
In fact it wasn’t solved and this government, through the carbon 
filtration plant and the grants that we provided to Moose Jaw 
and Regina, certainly solved that problem — an example of a 
unique situation which demanded certainly unique attention. 
And the Meadow Lake situation is another one. 
 
As I indicated, we take a look at each individual case as it 
comes up, from time to time, to determine whether or not there 
is justification for the provincial government to provide 
additional funds over and above what the provincial 
government already provides in terms of capital funding. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well I find this quite interesting, Mr. 
Chairman, Mr. Minister, that the provincial government, the 
Urban Affairs department, would issue a special grant of $2 
million for infrastructure development to the town of Meadow 
Lake, which no other town in this province has received. 
 
And then you say that it has special needs. And you go on to 
say that it was just south of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan’s line, or the NAD (northern administration 
district) line, and that it had to catch up with the type of moneys 
that were going into northern Saskatchewan because it really 
wasn’t fair, the North was getting more money — and I will 
touch on that — than Meadow Lake was. 
 
Then you touched on soil conditions. Well I want to tell you, 
Mr. Minister, Carrot River, I’m sure, would appreciate a $2 
million grant, and they’re in no different condition. The soil 
conditions are the same in Carrot River as they are in Meadow 
Lake. They live right adjacent to the NAD line. So I suspect, 
Mr. Minister, that the town of Carrot River will be coming to 
you and asking for a $2 million infrastructure grant, and they 
should be given that. 
 
There are many towns in this province who have soil conditions 
that are not the best conditions for building on, and I’m sure 
that they could use the special needs. But I just want to say that 
Meadow Lake is an old town. It’s been there for many, many 
years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, since 1930. 
And it’s had sewer and water in that town since 1930 and has 
had all the facilities that northern Saskatchewan have never had, 
and I talk about north of Meadow Lake. 
 
Big River should fall into the same category. We can take  

a look at Green Lake, which is 30 miles away from Meadow 
Lake, and when did they get sewer and water, Mr. Chairman? 
They never got their sewer and water or moneys from the 
government to put sewer and water in until around 1976. And 
Meadow Lake has always had these facilities. 
 
So I think that when you have a special infrastructure 
development grant of $2 million to the town of Meadow Lake, 
then it most certainly should apply to Loon Lake and St. 
Walburg. It should also apply to Ile-a-la-Crosse and La Loche, 
and it should also apply to Weyburn and Carrot River. Now I 
think that you’ve picked one town out and the excuses that 
you’ve used are just not fair. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan still hasn’t caught up with Meadow 
Lake or southern communities. A lot of the communities have 
just got their water systems. They haven’t got paved streets up 
in northern Saskatchewan. We’re just getting our fire halls. And 
there’s so much that has to be spent up in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I just want to say, Mr. Minister, and I want to make it clear, 
that if Meadow Lake is available for this type of an 
infrastructure grant, development grant, then I think the town of 
Debden and every other town in this province should be 
available for it and you should be out promoting it. 
 
I want to now turn to the northern municipal services. Here we 
now get back into the argument of what you are doing in 
northern Saskatchewan. I see the figures show that in 1984-85 
we were spending $1.690 million on municipal services and had 
32 individuals working. We now look this year and we see that 
cut down to $763,000 and 17 people working. 
 
Well you’ve cut the individuals who are working for the 
department to over half. And when you take 700,000 away from 
1.7 million you will see that there’s $1 million shortfall there. 
 
In 1971, Mr. Chairman, we had a situation in northern 
Saskatchewan where local governments really had no authority 
at all. In 1971 many of the larger communities were working 
with $2 per capita. And you take a community like 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, which was an advisory body, had a population 
of 1,200 people so they had $2,400 to operate their town. That 
was in 1971. I leave out the county of Uranium City and the 
towns of Creighton and La Ronge. They had that infrastructure 
and that development. 
 
It was the policy of the New Democratic government to go in 
and create a good strong municipal body in northern 
Saskatchewan, and that’s what we were doing. And there were a 
number of steps that were taken. The northern municipal 
council, of which my colleague from Cumberland and myself 
were the first members on that council, was created so that local 
governments could be created and that they would be able to 
take over their own affairs. And that worked quite well. 
 
As you know, we now have pretty well in all the communities 
in northern Saskatchewan elected bodies, and they’ve had 
money to work with. But the towns have  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

889 
 

a lot of building to do. They have to catch up. They’ve got 40 
years to catch up to Meadow Lake — 40 years. And you take 
the older communities down south, they’re behind 40 and 50 
years. And to say because all of a sudden there was a thrust to 
build up municipal facilities in the DNS area, that somehow 
Meadow Lake was losing and they had to catch up to the North 
. . . Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, that’s exactly what you said. 
You said that because of the funds that were going into the 
department of northern Saskatchewan’s area, that Meadow Lake 
felt they weren’t getting their fair share, so they had to catch up. 
And I suggest to you that that’s true, that that’s what you have 
said is the true thinking of your government because you 
indicate quite clearly that no other community in Saskatchewan 
has got a $2 million infrastructure development grant. No other 
community has taken advantage of that infrastructure grant with 
the exception of Meadow Lake. 
 
So what do we have here now? We have a government who has 
said, look, here’s a town who is sitting right close to the line but 
is tapping the resources of the citizens of the NAD (northern 
administration district) line — north of that line. And I ask the 
member from Meadow Lake to stand up and deny the fact that 
it’s not the citizens of La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Beauval and Canoe Lake and Green Lake 
who make that town tick. 
 
You can go into Meadow Lake on any given day of the year, 
and you’ll walk down the street, and you walk into any 
building, and it’s all the northern people who are down there. 
They do their shopping and they keep that town going. But yet 
your government decides in its wisdom that that’s not enough, 
that the citizens of the northern administration district come 
down and do their shopping and keep the town of Meadow 
Lake going, but that you have to cut back on the northern 
communities in the funds that they are giving for their 
infrastructure in the local governments. You have to cut them 
back, and you have to give a special $2 million grant over and 
above all the other grants that Meadow Lake gets for 
infrastructure development. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, I’m sure that the town of Shellbrook would 
like to have a $2 million infrastructure development. And I 
know that Carrot River would like to have it. And I know that 
Nipawin, and I know that Prince Albert would love to have that 
extra grant. And if it’s put out on a per capita basis and you got 
$2 million for Meadow Lake, just think what the member from 
Duck Lake could do. He’d have a pretty nice cheque to bring to 
Prince Albert. He would, because if you take 30,000 people that 
Prince Albert have, compared to the 3,000 to 4,000 that live in 
Meadow Lake — and you’re using a per capita basis, and I’m 
sure that’s what you would be using for this grant — that there 
isn’t a town in Saskatchewan that would not like to have that 
grant. 
 
But the excuses that you are using . . . And now you’re taking 
money away from the northern communities, and I have many 
communities in northern Saskatchewan who are coming to me 
and saying, look, our operating grants have been cut. One just 
has to take a look at your estimates, and that’s a fact. 

The community of Pinehouse the other day has got to a point 
where it had to lay off four of their staff who are working for 
that community because they haven’t got the money. Some of 
the smaller communities are telling me that they have been cut 
back $10,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s their MLA. They need a new MLA. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That’s right. The member from Duck Lake 
says that because they have a New Democratic MLA up in 
Athabasca, that that’s why this government is cutting them 
back. 
 
Now I tell you, when we got in in 1971, we didn’t do that to 
Meadow Lake. We sure didn’t do that to Meadow Lake, and we 
didn’t treat any other community any different. We treated them 
all equal. With municipal affairs everybody was treated equal 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We didn’t use that. But the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, from his seat, says that 
the reason that the towns up in my constituency are getting 
these drastic cuts, and that Meadow Lake is getting the $2 
million for infrastructure development, is because of myself, a 
New Democratic member. And I don’t think that that’s fair to 
say that. I don’t think that’s fair to say that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that you have made some very 
serious cuts in northern Saskatchewan. And you’re going to 
have to answer for that. When these communities say they can’t 
keep their town managers . . . Some of the smaller communities 
tell me there’s no way they can keep their town managers. 
 
When the minister from Meadow Lake and the Minister of 
Urban Affairs quit talking, then I will continue to ask my 
questions. And I’m not asking the questions of the member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. I’m asking them for the 
member from Urban Affairs. 
 
So if I can get back to making my comments, Mr. Chairman, I 
just want to say that when I take a look at the massive cuts that 
we’ve had in the last two years in municipal affairs, municipal 
services in northern Saskatchewan, from $1,000,690 to this 
year’s $763,000, and a cut in staff of over 100 per cent — a cut 
in staff of over 100 per cent — I think, Mr. Minister, that the 
priorities of northern Saskatchewan are just not with your 
department. 
 
(1145) 
 
And I go into these communities and they’re all telling me the 
same things. They just haven’t got enough money to operate 
with. And I will get down to the different items in here, but I do 
want to make it very clear that there isn’t one community in my 
constituency, Mr. Minister, that would not appreciate a 
development program such as the one that you gave to Meadow 
Lake, the $2 million for infrastructure development. There isn’t 
a community in my riding that would not appreciate that special 
grant, and I would say that if you’re going to give that type of 
grants to Meadow Lake, then I think every other community in 
this province should be entitled to it and that you should 
advertise that this money is available for infrastructure 
development. 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

890 
 

I want to get you to comment, Mr. Minister, on why we would 
have such a massive cut in municipal affairs in northern 
Saskatchewan — from $1.690 million to today, $763,000. 
That’s for municipal services in northern Saskatchewan, not just 
my riding, but that covers all of the northern administration 
district — Cumberland House, Creighton, the whole works of 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, I’m delighted to have the 
opportunity to respond to the member opposite. I think the only 
massive cut that there has been has been a massive cut in doom 
and gloom in northern Saskatchewan and a commensurate rise 
in enthusiasm because of what is happening in northern 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
And I will just talk about one example, because I’m sure the 
members from northern Saskatchewan are more capable of 
talking about this than I am. But consider the boom that is 
taking place at present in the gold mining industry in northern 
Saskatchewan. Thanks to my colleague, the member from 
P.A.-Duck Lake, we have seen a phenomenal increase in 
exploration and mining activity in northern Saskatchewan under 
this government — under this government. 
 
And I think, if the member is so concerned about northern 
Saskatchewan, how can it be that he remains a member of a 
party which is committed to doing away with uranium mining 
in northern Saskatchewan. That’s the key question. If you are so 
concerned about your northern communities, how can you 
maintain your membership and sit there as a member of the 
NDP opposition when your party wants to do away with 
uranium mining in northern Saskatchewan? That has significant 
implications for municipalities in northern Saskatchewan, and 
we all know that. 
 
Now the other difference between this particular government 
and your NDP administration is this whole matter of how we 
deal with northern Saskatchewan. You had this imaginary line 
there which cut off everybody in the North from the South — 
the old DNS. And under your administration the government 
was going to tell people what to do. The big government was 
going to tell people what to do. Well we operate under a 
different philosophy, and you will know that it is this 
government which has provided more autonomy and 
self-direction for municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. It 
certainly wasn’t your administration that changed the 
legislation. 
 
I want to ask the member opposite: does he think that 
everybody here in the province would like to pay what the 
citizens of Meadow Lake are paying today for foot frontage 
costs? I think it’s important for him to understand that the 
citizens of Meadow Lake, whom he has been talking about in a 
somewhat disparaging way by implication, they pay $63.18 per 
foot frontage — literally unheard of throughout the rest of the 
province. So they have taken upon themselves, the citizens of 
Meadow Lake, a substantial cost burden in order to help solve 
the problem that they were facing. And this particular 
government was certainly willing to help with that particular 
problem. 
 

And I think that most of the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan would expect that the provincial government 
would have that kind of sensitivity to a location, to a 
municipality, which doesn’t have the same funding benefits that 
those in northern Saskatchewan do who get twice the capital 
funding that those in southern Saskatchewan. But Meadow 
Lake didn’t have access to that because it was below the old 
imaginary DNS line. And so they quite justifiably came to the 
senior government and said, can you help us out, because we 
are willing to shoulder a very substantial burden ourselves? 
 
And why doesn’t the member opposite recognize that? Why 
does he want to drive a wedge between communities in our fair 
province? I want to remind the member opposite when he talks 
about special grants, special grants for special situations — that 
I happen to agree with because I think that’s what people in this 
province want — that under your administration you operated 
on the same principle, a very reasonable principle, but you 
don’t want to admit that today. 
 
Your administration provided funds to Lloydminster to deal 
with their pipeline situation to the tune of $10 million; a special 
situation for Lloydminster, a situation that undoubtedly was 
justified. 
 
Undoubtedly the Regina water situation was justified in terms 
of the senior government providing assistance to fix up the taste 
and odour of the drinking water problem here in Regina. 
 
Undoubtedly the Meadow Lake situation was justified in terms 
of providing additional funding, particularly since the Meadow 
Lake citizens were willing to take upon themselves such a 
substantial burden to fix up their particular problem. 
 
So I think on all counts the member opposite’s arguments, in 
fact, don’t stand up under scrutiny. They provided special 
grants under special situations to unique community problems. 
 
This government isn’t doing exactly the same, but this 
government is also providing the kind of economic stimulus in 
terms of the resource development and mining and exploration 
which is going on in northern Saskatchewan that never 
happened under the NDP administration — never happened. 
 
And it’s beyond me why the member opposite didn’t cross the 
floor when he had an opportunity to and stand up for the kinds 
of things that he knows should have gone on in northern 
Saskatchewan under your administration but never did. And it 
still is beyond me why he supports a party which is against 
uranium mining in northern Saskatchewan and that provides so 
much benefit for northern Saskatchewan, and he knows it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I sincerely hope that 
you will give me the latitude that you have just given the 
minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

891 
 

Mr. Thompson: — You know full well that we were here to 
discuss Urban Affairs estimates. We have just heard the 
minister go on and on and on, and he talked about uranium 
mines and he talked about gold mining and he talked about 
exploration and I sincerely hope — I sincerely hope — that you 
will give me the same leeway that you’re going to give that 
minister. 
 
You indicated — and you didn’t answer the question that I 
originally asked you anyway — you just went on on a tangent 
and you started talking about everything that you shouldn’t 
have been talking about. 
 
And you said that when we were a government, we were trying 
to separate northern Saskatchewan. Let me tell you, if 
anybody’s trying to separate northern Saskatchewan right now, 
Mr. Minister, it’s you and your government. When we got in 
and we set up the municipal body within the department of 
northern Saskatchewan, we set that up so that we could give 
northern Saskatchewan an equal opportunity so that they could 
have the same types of services that anybody in the South has 
had, and has had for 50 to 100 years, and they were entitled to. 
 
We wanted to bring them in line with the South; make them feel 
that they were equal to the south; and we wanted to build up fire 
halls and town hall offices and the likes, an infrastructure that 
just was never there. And that’s what we did. 
 
And the member, he wants to get back in the gutter again. And 
let me tell you, Mr. Minister from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I 
took that kind of gutter stuff from your members for the last 
four years when we sat in government. And you’re still 
muttering from your seat. And I don’t think that your 
government has anything to mutter from. If you want to get 
down to the gutter stuff, well, Mr. Attorney General is the one 
who’s doing it from his seat, and he wants to bring my family 
up from the seat. 
 
I ask him to stand up in this House as the Attorney General and 
make them statements about my family that you just made from 
your seat. Go ahead and stand up and make them. That’s the 
type of member we’ve got, the Attorney General, the member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake who likes to muck around in the 
mud like his colleagues did in the last four years in this 
legislature when I sat on the other side. Well, Mr. Chairman, if 
you could bring the Attorney General to order then, fine. 
 
But I want to get back to you, Mr. Minister, and Urban Affairs, 
and I just want to say that we wanted to bring northern 
Saskatchewan in line with the South. We wanted to build up the 
type of an infrastructure that communities like Big River and 
Debden and Carrot River and any of the towns down South had, 
and they didn’t have that. It took a lot of money to build that up, 
and it took a lot of initiative on the part of the local 
governments to get in there and work with government 
departments to make sure that this was a reality. And there was 
mistakes that were made, and it maybe cost a little bit more 
money. 
 
But I’ll tell you, when the member for Meadow Lake talks 
about the special amount of money that was put in for that 
special grant to Meadow Lake because it’s a different town and 
the footage costs $160 . . . or $63 a foot frontage.  

Well the same applies up in northern Saskatchewan — only a 
lot more severe — because when you leave Meadow Lake, you 
have to drive 200 miles to get to La Loche, and you can just 
imagine what it’s like for that community to try and operate 
their town on the same level as it is in Meadow Lake. It just 
doesn’t happen that way. They have to drive 200 miles to get 
most of their services. So I think that’s really not a fair 
assessment to use. 
 
But we’re interested in maintaining the type of good local 
government structure that we had in northern Saskatchewan 
and, Mr. Minister, I think that the only way that that could take 
place is to — and you say you’ve changed the regulations so 
that Northerners have more say — but I think if you’re going to 
give them more say, then you most certainly have to give them 
more money to work with. And you have to realize that 
northern Saskatchewan is a unique situation — not just 
Beauval, not just Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse — it gets more 
severe as you go farther north. And when you get up into the 
Stony Rapids and Camsell Portage and Uranium City and Black 
Lake, Wollaston Lake, and when you get up into that area then 
it costs a lot more, a lot more than it costs as Beauval. And of 
course in Beauval it costs a lot more than it does to operate the 
community of Meadow Lake . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Yes. The minister he said that really we’re not that worried 
about the local government and the cut-back in their funds, 
because we’re creating all this activity in the gold mines. I just 
want to make that comment that the uranium mines that are up 
in northern Saskatchewan are working. They will continue to 
work. And they will continue to work. 
 
An Hon. Member: — As long as we’re here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Whether you’re there or we’re here . . . 
whether you’re there or whether we’re here. It’s your 
interpretation that you’re putting on that. 
 
But I don’t know for sure, Mr. Minister, how many individuals 
are working in the gold-mine. I’m just not too sure if there is a 
gold-mine operating in northern Saskatchewan yet. And you 
just tell me, Mr. Minister, if there is a gold-mine operating, 
because I think that there’s one under construction. I think 
there’s one under construction, but I don’t think it’s operating. 
 
And when we set up the uranium mines . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the Attorney General has asked you, Mr. 
Chairman, to sit me down. He continues to talk to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs while I’m asking him a question. Now I would 
like to deal with the Minister of Urban Affairs and not the 
Attorney General. Now if your Attorney General wants me to 
be sat down, then you stand up, Mr. Attorney General, and 
make your point to the chairman. Stand up . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well the member from Weyburn’s getting into it. The member 
from Weyburn. The butterfly. He’s up here now and flopping 
around. Now if you want me to sit down, then you ask the 
chairman. But I’m not going to ask questions of the Minister of 
Urban Affairs if he’s carrying on a conversation with the 
Attorney General at the same  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

892 
 

time. I’d like to have a little bit of respect. 
 
And then the Minister of Urban Affairs made the remark that 
we somehow, when we were in government, by creating the 
department of northern Saskatchewan and creating local 
governments, that we were trying to drive a wedge between the 
North and the South . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 
Chairman, if the Attorney General wants the floor, he can get 
up and make his point. 
 
I tell you, if this conversation is going to continue between the 
chairman and the Attorney General, and the Attorney General 
and the Minister of Urban Affairs, then I may as well sit down 
and let somebody else take over. Because this is getting out of 
hand. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Minister, you indicated we were trying to drive a wedge 
between northern and southern Saskatchewan. I say that that’s 
not true. We were trying to give the Northerners the equal 
opportunity, the same opportunity as they had in the South. And 
we built all the municipal facilities that are up there. We put the 
sewer and water systems in. And they’re hard to maintain. It’s 
not easy to maintain them up in northern Saskatchewan because 
of the geographical location. And there has to be more money 
given to the local communities to operate them facilities. We 
put the sewer and water in, and we put fire halls in, and I know 
there’s a few more fire halls that still had to go in, and you’ve 
pretty well completed that. 
 
But I just want to say, Mr. Minister, at no time — at no time 
were we trying to drive a wedge between the North and the 
South. Our policy was to try and make people up in northern 
Saskatchewan feel that they were equal partners with the rest of 
Saskatchewan. And the only way that we can ever become 
equal partners is if we can provide the type of services to 
northern people as the same services that they have in the 
South. 
 
And it’s going to cost extra money. And that’s what concerns 
me when I see that you have cut back dramatically on municipal 
services and the funds for municipal services. Because we have 
all the bodies up there who are elected now, and they want to 
run their towns, and they feel that they’re becoming fast a part 
of southern Saskatchewan, a part of the whole province. All of a 
sudden now — they were well on their way, and now they get a 
cut in funds. And if this cut in funds is going to continue, then 
they’re going to get discouraged, and we’re going to start going 
backwards. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to not cut funds to northern 
Saskatchewan. I ask you to use a formula — the same type of 
formula that you used for Meadow Lake, where they have a 
ground that is tough to handle, and I realize that. But in the 
North we have the same problems, and we need that extra 
money to operate our towns. And I ask you not to treat them 
any differently but to give them the money that they need to 
operate. Sit down and listen to them. 
 
And I know, I’ve seen the correspondence that’s gone back and 
forth between Urban Affairs and the northern  

communities, and they’re concerned. And I think it’s valid, 
their concerns. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to take a serious 
look at increasing the funding for our northern communities and 
the local governments that are in the North and make them feel 
that they’re a part of Saskatchewan — not a group that’s out 
there separate from the rest of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do want to say 
that I believe the member opposite is very sincere in his desire 
to see northern Saskatchewan progress. He’s lived in the North 
many years. I’m sure he’s as concerned about northern 
communities as I am about my community. 
 
The difference between us is the approach that is used to deal 
with the problems. And I think it’s important to point out, it’s 
important to point out first of all, Mr. Chairman, that there is no 
reduction in the amount of money going to northern 
communities. In fact, for the member opposite, there is a 3 per 
cent increase in revenue sharing for northern communities, 
treating them similarly to southern communities. 
 
In terms of the particular blue book figure that you were 
looking at, we are simply striving for greater efficiencies in the 
Department of Urban Affairs, and there were three vacancies 
that had not been filled for some time. So we’re not talking 
about a reduction in services; in fact, with the new arrangement 
that we have with local municipalities in the North, I think 
we’re providing a much better approach to government in 
northern Saskatchewan than was previously provided. 
 
And if I might say for the member opposite, while I appreciate 
your concern for your communities, there’s a difference 
between working with communities and helping them develop 
than simply always trying to do things for communities. And 
that’s a paternalistic approach, and that was the approach of the 
old DNS — bring people in to do things for municipalities 
rather than attempt to help them to develop by themselves 
together. That is a much better approach, and that is the 
approach that this particular government believes very, very 
strongly in. And that, of course, is why we passed The Northern 
Municipalities Act, so that people could have greater authority 
and greater discretion and greater ability to run their own 
affairs. 
 
Now that is a substantial difference in approach and in 
philosophy between the former NDP administration and this 
Progressive Conservative government. We do not believe in a 
paternalistic, “do things for people” approach because they 
can’t do it themselves. We believe in working with 
communities as much as possible to build a better 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I must comment on the suggestion that somehow nothing 
was happening in the gold-mining industry in having any 
positive effect for municipalities in the North. In fact today 
there is a tenfold, 10 times increase in exploration activity 
compared to what was going on under your administration — 
tenfold increase today. In addition, there are hundreds of people 
directly and indirectly involved in that kind of activity that 
weren’t there previously. 
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

893 
 

And the third thing I would say is that you may not think that an 
NDP government would close down the uranium mines, 
because you can’t talk that way. You come from the North. And 
I understand that. But I want you to know, in my constituency 
the NDP candidate is passing around in his brochures that the 
northern uranium mines will, in fact, be closed down. 
 
And that simply is the reality. And I don’t know if you want to 
face that reality, but that is the reality. Your party is talking 
about closing them down. Your party is not talking about 
sustaining them. 
 
The fourth thing I want to mention is, is the member suggested 
that I was saying that you wanted to drive a wedge between the 
North and the South. You didn’t understand my comments, and 
so I want to repeat them. I’m sure you wanted the best for the 
North; we want the best for the North. But when you suggest 
that Meadow Lake — if it has special needs, a unique occasion 
of problems — that they shouldn’t be dealt with in a special 
way, in the same way that your administration dealt with 
Lloydminster in a special way, then in fact you are driving a 
wedge between communities. 
 
And it’s got nothing to do with a wedge between the North and 
the South. It’s suggesting that somehow there isn’t a special, 
unique problem in Meadow Lake that demands special and 
unique attention in the same way that Lloydminster needed 
special and unique attention, in the same way that Regina with 
its water problem here needed special and unique attention. 
 
That’s the role of the senior government of the provincial 
government, to respond to those kinds of special and unique 
occasions and provide funding over and above the normal 
funding levels that are provided to communities. And I want to 
remind the member opposite that this government in fact is 
providing for northern communities double — double — the 
amount for capital funding on a per capita basis that is provided 
to southern communities. 
 
So you see, our commitment to the North is a very substantial 
commitment, a substantial commitment in terms of funds; a 
substantial commitment in terms of working with the 
communities rather than in a paternalistic working for the 
communities approach; and also a substantial commitment in 
terms of building the resource community, providing 
exploration, providing mines that weren’t there previously, and 
sustaining the mines that are there today. That’s our 
commitment to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want 
to make a few comments, but I don’t want to get into this long 
debate again. I think that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think, 
Mr. Chairman, that there’s no sense in me answering questions 
for the member from Weyburn from his seat. I’m going to deal 
with the Minister of Urban Affairs here. 
 
And I just want . . . a small comment that you indicate that 
when we were in the DNS up there that we did everything for 
the North; and your approach is different, that you’re letting 
them do it. I just want to say to you, Mr. Minister,  

that there was no local governments in northern Saskatchewan 
until the DNS took over. There was no local school boards in 
northern Saskatchewan either until the DNS took over. There 
was no Northern Lights School Board until we took over. 
They’re there now — they’re there now — and we gave them 
that authority, and we gave them money to operate under. And 
that’s fair — you say we didn’t do that, but I say we did, and we 
were successful at it. 
 
You talk about Meadow Lake being unique. I know Meadow 
Lake is unique; I know the type of ground that the community 
sits on. But, Mr. Minister, I don’t think it’s any more unique 
than northern Saskatchewan. And I just ask you that. You 
know, I don’t think it’s any more unique. So when I was saying 
that the grants, the special grants that were given to Meadow 
Lake, I think that they should well apply to northern 
Saskatchewan and to many other southern communities. 
 
You talk about capital expenditures, and that you have doubled 
the capital expenditures in northern Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I take a look at your capital expenditures for northern 
Saskatchewan and I see for three years in a row it’s $450,000 
— and you talk about doubling capital expenditures. 
 
Well I can tell you that the sewer and water system that was put 
into the small community of Turnor Lake — and that was a 
cost-shared agreement with the federal government and the 
provincial government, because it’s part reserve and part 
non-treaty — that there would be three times as much money 
put into that capital project as what you’re putting into all of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And you now have a five-year capital project program, and if 
it’s $450,000 a year and you use that on a per capita basis, I’m 
sure that you can’t stand up in this House and say that you have 
doubled, since our administration, the capital grants in northern 
Saskatchewan That’s just not true, because the figures will bear 
that out. 
 
We’re not talking about municipal services; we’re not talking 
about operating grants for the communities; we’re talking about 
capital grants. And in your estimates your capital grants is 
$405,000. And that’s for all the communities in northern 
Saskatchewan, and that’s not much. But for you to say that 
you’ve dealt with that, well that’s just not true. 
 
I just want to make another small comment. You comment 
about all the jobs and all the opportunities that were up in 
northern Saskatchewan. Well I say to you, Mr. Minister, you go 
up into northern Saskatchewan and any time you want to come 
I’ll take you out to the communities and you’ll see that that 
project that you were talking about most certainly is not going 
to solve all the problems of unemployment in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have communities with 90 per cent unemployment up there. 
We have 99 per cent of the residents of northern Saskatchewan 
who do not have a full-time, year-round job. And I tell you that 
is true. There are many, many people, and I’m not talking . . . 
I’m going to leave the professional people out of it. But the 
residents of northern  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

894 
 

Saskatchewan — there would be close to 99 per cent of the 
people who do not have a full-time, year-round job. 
 
I’m not talking the traditional users. We have commercial 
fisherman and trappers who make their living at that, 
year-round. But we have so many other people in northern 
Saskatchewan who are not fishermen and trappers and who are 
never going to be, but want to get out into the labour force. And 
that’s where the problem lies. And I just got a call from 
Pinehouse, and they’ve had to lay off four more of their 
workers in the community. The town hall has laid them off 
because they just haven’t got the money to operate. And that’s 
taking place all through the North. But your capital projects — 
you know that statement is just not true. 
 
(1215) 
 
I see operating grants to the town of Uranium City. That has 
gone down from a million to 350 to $160,000 this year. Could 
you indicate just what’s left in Uranium City as a municipal 
body and what that $160,000 is going to cover? Is there any 
plans to shut that town completely down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As the member opposite is aware, the 
population of Uranium City has decreased from 2748 in 1980 to 
today a figure of 170 in 1986. I expect to see that the . . . An 
estimated 170 I’m saying is the figure here; an estimated 170 in 
1986. From an urban affairs point of view we expect to see the 
community continue. The funding, of course, is at an 
appropriate level, given the substantially reduced population 
size of the community. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And as long as that community maintains 
that population, Urban Affairs will continue to fund that 
community? Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We would continue to provide funds as 
necessary, reviewing the needs of the community. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, one more item under Urban 
Affairs and the northern . . . I want to, Mr. Minister, ask you 
about the fire protection that you have under your subvote here, 
and I believe it’s for fire protection facilities. Are there some 
facilities that are still being constructed, i.e. fire halls, or fire 
trucks to be purchased yet, in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as the member knows, in 1985-86 
five communities took advantage of the northern fire protection 
facilities program and received a total of 104,500 — a number 
of communities, Creighton, Sturgeon Landing, Timber Bay, and 
so on. It’s forecast that the full amount of the grant for ’86-87 
will be taken up as both Stanley Mission and Wollaston will be 
acquiring some facilities, and it’s anticipated that one other 
community will commence construction of a fire hall as well. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I agree 
with a lot of the points, the very serious points that were raised 
here by my colleague, the member for Athabasca. And I will 
have a number of issues, as well, dealing with . . . issues 
pertaining to the Cumberland constituency. 

For starters, Mr. Minister, I have a letter coming from the city 
of Flin Flon. The mayor issued this letter to the former minister 
of Urban Affairs. You may not have this information 
immediately, but none the less I’d like to raise the matter with 
you during estimates of this legislature. It goes on to say, Mr. 
Minister: 
 

To the Hon. Tim Embury: Enclosed please find a petition 
signed by the residents of South Hudson Street, FLIN 
FLON, Saskatchewan. The petition is to express concern 
about the lack of rebate on property taxes to the residents 
of Saskatchewan, similar to the one being enjoyed by their 
counterparts on the Manitoba side of the border. Needless 
to say, the Provincial Rebate of $350.00 to the Manitoba 
residents, goes a long way to lessen the burden of 
relatively high property taxes in Flin Flon. The petitioners 
are wondering why such a relief is not available to them. 
As this is a Provincial matter, I am forwarding this petition 
to you, for your consideration. I look forward to receiving 
your comments, in this regard, at your earliest 
convenience. 

 
This letter was issued this winter, Mr. Minister, and I wonder: 
at this point in time what commitments or response have you 
had with the people of Creighton and particularly the residents 
of South Hudson Street? I may want to remind the minister that 
those people are Saskatchewan residents, and they are entitled 
to a fair policy with respect to government services and 
government policies. 
 
But the letter that I have with me, a carbon copy that was sent to 
me, indicates that the member for Athabasca stated a lot of 
issues pertaining to the North, which have been disregarded by 
your administration. This letter indicates to me that this is 
basically what has happened. You have neglected to look after 
the needs of northern residents. If you wish to comment, Mr. 
Minister, I’d appreciate getting a response and an updated status 
on that petition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It’s difficult to see how the member comes 
to the conclusion that we’re not responding to the needs of 
northern residents. I think I just spent a fair amount of time 
talking with the former member who was questioning me about 
the very positive things that are being done by this 
administration to address some of the needs in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would remind the member opposite that he belongs to a party 
which wants to shut down the uranium mines in northern 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member 
who was addressing me. And if anything is going to harm 
northern Saskatchewan it’s going to be to shut down those 
uranium mines. I’m pleased that we have a government which 
is sensitive to the needs of the North. And we want to see the 
North expand and we want to see it grow and we want to see 
jobs created and we want to see resource development take 
place. We don’t want to see a government come in and say, shut 
down the uranium mines. We don’t want to see a government 
come in and say, shut down the new paper project in Prince 
Albert. We don’t want to see a government come in and  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

895 
 

say, put back the gas tax on. None of that will help northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would remind the member opposite that in NDP Manitoba 
today, there is a very stiff provincial gas tax — a very stiff 
provincial gas tax — and a payroll tax, and a 6 per cent sales 
tax. They buy clothing there, they have to pay a tax. People in 
Saskatchewan buy clothing, they don’t have to pay a tax. In fact 
I suspect they come into Saskatchewan to buy their gas. I 
suspect they come into Saskatchewan to buy their clothing. I 
suspect that a good number of them wish they were living in 
Saskatchewan instead of in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister wants to 
talk about jobs, agriculture, health, and education programs that 
his government advocates for the people of this province. I must 
dispute what the minister, with respect to his arguments . . . 
Because as of today, Mr. Minister, we have higher welfare 
dependency rates in northern Saskatchewan and in 
Saskatchewan in general. We now have 65,000 people on 
welfare, a much higher percentage than there were in 1982. And 
now we have an increase in unemployment. There is high 
unemployment in this province. There’s 42,000 people 
unemployed, looking for work. 
 
But in specifics, Mr. Minister, we’re dealing with Urban Affairs 
and you go on to talk about the many programs and services 
that you have delivered, the many opportunities and options that 
you have delivered and provided for the residents of northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
May I remind you that the North, to this point in time . . . You 
keep reiterating resource development; you talk about uranium 
development. Fine. That’s fine. I’ll accept that. And you talk 
about gold development. But, Mr. Minister, just how much of 
that revenue in resource development is going back to the 
pockets of the people in northern Saskatchewan? I want to 
know, and the people of this province and particularly the 
people of northern Saskatchewan want to know, just how much 
of that revenue is going back to the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. How much of that gold is going back into the 
pockets of the people at the local level? Can you answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’m not the minister of gold mining; I 
am the Minister of Urban Affairs. But I would be happy to 
respond by saying that, can you imagine what it would be like 
in northern Saskatchewan if the uranium mines were shut down. 
You come from the North. Can you imagine what it would be 
like if the uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan were shut 
down? Can you imagine what it would be like if that resource 
activity that is taking place there today were not taking place? 
Surely northern Saskatchewan has benefited from those 
policies. Surely northern Saskatchewan has benefited from 
those policies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is talking from 
his seat. Perhaps he would like to stand and ask a question if he 
has a question. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan has benefited substantially from  

the resource policies of this particular government, and if you 
want to see the northern uranium mines shut down, then you 
just continue to support the NDP party — continue to support 
them. Continue to say the NDP party is best for northern 
Saskatchewan. Continue to say, I’m proud of a party that wants 
to shut down the northern uranium mines; I’m proud of a party 
that is against the kind of resource and exploration activity that 
is taking place as a result of the policies of a Progressive 
Conservative government. Say that you’re proud of a party that 
once had a gas tax on that hurt northern Saskatchewan. You say 
that you’re proud of a party that would have charged people a 
sales tax on clothing purchases. 
 
That’s really what we’re talking about here. And I think that 
intelligent, thinking Northerners are going to recognize, when it 
comes time to mark their ballots, that the future of northern 
Saskatchewan is far more secure under a Progressive 
Conservative government than it ever would have been under 
an NDP government. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, you keep reiterating . . . We’re 
dealing with Urban Affairs but you keep wanting to talk about 
the uranium development issues in northern Saskatchewan, and 
the chairman has given you a lot of clearage on it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Members, the noise from both sides is 
getting a little loud and I can’t even hear the questioner any 
more because of the noise coming from his side. And while 
both members are asking and answering questions, would you 
please tighten them up. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’ll tighten up my bow, Mr. Chairman, against 
that minister who is really arrogant, providing to this Assembly 
a very biased attitude towards the top half of this province, the 
people living in the northern administration district. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to remind you — and for the record — I 
want to remind you that my colleague and I, the member for 
Athabasca, and myself and the party were the ones that 
advocated pro-development in northern Saskatchewan. We took 
a pro-development stand in every convention that we had, 
because of the need for jobs — because of the dire needs for 
jobs. We wanted to get away from that welfare dependency 
syndrome that we have been subjected to. 
 
I may not be as eloquent in English as you guys, but you come 
up North and let’s debate in Cree, and I’ll tell you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Me and my colleagues in northern Saskatchewan, 
many of my colleagues in northern Saskatchewan will certainly 
agree with many of the points that my colleague and I have 
raised today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — I asked you a little while ago just how much  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

896 
 

revenue is going back to the people in northern Saskatchewan 
out of uranium and gold-mining developments. To this point in 
time, Mr. Minister — and I want to get back to what I was 
initially stating here — my colleague and I have taken a 
pro-development stand, and we also initiated surface lease 
agreements which played a major role in the provision of jobs 
for Northerners. But when your administration came into effect 
in 1982 and 1983, you dismantled not only the department of 
northern Saskatchewan, but you ignored the surface lease 
agreements that were there designed to assist and to support 
training and job opportunities and options for the people in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
To this point time many, many . . . The majority of the people 
living in the northern administration district represent about 70 
to 80 per cent native. And to this point in time, Mr. Minister, I 
have yet to see fair resource revenue-sharing formulas designed 
to put money, revenue, and jobs to those particular groups of 
people in this province. 
 
Way back in the early ’70s, like my colleague from Athabasca 
mentioned a moment ago, the communities in the North, the 44 
communities in the North were in a dire and depressed 
situation. When the NDP came into power in ’71 and ’72, they 
advocated a policy of local government, a policy of local 
autonomy, local decision-making. And we established 
meaningful programs for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We established the first municipal council that had input by the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. We had consultation. We had 
full public forum meetings with every organization in the 
North. We weren’t afraid to deal with the people. We went to 
the people. We dealt with the native organizations. We dealt 
with the local grass roots leaders to bring about meaningful 
local government legislation. And we brought about school 
boards, community college boards, surface lease agreements 
such as we discussed a moment ago for the uranium mines. 
 
And we had, Mr. Minister, an opportunity for once, an 
opportunity for the North to become involved with mainstream 
society in Saskatchewan. For far too long now, Mr. Minister, 
we’ve been left on the sidelines. We are not, and I have stated 
before, we are not — native people in particular — have not 
been in the mainstream, social and economic mainstream of 
society. And I’m sure you can’t dispute that fact with me. 
 
Because today, Mr. Minister, I see 63 per cent of people in jails 
and in the correctional centres in this province — 63 per cent of 
those people represent native people. You look at the statistics, 
and you’ll find out that there’s more native people in the 
provincial jails and correctional centres today. And now I ask 
you, is that fair? 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about services and programs that you 
have provided for people in northern Saskatchewan, and you 
dispute many of the points that me and my colleagues raise. 
Well I have a letter here coming to you and to the Premier 
written and submitted by 24 local governments and they are 
saying: in northern Saskatchewan we have high unemployment. 
Our tax  

base in the communities is very low. Therefore, the letter goes 
on to say: 
 

Northern Communities need Sewer and Water services; 
roads; street lights; office buildings; firehalls, fire trucks; 
water and sewer extensions; all of these (Mr. Minister) 
cost money. The Northern Communities cannot afford 
them, because the Per Capital (grants) we get isn’t enough. 

 
Some smaller communities only get and receive from your 
government, and that’s what it says — $40,000 to run their 
communities — $40,000, just imagine that. What can you buy 
with $40,000? Can you administer a community with $40,000? 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, is that fair? I’m quoting from the letter, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Another quote I’ll give you is . . . it ends with the conclusion 
here, Mr. Minister, and I’ll send both copies of letters that I’ve 
brought to your attention, if you want. 
 
The closing, the conclusion of this letter states, Mr. Minister, 
submitted by the 24 local governments, is that they say: 
 

I notice that Saskatchewan was a signatory of the 
Canadian Constitution, and, according to the New Charter 
of Rights and freedoms, everyone should be treated equal. 
We are just (simply) asking for equality in Northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Minister, this letter was sent to your Premier last year. And 
to this point in time, Mr. Minister, I . . . You know these are 
carbon copies sent to me and to my colleague for Athabasca. 
And to this point in time, I haven’t seen any concrete evidence 
of you people on that side of the House, the PC government — 
I have not seen any concrete evidence of tackling and 
committing yourselves to resolve the very extreme hardships of 
those people living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Today we have the highest unemployment ratings throughout 
this province. Like my colleague said a moment ago, the 
unemployment rate is 99 per cent in many of our northern 
communities, and I agree with those figures. The welfare 
dependency rate are high. The incarceration rates of native 
people are high. I mention that because the majority of the 
North is predominantly native. So you can’t tell me, Mr. 
Minister, that your PC government is doing an excellent job in 
northern Saskatchewan. I simply can’t buy that. 
 
You people called this legislature together on the 17th of last 
month in anticipation for an election, but the polls told you 
otherwise. You just couldn’t go. You had cold feet. Then you 
slapped together a quick budget, and as I mentioned before, out 
of desperation — that’s what you did. You put together a 
budget out of desperation with no concrete planning, with no 
concrete plans to remedy many of the issues confronting us in 
this province. 
 
And in particular, Mr. Minister, I look at the resource revenue, 
the northern revenue-sharing portion in your budget submitted 
for 1985-86 . . . pardon me, ’86-87, correction there. And I 
noted under . . . My colleague  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

897 
 

from Athabasca talked about the northern municipal services, 
but I want to talk about the northern revenue-sharing program. 
 
I look at the 1982 and ’83 budget, Mr. Minister, and I look at 
the 1986-87 budget — I’ve got both of them here, Mr. Minister, 
for your information. I’m sure you’ve got the records — and I 
notice that there is a decrease in northern revenue sharing to 
northern communities, 19.5 decrease — a cut. You have in your 
budget estimates for 1986-87 earmarked 5.2 million. In our 
budget, the New Democratic budget that you guys cut to 
ribbons, we had 6.5 million earmarked for northern local 
governments. How can you explain that one, Mr. Minister? 
How can you justify some of the statements that you and your 
colleagues are hollering about continuously? Whenever each 
member on this side of the House makes good points of concern 
to our constituents, you get up and you start hollering and 
bellowing so that the message can’t be heard audibly by the 
chairman, by the Speaker, or the minister that’s being 
questioned. 
 
But at this point in time, Mr. Minister, I want you to answer 
some of those questions that I’ve been raising. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I wish the member would take the 
time to thoroughly investigate the statistics. If he takes a look at 
the actual last budget that you brought in in your administration, 
1981-82 . . . And I think you’d better discount your ’82-83 
budget because that was an election budget, and everybody 
knows it was an election budget. So ’81-82, the actual funds 
that you spent in northern revenue sharing, including grants to 
northern communities for recreational facilities, were around 
5.4 million. 
 
(1245) 
 
But I would remind you that at that time Uranium City was a 
much larger community than it is today — much, much larger. 
Today Uranium City is a much smaller community, but not only 
is Uranium City a much smaller community, we are, in fact, 
providing more in total dollars. If you take a look in the present 
blue book on page 101, and you add up all of the various funds 
that are going to northern communities, there are more dollars 
today going to northern communities. And of course Uranium 
City is a smaller community at the same time. So when you 
compare everything that should be compared in this kind of a 
comparative picture, I think you can see that our commitment to 
provide funds to northern Saskatchewan is a very substantial 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister refers to 
the 1982-83 budget as an election budget. I want to ask the 
minister: then what do you call this budget before us, ’86-87? Is 
that not an election budget as well? 
 
I say that, Mr. Minister, because you have come out, and the 
Premier has come out, and many of your colleagues have come 
out with millions and millions of dollars of government ads all 
over the province. 
 
We’ve had nothing but major announcements, major programs 
announced by your government in this past several weeks, the 
past few months, in anticipation of an  

election. But to this point in time, Mr. Minister, while we’re 
reviewing your election budget, you’re suddenly embarrassed. 
You’ve suddenly got cold feet. That’s the only conclusion I can 
arrive at because the Premier to this point in time has yet to call 
an election. 
 
The people in the North and the people of this province want to 
get some responsibility and some appropriate programs to 
remedy the many problems that we have pertaining to 
employment in this province, pertaining to the North, pertaining 
to agriculture, health, and education. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I can only conclude, if you suggest that our 
last budget was an election budget, then I, too, can suggest that 
your fifth budget presented in this legislature was, and is, 
nothing but an election budget, and a budget, I’m sure, that was 
slapped together out of haste and desperation without any 
concrete, sound planning and consultation with the 
communities in this province. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you know, my understanding in 
terms of building strong local government with some 
decision-making powers and some autonomy and some 
jurisdiction to be able to provide the services and programs it 
deems necessary for its jurisdiction, it must have an economic 
base, Mr. Minister. It must have revenue to operate and to 
administer the type of services and programs required by that 
particular community or by that particular jurisdiction. 
 
To this point in time, Mr. Minister, you have yet to answer the 
question. My colleague for Athabasca raised it, and I’m going 
to raise it again — in terms of resource revenue sharing — we 
have raised it continuous times in the course of the last four to 
the fifth successive PC government budgets and under 
estimates. 
 
I want to ask you, in the year ’83 and ’84 a financial document 
that was produced here by the legislature in terms of your 
operations — and I haven’t got it before me but I can get a copy 
of it — indicated in terms of uranium development and in terms 
of licences and permits dealing with forestry and tourism, 
fishing and trapping, we had revenues generated from the North 
to a tune of $503 million. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Minister, people in northern 
Saskatchewan are contributing a fair share of their resources to 
this province. But are you, Mr. Minister, are you and the PC 
government contributing just as equal an opportunity for those 
Northerners to build upon those resource revenues that you are 
developing and taking away from them? Have you got a policy 
for resource revenue sharing that can compensate for their 
losses? 
 
People in northern Saskatchewan are accumulating loss after 
loss under your administration. Just recently you sold the 
forestry rights to a Washington firm. Did we, Mr. Minister, 
have any consultation with the people in northern 
Saskatchewan? And I’m going beyond the initial phrase of 
questions that I had before you, Mr. Minister. Getting back to 
the resource revenue sharing, just how much of that revenue, 
Mr. Minister, is being funnelled back to the communities in 
northern Saskatchewan to  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

898 
 

help build a sound economic base for those northern people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 
points that need to be made in response to the member opposite. 
The total funding for northern Saskatchewan is up when you 
take a look at revenue sharing, up 3 per cent. When you take a 
look at the revenues that have accrued to municipalities from 
municipal property taxes, for example: 150,000 in 1979; 
316,000 today in 1985. Revenues from land sales accruing to 
the North: 25,000 in 1980; 1.078 million today in 1985 — a 
very good indication, I think, that we’re in the right direction as 
we pursue our policies in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But the member talks about economic development and how it 
relates to the people of the North and the municipal situation in 
the North, and municipal governments, and so on. I think we 
need to state very clearly what the position of this government 
is in comparison to the position of the former government. And 
I think all members of this House remember, and certainly the 
members opposite should remember, because they were part of 
that organization, that government, that had as its foundation 
plank in northern Saskatchewan the old DNS, department of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And what do we remember most about the department of 
northern Saskatchewan? We remember that a very eminent 
judicial figure in this province said: the department of northern 
Saskatchewan is a bureaucracy run amok — a bureaucracy run 
amok under the former NDP government. 
 
Your approach to economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan was to ever expand this department of northern 
Saskatchewan. It was once again a big government, 
state-control approach; we will control your lives; we will do it 
for you — and the member who just stood on his feet, I think, 
was somewhat involved in that old department of northern 
Saskatchewan — we will direct the affairs of the lives of people 
in northern Saskatchewan, because as long as we can keep them 
under our thumb, then we will have control, and we will have 
power. 
 
Well the approach of this government is not to keep people 
under their thumb; it’s to release the potential, to release the 
opportunity that people naturally have whether they are 
individuals or whether they are families. And what a profound 
difference between the philosophy of a Progressive 
Conservative government or the philosophy of a New 
Democratic Party government. 
 
And I can tell you that if they were back in power they wouldn’t 
change one iota. And I want to tell you why they wouldn’t 
change — because they don’t understand economic 
development. Who understands economic development? People 
with some substantial business experience understand economic 
development. 
 
Do the members of this House understand that the NDP party 
today? Of the 64 candidates that they have nominated to contest 
election, only four — only four of 64 candidates have any 
business experience? How is that  

going to help the municipalities of northern Saskatchewan? 
How is that going to help increase economic activity in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Four of 64 candidates have any business experience. How do 
you think you can run a province? How do you think you can 
have any sustained economic development when you don’t 
have anybody who understands small business or business in 
the province? You don’t have an iota. You don’t have a sniff 
when it comes to economic development, and you know it. 
 
And how is northern Saskatchewan going to benefit from a 
party that doesn’t understand economic development? I’ll tell 
you how much your party understands economic development. 
You understand economic development so much that your party 
has passed resolutions saying: we are going to shut down, we 
are going to phase out uranium mining in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you call that economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan? How can you seriously sit in your seat and say, 
I support the policies of the New Democratic Party, when that 
party wants to shut down the northern uranium mines? Is that 
economic development? 
 
This particular party, this particular government, believes in 
releasing the potential that people have and that organizations 
have and that communities naturally have. That is why today, 
under a Progressive Conservative government, the exploration 
and the mining activity, for example in the gold industry, is up 
10 per cent compared to what it was previously. 
 
And when you take a look at the tourism activity under this 
particular government . . . You people were interested in just 
keeping Saskatchewan to yourself, because you wanted to 
control. This government believes in opening up the province of 
Saskatchewan. We believe in saying to people: come on in to 
this province. Come on in. 
 
And as a consequence of our tourism activities here in the 
province there has a been a substantial increase in tourism 
activity in northern Saskatchewan. And the members know that, 
particularly the members from northern Saskatchewan. They 
know that. Now that’s economic activity. 
 
Economic activity is tourism in northern Saskatchewan. 
Economic activity is keeping the uranium mines going in 
northern Saskatchewan. Economic activity is continuing to 
provide impetus and drive and initiative to the gold boom in 
northern Saskatchewan, so that hundreds of jobs are going to be 
created, and indeed hundreds of people today are involved in 
that activity. 
 
But I think a very significant difference between this 
administration and your administration, when it comes to 
northern Saskatchewan, is what we are doing in the forestry 
business in northern Saskatchewan — what we are doing in the 
forestry business in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want the member opposite to know, and I want all members of 
this House to be reminded, and I want the people of 
Saskatchewan who are watching to know, that  
  



 
April 25, 1986 

 

899 
 

it is this particular administration that has worked hard to put 
together a world-class deal to bring a world-class paper 
company into this province, that is going to invest $500 million 
to bring to the province of Saskatchewan the first-ever 
paper-mill of its kind, a world-class facility. That’s economic 
development. That’s the difference between a Progressive 
Conservative government and a New Democratic Party 
government. And that is something that we can all be proud of 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Now the members say that he’s trying to talk out the clock. 
Well I would remind the member opposite — I would remind 
the member opposite — that as Minister of Urban Affairs . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . If the member opposite would have 
the courtesy to sit down and let me continue on with my speech. 
You had the opportunity to speak when you were on your feet; 
now I will continue speaking . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order, order! While the 
minister is replying to the question, there should only be one 
person speaking, and that’s the person replying. Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I can see, Mr. Chairman, that we don’t 
have much time left this afternoon, but the member opposite 
had asked about economic development. He had asked about 
economic development. 
 
Surely any intelligent, thinking person that is concerned about 
northern Saskatchewan knows that, if you’re increasing 
tourism, if you’re increasing the gold-mining activity, if you’re 
going to keep the uranium mines in operation, if you’re going to 
bring in a paper-mill project, that is economic activity in 
northern Saskatchewan. That is something that all members of 
this Assembly should be proud of. The NDP members from 
northern Saskatchewan should be supporting those kind of 
activities. We’re building for the future. We believe in a future 
for northern Saskatchewan. We don’t believe in shutting it 
down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 


