


















































April 22, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 22, 1986 
 

779 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Clerk: — Mr. Koskie, from the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills, presents the 13th report of the said committee, 
which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for a private Bill and finds that the provisions of 
rules 56, 57, and 60 have been fully complied with — Of 
Orest Olekshy, Phillip Eriksson, and Dennis Pehach, of the 
city of Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Melville, that the 13th report of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Police Investigation of Cabinet Minister 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Premier. As you indicated previously, Mr. 
Premier, that you would indeed provide to the Assembly a full 
status report into the allegations of investigation into the Deputy 
Premier. You indicated that a week ago last Monday, I believe. 
I was wondering whether you’re in a position at this time to 
give us a full status report vis-à-vis those allegations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice made 
a statement publicly to the media not that long ago — I believe 
about 1 o’clock or 1:30 — and he was advised that the Regina 
City Police have completed their inquiries into a complaint 
made against the Hon. Eric Berntson, and the complaint was 
without foundation. He made that clear, and he went on to add a 
few more observations that the details of the inquiry were given 
to the Crown prosecutors today, and the prosecutors have 
agreed with the conclusion of the police that no charges were 
warranted. 
 
And since the charges were not warranted, it would not be 
appropriate for the minister or for me to discuss the details of 
the inquiry. To do so would be inappropriate violation of the 
Berntson family’s right to privacy, as it would any other case of 
this nature. 
 
So I can report that the complaints were without foundation, as 
described by the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the 
Premier can advise the House, now that the investigation has 
been completed as he indicated, can he advise: when did the 
formal police investigation into the allegations begin, and when 
in fact did they officially conclude? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I can’t provide that information, and 
I’m not so sure why the hon. member would need to know. 
There has been a full inquiry by the police, and that inquiry was 
brought to the Justice officials. They have agreed with the 
police that the complaint was without foundation, and nothing 
needs to be said more about it. 
 
In respect for justice, and respect for the family, the Berntson 
family, I believe that it’s fair that we do leave it just at that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, one final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it’s significant to know when the investigation and when, 
in fact, the decision that there was no grounds, in fact, for any 
action whatsoever, when that investigation was, in fact, 
completed, because I think it was incumbent upon the Premier 
to come to the House at the earliest possible time in order to 
advise the House, as he indicated he would. And that’s the basis 
of asking when the investigations commenced and when the 
investigation, in fact, was completed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I have just advised the 
hon. member, the inquiry was complete today, and the minister 
announced that the complaint was without foundation. So it 
finished today, and it started several weeks ago. The minister 
made the statement today that the police have completed their 
inquiries into the complaint, and the complaint is without 
foundation. What else can I add to that? I mean, he made the 
statement today and the police have made their statement, and 
they provided the information to the Justice officials and they 
have said it is without foundation. 
 

Open Letter from Provincial Ombudsman 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Social Services. And my question to 
the minister deals with the rather extraordinary open letter he 
has received from the provincial Ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Ombudsman has been forced to issue a public 
challenge to you because you have refused to respond or even 
acknowledge the serious problems that he has uncovered in 
your department. And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you not 
acknowledge that there are some serious problems in your 
department? And will you now agree to an independent review 
of the changes that you introduced to the welfare system in 
1984, changes which the Ombudsman and many others, 
including church groups, say have created increased hardship 
for some of the poorest people in our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same question 
which the member opposite asked approximately perhaps this 
time last week. At that time I provided an answer to the member 
opposite, and the answer would be the same today as it was last 
week, and that is that the welfare reform system in the province 
of Saskatchewan was in dire need of overhauling and reforming 
for a long period of time. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

780 
 

The members opposite, when they were in government, chose 
to let the system run without any kind of leadership and reform, 
and everybody in the province knew that reform was justified; 
we have implemented that particular reform. It’s something 
which the people of Saskatchewan know should have happened 
a long time ago. We have taken the action. I have absolutely no 
intention of deviating from that track which we established 
some time ago. Welfare reform is necessary, it is well received, 
and we will continue in that direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here is not the 
issue of welfare reform. The issue here is the policies of the 
minister and his department which, apparently, by many people, 
in the minds of a lot of people, some very notable ones as well 
as the Ombudsman, have created hardship and have caused 
some problems which I shall ask as supplementaries later. 
 
But my supplementary to the minister, who did not answer my 
first question: Mr. Minister, will you not acknowledge that there 
are some problems in your department which have been brought 
to light by the Ombudsman, and will you not agree here today 
to bring about a review, an independent review, into those 
problems and into the changes, so that it can be looked into to 
determine what the problems are, and what solutions should be 
brought about to cure them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday to the 
media in response to the letter which the Ombudsman has made 
public, if I thought that a public review was justified, then as a 
responsible minister that is something that I would certainly 
agree with. I don’t happen to think that a public review is 
justified. I think that the taxpayers want their money spent 
prudently, and I believe that the taxpayer believes that welfare 
reform is something which was long overdue and that they are 
pleased that this government has initiated it. 
 
And if the member wants to continue asking me questions about 
welfare reform, I have some statistics here that he will be most 
interested in which will indicate once again how desperately 
overdue welfare reform was in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
say to the minister something about, and ask him something 
about, specific cases which the Ombudsman brings to light in 
his open letter. The Ombudsman reports that his office and even 
the police have received a number of complaints from recently 
separated women on social assistance. That’s documented by 
the Ombudsman. These women have reported being watched by 
persons unknown to them, sitting in parked cars outside their 
residences and the like, and in a number of cases these 
unknown persons have turned out to be employees of your 
department, Mr. Minister. Can you explain why your 
department has the homes of these female welfare recipients 
under surveillance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know particularly 
what case the member opposite is referring to. But I want the 
member opposite to know that this whole matter of  

fraud and abuse in the welfare system is something that this 
government takes very, very seriously, and it is something that 
the taxpayers want to be taken very seriously. They want to see 
education and training and job preparation and direct job 
experiences provided for welfare clients, and we are doing that 
on a magnitude never done before. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker — at the same time — they 
want whatever abuse, whatever fraud is in the welfare system to 
be rooted out, and any responsible government would do that. 
And if you don’t think, if the member opposite does not think, 
that that needs to be done, then he is sadly mistaken. 
 
And I would draw to the attention of the member opposite an 
article in the Prince Albert newspaper recently which talked 
about a welfare client — which talked about a welfare client 
who in fact had not reported income to the Department of 
Social Services and, according to the newspaper article, was 
vacationing in Venezuela — vacationing in Venezuela, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because of the actions of our professional staff, this matter was 
under investigation for some time, and I understand that fraud 
charges have been laid, Mr. Speaker. Now that is exactly why, 
that is exactly why it is important that the members who work 
for the Department of Social Services, that our fraud 
investigation unit do the kinds of things that need to be done 
appropriately on behalf of the taxpayer and on behalf of 
everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I really 
find it amusing that the minister feels that he has to rant and 
rave in order to answer a straightforward question. Mr. 
Minister, after your speech you failed to answer the question. 
My supplementary, again, is: why, Mr. Minister, do you feel it 
necessary to have your department provide a surveillance of 
homes of female welfare recipients to the extent of having 
people sit in cars across the street and spy on them. Do you feel 
that that is justified to frighten these individuals with that kind 
of tactic on the part of your department, which is the part of 
your government’s policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I simply cannot believe the 
line of questioning from the member opposite. Is he saying that 
a government, is he saying that a Department of Social 
Services, is he saying that this minister should not be concerned 
about abuse and fraud which may exist in the welfare system? If 
that’s what he is saying, he is sadly mistaken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to report to you, and to the member opposite, some 
statistics which would bear out the fact that what we are doing 
is very responsible, and what he is suggesting is irresponsible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And I’m answering the question of the 
member opposite. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

781 
 

In the month of March, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
mandatory cheque pick-up which this government introduced 
— which should have been done years ago by the members 
opposite, but they did not — in the month of March the value of 
the unclaimed cheques which were not picked up by people on 
the welfare rolls totalled over $85,000. And if you extrapolate 
that to the entire case-load over an entire year, you’re talking 
about something in the order of $4 million that would not have 
been spent. 
 
I think that kind of thing that we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is 
exactly what should be done by a responsible government, and I 
certainly stand by our policies of welfare reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister would be well served if he would concern himself 
about the well-being of families who are finding themselves in 
these difficult situations, and he should remind himself that we 
don’t live in a fascist state here in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Ombudsman’s open letter brings to light 
another case involving your department’s so-called fraud squad, 
which you have referred to. He reports that a pregnant woman, 
in ill health, was recently arrested and incarcerated on fraud 
charges, but when she appeared in court, the charges were 
stayed for lack of evidence. Can the minister explain how that 
happened? And further, Mr. Minister, can you explain how that 
is treating people fairly or with even a semblance of human 
dignity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
full well that the Department of Social Services did not lay 
charges. The Department of Social Services provides 
information and evidence to the police if they believe that there 
is a fraud situation that has ensued. It is then in the purview of 
the police to determine whether or not an investigation should 
take place. 
 
And if the member opposite is questioning whether or not the 
police should, in fact, be investigating matters of fraud, then I 
think he’s on the wrong course. Whether or not the police 
should have actually investigated this particular case is a matter 
that I know nothing about. But I do know that when my 
department receives information that they believe should be 
passed on to the police because it does have implications 
regarding fraud, then certainly my department is doing the right 
thing in passing that information on to the police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary on 
this question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the police do not lay 
charges unless your department brings to them what they think 
is evidence to bring about some need in the minds of the police 
to lay the charges. So don’t put it on the police, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m asking you: how can you justify this kind of action on the 
part of your officials in your department on a woman who 
found herself in this kind of a situation, and then it  

was proven that there was no evidence at all? How can you say 
that this is fair, and how can you say that this is treating this 
individual who represents, I might add, many, in a human and a 
dignified way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is clearly in the 
realm of police responsibility. The Department of Social 
Services provides information to the police, if they believe that 
the police should have that information. The police then 
determine whether or not there is sufficient information to arrest 
an individual or to lay charges. That’s entirely in the domain of 
the police force. That has nothing to do with the Department of 
Social Services. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, since you took office, the number of people who have 
become dependent on welfare in this province has reached 
record levels. I think that says something about your policies. 
You say you have brought in what you pretend to be welfare 
reform — which turns out to be a witch-hunt. You say that, in 
spite of the fact that church groups, welfare rights 
organizations, schools of social work, and many others, in spite 
of the fact that they say that a review is necessary, you say a 
review, you will have nothing to do with. Surely, Mr. Minister, 
that is wrong. How can you continue to pursue your arrogant 
fashion and your arrogant fashion and refuse to acknowledge 
the fact that a review is necessary of your policies and your 
programs to determine what is wrong with the system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we now know very clearly 
where the member from Regina North East and all of the NDP 
opposition members stand on welfare reform. If ever it was 
clear, Mr. Speaker, it is clear today. They are opposed to 
welfare reform. They do not want to see welfare clients have to 
come and occasionally pick up their cheques. They don’t want 
to see welfare clients have to go through education and training 
and job preparation to better themselves. 
 
Their approach to welfare was a very simple approach: hand out 
a cheque, turn your back, and walk away. That’s not 
responsible. That’s not what this government believes in. That’s 
not what the people of Saskatchewan believe in. Welfare reform 
is working; we’re very proud of it, and we’re staying on the 
track. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A question to the Minister of Social 
Services, and it has to do with, by way of background, Mr. 
Speaker, the real facts on what has happened with payments out 
of the Saskatchewan assistance plan, or welfare. 
 
The minister will know that there are now 20,000 more people 
on welfare than when he became minister. In his own estimates, 
which we’re dealing with as soon as we get to them, Mr. 
Speaker, the amount he is estimating to be spent on welfare is 
$190 million. That’s 90 million more than when he took over 
per year. I would say to you, Mr. Minister . . . How do you 
explain that your welfare reform is working when there are 
20,000 more people on welfare than when you started your 
reform? How is your reform working so well when you have 
20,000 more people collecting welfare than when you were 
given the job to cut down the number of people on welfare? 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

782 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, consider the inconsistency of 
the member opposite. Here he is complaining about the number 
of people on welfare rolls; at the same time he’s opposed to the 
Gainers plant in North Battleford which will create jobs. He’s 
opposed to the paper-mill in Prince Albert which will create 
jobs. He’s opposed to the Rafferty project which will create 
jobs. He’s opposed to the upgrader and the ammonia plant here 
in Regina which will create jobs. At the same time he refuses to 
admit that welfare rolls have dropped in the past year; at the 
same time he refuses to admit that it was necessary to mount 
significant measures to combat fraud and abuse; at the same 
time he refuses to support our efforts to educate and to train 
thousands of people on social assistance. How inconsistent can 
the member opposite be? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the minister, and it has 
to do with the Ombudsman report, another radical and crazy, 
along with the doctors who are being labelled by this 
government as being radical and crazy. There’s getting to be 
small minority in this province who are not radical and crazy — 
about 50 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member rose on a 
supplementary. If you have a supplementary, I’ll take it, 
otherwise we’ll move on to the next person. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just wanted to ask the minister, in his 
dealing with the Ombudsman, in light of a case which a person 
had his social assistance postponed for a week because he was 
an hour late for an appointment — this is documented by the 
Ombudsman. The reason that he was late for the appointment, 
and deducted a week, was because he was going for a job 
interview. I wonder, Mr. Minister, is this part of your welfare 
reform system to get people onto the employment rolls? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have come to not 
always accept that what the members opposite say is entirely a 
fact, nor their quotations. If the member was really concerned 
about this particular case, I wish that he would bring it to my 
attention, and we certainly would be willing to look into a 
situation where a particular person, a member of the public, has 
not been appropriately dealt with by the Department of Social 
Services. We want to see everyone dealt with fairly and justly 
and reasonably. I think the public deserves that, and certainly I 
want to ensure that that happens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the minister. It’s 
interesting, Mr. Minister, that you don’t believe the report of the 
Ombudsman. There are many people in the province who have 
high respect for Mr. Tickell and his work over the past number 
of years in solving their problems. And I find in appalling that 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 
statements rather than asking questions. If you have a question, 
we’d be pleased to take your question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little difficult to ask a 
question without putting a sentence in front of it, but I will try 
to do that. Mr. Minister, in his open letter the Ombudsman has 
this to say about your attacks on the findings of his annual 
report, and findings, I might add,  

that suggest you have a number of serious problems in your 
department. And I quote from the report, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I can only construe your approach as either a device to 
avoid responding to the ‘real’ issues or an attempt to shoot 
the messenger because you do not like the message. 

 
Mr. Minister, if you refuse to launch the kind of independent 
review which the Ombudsman calls for, how in the world do 
you expect the people of the province to have any confidence in 
you or your government’s ability to deal with problems when 
you’re saying the Ombudsman is not credible and that he’s 
somehow lying or misleading the people of the province — 
which is what you’re implying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is off 
on the wrong track altogether. First of all, if he has had much 
consultation with the public, he will know that there is broad, 
broad support for welfare reform in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have today . . . Mr. Speaker, if the 
members opposite would be so kind as to be quiet, I would 
respond to the question. 
 
I have today responded publicly by way of letter printed in the 
Leader-Post to the Ombudsman’s report, and I would simply 
quote a comment that I made in the newspaper. 
 

Of the 320 complaints concerning Social Services that the 
Ombudsman received in 1985, (that meant that) less than 
one-half of one per cent of the clients in the Department of 
Social Services had any particular complaint. By far the 
majority of those were not serious enough for the 
Ombudsman to investigate. 

 
In fact, if I remember the numbers correctly, of the ones that 
were actually communicated to the department senior officials 
there were only five that were, in fact, substantiated. So if I 
might just quote the last statement of my letter in response to 
the member’s question, it goes as follows: 
 

But when the message tends to condemn a program of such 
importance and responsibility as welfare reform, when the 
message is based on miniscule and not particularly 
meaningful statistics, when the message hangs upon a 
handful of unsubstantiated claims, then it’s time to doubt 
the credibility of the message itself. 

 
The public has a way of discovering the real truth about welfare 
reform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the Premier. I 
wonder, Mr. Premier, if you share the view of the Ombudsman 
that has been expressed here today that the findings in the report 
are unsubstantiated. Do you share that view of the Ombudsman 
and his report to the legislature, that the cases that he brings 
forward and the work that he does on behalf of the people of the 
province  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

783 
 

are not credible and that the cases are unsubstantiated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that I concur with 
the minister that if you have less than one-half of 1 per cent as 
the basis for allegations against a department, it’s a very 
insignificant number. So if it’s one-half of 1 per cent, and it’s 
five people that he’s basing the entire case on, then it’s not 
entirely reasonable to expect an entire welfare reform package 
to be reviewed in the event that we’re going to have less than 
one-half of 1 per cent to be the basis for the review. So I believe 
that the minister has made a reasonable case, and the public 
would agree with him. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, do you not agree that people, like many church 
groups in Saskatchewan who have had something to say about 
this — the school of social work, welfare rights organization, 
and the Ombudsman, all of whom have had the same claim to 
make about the problems that exist with your minister’s policy 
— do you not agree that those people are worth listening to, and 
that maybe that they have a point, and that someone should look 
at what they are saying and consider instituting an independent 
review so that what they are saying can be looked into? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
I consult with every organization in Saskatchewan, or most of 
the organizations, including church groups, to provide the best 
policies that we can with respect to welfare and agriculture and 
employment and new economic opportunities, training, 
education, health care, and so forth. And as a result of the 
co-operative nature of our government dealing with all groups 
in society, whether there’s a co-op or whether it’s business, or 
whether it’s farmers, whether it’s neighbouring governments, 
whether it’s the federal government, and indeed the U.S. 
government — when it comes to projects, the nature of listening 
and co-operating with others is a corner-stone of our 
administration, and it’s led to some very positive initiatives. 
 
Reform has been one of them, not only welfare reform, but 
reform in Crown corporations, reform in taxation, reform in 
many measures with respect to government. Welfare reform in 
the province of Saskatchewan is overdue and it’s popular and it 
receives widespread support from people in the church that I go 
to, people in the church that the hon. member goes to, people 
that are involved in all kinds of groups. Okay? So I listen to 
people all across the province, and I bring the best information 
together. We design the welfare reform, we design tax reform, 
we design agriculture reform, Crown corporation reforms, 
because we’re listening. The problem, Mr. Speaker, obviously, 
is that the previous administration did not listen, and the people 
of Saskatchewan turfed them right out on their ear because they 
wouldn’t respond. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, they are now 
saying, well me too; me too; me too. Well I suppose it’s a little 
bit late, but it takes you a while to learn the fact, and it may take 
you a few years yet. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

Multi-year Crop Disaster Assistance Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to make a 
statement with respect to crop insurance and a multi-year 
disaster mechanism for Saskatchewan and Canada. I have sent a 
copy across to my hon. colleague, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
The multi-year crop disasters that occurred in the province in 
the ’80s had a devastating effect on the incomes of farmers 
affected by these crop losses. The provincial economy as a 
whole suffered as well. Although the crop insurance program 
was sound and well-accepted and could handle normal crop 
losses, it became apparent that this program did not adequately 
address the effects of a multi-year disaster. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, I proposed the national emergency assistance program 
at the first ministers’ conference in November of 1985, last 
year. This program would deal with emergencies related to 
multi-year disasters. Discussions have been ongoing since that 
time with respect to a program that would deal specifically with 
the need for payments, in addition to that provided through the 
normal crop insurance coverage, in the event of multi-year 
disaster mechanisms. Such a program would also do away with 
the need for emergency assistance and ad hoc programs for crop 
loss. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to say that our efforts have been 
successful. Today I am announcing the addition of a multi-year 
disaster benefit, to be in addition to the crop insurance program. 
Agreement in principle has been reached with the federal 
government and the other western provinces on the 
implementation and features of this benefit. Under the 
multi-year disaster benefit, eligible areas are determined by the 
size of the pay-out in the area, compared to the total premium 
for the same area. All insured farmers, Mr. Speaker, in an area 
which had losses of this magnitude in both 1984 and 1985 will 
now receive an individual increase of 10 per cent to their 
selected coverage option in 1986. The appropriate coverage 
adjustment factor will then be applied to this increased 
coverage. This additional 10 per cent coverage will be based on 
the 1986-87 Canadian Wheat Board initial price. The new 
coverage will largely offset the effects of previous years’ losses 
on subsequent levels of protection provided. 
 
Insurance pay-outs, Mr. Speaker, in the designated area will be 
based on individual’s own production. All farmers in the crop 
insurance program will be eligible for this additional coverage 
except for those who are now insuring under individual 
coverage option. Farmers under this option already insure at 80 
per cent of their average yields. 
 
The crop insurance program is a sound program that is well 
respected by farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In 1985, 
75 per cent of all Saskatchewan farmers carried crop insurance. 
For this reason the multi-year disaster benefit is being tied to 
crop insurance. All farmers not already in the program are 
encouraged — and I repeat, encouraged — to apply for crop 
insurance by April 30th deadline if they want protection in 
1986. 
 
An additional important change that I want to discuss are  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

784 
 

enhancements being made to the allowances for minimum 
average yields under crop insurance programs. We made 
changes last year, Mr. Speaker, and we are announcing changes 
today. As a result of our experience in 1985, it was obvious that 
there needed to be an increase in the minimum level below 
which producers could collect the maximum coverage. In 1986 
this level will be increased for all crops at the same time, and it 
will be feathered to eliminate sharp cut-offs. These changes will 
recognize the increased harvesting costs associated with low 
yielding crops, and also the management problems associated 
with low production harvesting. 
 
In 1985 we did not have the multi-year disaster benefit 
available. As well, the allowances for minimum yields was 
considered to be too low. The crop drought assistance program 
was implemented, Mr. Speaker, to offset the effects of both the 
1984 and 1985 droughts on farm incomes. This program paid 
out more than $51 million, Mr. Speaker, to 13,000 farmers, to 
allow them to catch up as a result of the droughts in 1984 and 
1985. 
 
When we set up the program, our objective was to offset the 
losses through several features. Those farmers with crops at less 
than 100 per cent coverage adjustment have coverage increased 
to the level of 100 per cent. Crops averaging five bushels per 
acre or less for hard red spring wheat, and equivalent levels for 
other crops, were paid out at their full coverage. 
 
As the season progressed, we considered the need for other 
enhancements, as well. The matter of additional production 
salvaged through special harvesting methods was included in 
our deliberations. There appeared to be a need to look 
specifically at special equipment. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, 
we gave consideration to providing benefits for payment on 
acreage harvested with air reels. Further serious consideration 
by the crop insurance board and the Government of 
Saskatchewan has resulted in a final decision to exclude 
payment for air reels. 
 
The payment determined by last year’s additional crop drought 
assistance program benefits does, in fact, meet our objective of 
providing assistance where major crop losses were suffered. As 
well, other better management techniques and other equipment 
— for example, straight headers — can bring about the same 
result of salvaging additional production. 
 
The importance of crop loss protection through a program such 
as crop insurance has been amply demonstrated during the past 
two drought years. With enhancements such as the multi-year 
disaster benefit and increased allowances for minimum yields, 
the program will meet the needs of farmers in cases of future 
back to back disasters. The multi-year disaster benefit is based 
on sound principles. It represents positive proof of our 
commitment to maintain a strong agricultural industry, and has 
been introduced because of this government’s desire to work in 
co-operation with farmers and with other governments towards 
positive and constructive solutions to the agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 
minister for the advance copy. But I want to say to the  

Premier that when you stand up and you talk about crop 
insurance, I have yet to hear the minister answer more questions 
than he raises. 
 
You know, when you start dealing with crop insurance, I wish 
you would have left it up to your minister of agriculture last 
year when a constituent of mine was looking after it, because 
we didn’t have that kind of problem. You’ve created very many 
problems in crop insurance. And today, in the name of an 
announcement, he is again raising more questions than he 
answers. 
 
And the question is this, Mr. Minister: what happened with our 
$4.08 coverage? Is that still in place, or have you got a new 
formula in there where you’re going to go back to the initial 
price that the Canadian Wheat Board announced and 10 per cent 
on that? Which is it? 
 
The farmers think they bought crop insurance this spring at 
$4.08 a bushel. Is that still in place, or is it like you say here: 10 
per cent increase on the Canadian Wheat Board initial price, 
which is down to $3.15? That’s quite a difference, Mr. Minister. 
I really would like to know what this little package says, 
because it scares me, it scares me to think that you are trying to 
cut it off. 
 
The other question that farmers are asking me right across the 
piece — it’s still not clear here today because of continuous 
crop losses, Mr. Speaker, and from your constituency on south 
— because of continuous crop losses, are the farmers covered at 
75 or 85 per cent, or are they going to start at 100 per cent? 
 
And are the ones that had one crop loss, say there’s a second 
one, are they going — that were in 115 per cent — are they 
going to have 125 per cent coverage? The 10 per cent option 
you’re talking about here leaves questions unanswered. Why 
don’t you make it plain and straightforward and say what 
you’re going to do with crop insurance? 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I’ve travelled across many 
constituencies in Saskatchewan. People are asking to hear the 
NDP’s agricultural spokesman talk about and answer questions 
on crop insurance, and the question they’re saying is: what are 
you going to do with crop insurance? Should we still buy it? 
And every time you stand up, you create more problems. 
 
Your staff from crop insurance went out to Glenbain to a 
meeting. Ron Osika went down to Glenbain; he told the 
farmers, sign this affidavit, fill out this form — you’ll get air 
reel coverage. Now all of a sudden they haven’t got air reel 
coverage. The exception was there; you take it away from them. 
 
You announce in Assiniboia a five-bushel coverage; the first 
five bushels is yours. What’s happened since that time, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s not a five bushel coverage, but it’s a five bushel 
cut-off. The only reason farmers wanted to be paid for, an air 
reel, is because they got a little bit over five bushels when they 
harvested carefully. They weren’t cutting it off, and they didn’t 
stop harvesting when they got to five bushels an acre and baled 
the rest. And then they said they wanted a little extra coverage. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

785 
 

Well maybe the Attorney General thinks this is funny, but I 
want to tell you that there are problems, there are problems out 
there with the changes these boys have made to crop insurance. 
 
One more commitment I’d like from the minister, the Minister 
of Agriculture — just one commitment. Will you stick with the 
contract the farmers signed? Will you leave the game rules in 
play for the entire game, or are you going to change them in 
midstream, or are you going to change them after Christmas for 
what they did last year? I’m telling you, is the coverage $3.15 a 
bushel plus 10 per cent, or is it going to be 4.08 a bushel plus 10 
per cent? Where are you standing, and what are you saying in 
this announcement today? You want a grandiose headline by 
saying you’re not making your commitment. 
 
I read it carefully. Your efforts last year, Mr. Premier — if I can 
have the attention and some peace in this House; if I could have 
some semblance of order here. I don’t know — you don’t care 
when we’re talking. But I’m quite concerned that I can make 
myself heard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the question is this. Last year you created total chaos in 
crop insurance. People across Saskatchewan are very upset with 
a good program, a program that worked. People across 
Saskatchewan were asking for some disaster help. They weren’t 
asking to have you meddle and tamper with crop insurance and 
use crop insurance for political reasons. That’s what you did. 
You tried to make a political implement out of crop insurance. 
 
I want to warn you, Mr. Minister, crop insurance is a vital part 
of the agricultural economy. We like crop insurance. We built a 
program that was good, that wasn’t interfered with. You start 
meddling. You’ve got your sticky fingers into it. You made 
everybody unhappy. The cattlemen aren’t happy; the grain 
farmers aren’t happy; the people that bought special equipment 
aren’t happy. You have gotten everybody confused. 
 
And I’m telling you, call an election on crop insurance, and I’ll 
get out and I’ll tell the farmers across Saskatchewan: we’ll 
reinstitute a crop insurance program that they can count on, that 
they know what’s going to be there. When they sign their 
contract, it’ll be good for the whole year. It won’t be tampered 
with. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I want to tell you, farmers asked for air reels because of the 
changes you made in July. If you want to put a five bushel 
deductible in there and say that if you get six bushels an acre 
we’ll subtract a bushel, that’s great; we like it. But if you want 
to mess around and say there’s a five bushel cut-off, that’s what 
farmers didn’t like, because it taught a farmer that it’s better to 
be a little bit slothful. That’s what you were putting into a 
program, and that program is bad news. 
 
The changes you’ve made today, the changes you’ve made 
today do not touch the problems you’ve created. They still don’t 
answer. It leaves more questions unanswered than you had 
before you started. Mr. Minister, listen to some advice. Get 
some people around you that like crop insurance, that believe in 
the principle  

of insurance. And let’s implement a program that’s going to 
work, and let’s not make it political. Let’s not use this as a 
political hatchet thing where you could help your friends and 
make some little payments here, and none there; make some 
adjustments in here, not there. 
 
Eighty adjusters were out in my area at one time this summer. 
Eighty were working out of Gravelbourg. And after it was all 
done, Mr. Speaker, those adjustments didn’t count. They then 
went back and measured the bins after all, like they should have 
done in the first place. 
 
I’m telling you, you messed up crop insurance. Straighten it out, 
but don’t try and make it a political animal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Federal Government Policies Adversely Affecting 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the Assembly today to speak on the motion, a motion which I’ll 
be moving at the conclusion of my remarks: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the provincial government 
has failed to stand up for Saskatchewan interests in 
Ottawa, and that this Assembly urges the provincial 
government to call on the Government of Canada to: 
provide a federal deficiency payment to grain farmers; 
repudiate the proposals of the Nielsen task force report 
which would be disastrous for Saskatchewan agriculture; 
abandon its plan to cut back severely on basic funding on 
medicare and post-secondary education. 

 
I’ll be moving that motion at the end of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to say that I invite all members of the Assembly to 
consider this motion carefully, and to put aside their narrow and 
partisan view, and to join with us in support of this motion, for 
it addresses a basic and fundamental issue in Saskatchewan 
today: the need for the Devine government to stop apologizing 
for the Mulroney government in Ottawa; the need for our 
provincial government to begin to stand up for Saskatchewan 
interests; the need for us to stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Mulroney PC government in Ottawa has been a big 
disappointment to Saskatchewan people. It began by promising 
jobs, jobs, jobs, but quickly became known as the PC 
government of taxes and taxes and more taxes. 
 
It then moved on to betray what Mulroney himself, during the 
last federal campaign, called a sacred trust — the universality of 
the basic Canadian social programs. And it attacked directly the 
senior citizens by its direct assault on old age security pensions 
by cutting into the de-indexing  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

786 
 

of the pensions. 
 
And now this PC government in Ottawa, so heavily dominated 
by big central Canadian interests from Quebec and Ontario, 
now the Mulroney government is turning its back on western 
Canada, betraying Saskatchewan at a time of the worst 
agricultural crisis our farmers have faced in many years — in 
fact, some compare it to the great depression — a PC 
government in Ottawa that is not protecting Saskatchewan 
interests; that was quick to bail out the banks, to give massive 
concessions to the oil companies, but refuses to assist the 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And what does our Premier Grant Devine say? All he can do is 
to repeat over and over the same words as when he went down 
to Ottawa first — keep up the good work, Brian. And you 
know, that’s going to come to haunt the Premier of this 
province. Because yesterday they had another election down in 
Prince Edward Island, and the Tory premier there tied his 
fortune to the fortunes of Brian Mulroney. And we know how 
Jim Lee, the Premier of Prince Edward Island, made out last 
night. 
 
And I want to say, what does this Premier do, this paper tiger 
Premier that we have? You know he has defended the Mulroney 
government’s tax increases on ordinary people — working 
families and farm families. The Premier actually defended 
Mulroney’s plan to, as I said, de-index the seniors’ old age 
pensions. And two weeks ago the Premier got cold feet and he 
ran away from calling the election. His politics of polling turned 
into the desperate politics of panic, and he went to eastern 
Canada with some of his bag men and some of the PC executive 
to consult the boys in Bay Street. 
 
And our paper tiger Premier likes to talk tough, you know. But 
he didn’t meet with Mulroney when he went down on that trip. 
No, the Prime Minister was away. Did he even ask for a 
deficiency payment on grain for farmers? No. Did he even raise 
a whisper of opposition to the Nielsen task force proposals 
which would be disastrous for Saskatchewan farmers? No. Did 
he raise his voice in opposition to the drastic cuts in federal 
funding for medicare and post-secondary education? The 
Premier’s message to Ottawa was clear and simple and 
consistent — keep up the good work, Brian. 
 
For the people of Saskatchewan, I say they want real leadership, 
not just the cheer-leadership of the Premier. They’re tired of 
this here paper tiger Premier who lays down when he goes to 
Ottawa. They want a provincial government and a leader who 
will stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to some of the concrete and 
specific examples where the Premier of this province should be 
standing up for the Saskatchewan farmers. We must turn first, 
of course, to the absolutely critical question, and that is of grain 
prices. Saskatchewan farmers are the most productive and 
efficient in the world. They can compete head-on with farmers 
anywhere in the world. But today they are being forced to 
compete unfairly with the national treasuries of the United 
States and the European nations. 
 

The farmers of the United States and Europe are being very 
heavily subsidized by their respective national treasuries. That 
has three direct consequences: it drives down the world price of 
grain; it supports at a high level the incomes of those farmers in 
the U.S. and Europe; and it spells disaster to Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers need a federal deficiency payment, Mr. 
Speaker. They are efficient, they are competitive, but they can’t 
compete with Fort Knox. And that is why the New Democrats 
have joined with major farm organizations like the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in calling for the federal deficiency 
payment to grain farmers. But has the Devine government even 
asked for this? No, they haven’t. And if any of the PC members 
opposite wish to challenge that in this debate, if they wish to 
rise and assert that the Premier has indeed pushed for a federal 
deficiency payment, I invite them to table the documents that he 
has asked on behalf of the farmers. I invite the PC members 
who plan to enter this debate to speak out honestly on behalf of 
their constituents, to state very clearly and very directly whether 
they will join with us in calling on the Mulroney PC 
government to provide a federal deficiency payment. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, let me turn for a moment to another 
major issue facing Saskatchewan farmers, rural Saskatchewan, 
and indeed all Saskatchewan, and that is the proposal of the 
Nielsen task force report on agriculture, which would be 
disastrous to Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Let us be very clear on the significance of this. It is a massive 
report prepared under the direction of the Deputy Prime 
Minister and presented to parliament by him. Its thrust is the 
Tory policy. But have we heard even one peep of protest from 
the Devine government, from the Premier, or from the Minister 
of Agriculture as to the effects that the Nielsen report would 
have an agriculture? No, we haven’t. 
 
In fact, I don’t believe that we have heard even one word, one 
comment from the Devine government vis-à-vis the Nielsen 
report. And that’s truly remarkable but all too typical of this 
government. 
 
Here we have an absolutely major set of federal PC proposals 
which would have an enormous impact on Saskatchewan 
agriculture and the Premier of this province, the Minister of 
Agriculture, won’t even make a comment. All he can do is to 
grin foolishly and repeat over and over, keep up the good work, 
Brian. 
 
Let us look at some of the specifics in the Nielsen task force 
report. Do the members opposite wish to tell their constituents 
whether or not they agree with the task force’s attempt to 
undermine the Canadian Wheat Board? Do they agree with this 
comment taken from page 22 of the report? And I quote: 
 

One has to wonder whether an organization such as the 
Canadian Wheat Board is a liability or an asset. It could 
become a vehicle to hide mistakes. 

 
Is that the Devine government’s view? If not, I say let them rise 
and speak out against them. Does the government  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

787 
 

opposite agree with the recommendations against the western 
grain transportation subsidy, and against the branch line 
retention? If not, I say let them rise and speak out clearly in 
opposition to these proposals. 
 
Does the provincial government agree with the Nielsen 
proposal for changing crops insurance? Do PC members agree 
with the recommendations on page 181? And I quote: 
 

The long-term federal objective should be to shift a higher 
cost share on to producers. 

 
That is clearly the Mulroney PC policy on crop insurance. It is 
the provincial government’s also. Do they oppose that one? Or 
do they just repeat once again, keep up the good work, Brian? 
 
Does the provincial government agree with the 
recommendations that the federal farm improvement loans be 
eliminated? Well let them take their position. And does the 
provincial government agree with the task force 
recommendation that the advance payments administered by the 
wheat board should be eliminated? I ask them to take a clear 
position as well on this important issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taken together, those PC proposals in the Nielsen 
task force report constitute the most fundamental policy attack 
on Saskatchewan agriculture in our history, and yet not a word, 
not a comment, from the government opposite. Not a word from 
the Premier; not a word from the Minister of Agriculture here in 
Saskatchewan. Not a peep or a protest. 
 
And that is why Saskatchewan people have concluded that the 
Devine government is more interested in laying down for 
Mulroney than standing up for Saskatchewan. And while this 
paper tiger Premier is so busy trying to raise the price of fuel 
paid by farmers and other consumers, and while he may not 
understand the grace threat posed by the Nielsen proposals, 
Saskatchewan farmers do understand them and they are 
opposed to them and they want their provincial government to 
oppose them as well. But all we hear from the Premier is, keep 
up the good work, Brian. 
 
Let me turn to another major area of concern, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s the serious cut-back in established program funding by 
the Tory government in Ottawa. This poses a very serious threat 
to medicare and to post-secondary education. And I want to say 
as with other issues that I have mentioned, and I haven’t got 
time to complete this, but I want to say that the Mulroney 
government is proposing to cut by 1990-1991 $2 billion from 
post-secondary and medicare funding. And here this province, 
this government, will not stand up, will not say a word against 
the Mulroney cut-backs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more that I would like to say, but I 
want to conclude by moving this motion, seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 
 
(1500) 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the provincial government 
has failed to stand up for Saskatchewan interests in 
Ottawa, and that this Assembly urges the provincial 
government to call on the Government of Canada to 
provide a federal deficiency payment to grain farmers; 
repudiate the proposals of the Nielsen task force report 
which would be disastrous for Saskatchewan agriculture; 
abandon its plan to cut back severely on basic federal 
funding for medicare and post-secondary education. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
and second the motion moved by my colleague from the Quill 
Lakes. 
 
I should like to concentrate my remarks on two specific issues 
that were raised in this resolution. 
 
First, the need for firm opposition to the disastrous proposals by 
the Nielsen task force report on that portion that deals 
specifically with agriculture, proposals which would truly mean 
disaster for Saskatchewan farmers; a proposal that is going to 
have even a more devastating effect on farmers than did the 
effect that the reduced price of grain had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why we are joining with Saskatchewan farmers and 
farm groups across the province calling on the Devine 
government to vigorously oppose these proposals. Now I’ve 
mentioned them in this House before, Mr. Speaker. We’ve gone 
through these issues and yet I have to hear one word from the 
members opposite. Like my colleague from Quill Lakes 
suggested, why don’t they stand up and together oppose this 
kind of changes to Saskatchewan agriculture? 
 
Yesterday I had the privilege to sit in on a meeting with our 
leader, Ed Broadbent, and five of the major farm groups in 
Saskatchewan and these groups spelled out . . . And they 
represent a broad cross-section, Mr. Speaker. We had the 
farmers’ union on the left and we had the wheat growers on the 
right, and in between we had the commodity groups there, the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) that 
represents all the farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
And these people spoke with one voice loud and clear, saying 
that we are facing a crisis situation in agriculture. The situation 
is so serious, unless we lay aside our political biases and unless 
we get together we’re going to see a major effect on our 
population in rural Saskatchewan worse than the effect was in 
the ’30s — worse than the ’30s. 
 
And what have we got coming from the Tory government? 
We’ve got a report that the Deputy Prime Minister, Eric 
Nielsen, commissioned — put up a study group that were his 
cronies that put together a study. And on the agricultural 
portion, if the CPR would have written it themselves it wouldn’t 
have as devastating an effect on farming as this one does. 
 
First thing they call for, and the Premier stood up today  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

788 
 

and talked about changes to crop insurance. Nielsen’s report 
says, increase the premiums by 20 per cent a year until the 
federal government gets out of the matching formula that’s 
paying their share of crop insurance; get out of crop insurance 
and if the farmers want crop insurance let them buy an 
insurance program that’s actuarially sound. 
 
Has the member from Redberry stood up and said he doesn’t 
like it? Has the member from Redberry, on behalf of those 
constituents, said that he’s prepared to fight Nielsen on this 
one? Not a word. What about the big mouth from Wadena? He 
takes trips by the chemical companies — paid for by them — 
and travels around the world. But does he stand up and criticize 
this right-wing reactionary program? All he can do is talk from 
his seat and make a lot of noise, Mr. Speaker, but he won’t 
stand up in this House and condemn Eric Nielsen. He won’t 
stand up and condemn the people that are going to pull the rug 
out from under his operation. He won’t say a word about it. 
 
The Nielsen report said that the premiums for crop insurance 
should be increased by 20 per cent a year until the federal 
portion is moved right out, and I think that’s devastating to crop 
insurance. It shows you where the Tories are coming from and 
it shows you why we have the kind of statements like we had 
today from the Premier. 
 
The second thing that I really take exception to the Nielsen 
report with, Mr. Speaker, and that is the introduction of variable 
freight rates. I was pleased yesterday to sit around a table and 
hear farm groups say that freight rates should be frozen. 
Farmers cannot afford the increases that the right-wing 
governments together with the railways are foisting on the 
farmers — a little bit at a time, a little bit at a time, and more 
and more. And groups across the piece yesterday said, we 
demand that the freight rates be frozen, not variable freight 
rates. 
 
The Nielsen report also says, to make the railways more 
competitive and to be able to provide a service, we should have 
some branch line abandonment; let’s finally admit that these 
expensive branch lines aren’t doing a service to the agricultural 
economy; let’s abandon them. And I’m saying that that is 
devastating to the farmers living on lines like Beechy, lines 
across Saskatchewan that are offering a service. They’re saying 
these branch lines should be abandoned. I say that people in this 
House should stand up and be counted and tell the people where 
it’s going. 
 
I’m having a lot of competition, Mr. Speaker, but if you don’t 
hear them . . . It’s coming from right behind me, from the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, and his big, loud voice just 
throws a curve at you when you’re trying to think. And I’m sure 
he doesn’t want to hear this. I’m sure the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena doesn’t want to hear this. He doesn’t want 
to hear that his party’s commissioned a report that says they’re 
supposed to cancel the grain cash advances. He is saying that 
they should cancel the grain cash advances. That’s why he 
doesn’t want to hear this speech. That’s why we have that kind 
of racket in here. 
 
And the worst one is, end federal farm fuel tax  

rebate. Instead of joining with farm commodity groups from 
across Saskatchewan, and joining with these people and saying 
that we should take off the federal tax on farm fuel, they are 
saying to end the fuel rebates that farmers are enjoying and the 
two bits we’re getting back. 
 
These proposals spell bad news for Saskatchewan farmers, bad 
news for all of Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan 
businesses, because they’re going to feel the consequences of 
branch line abandonment, of variable freight rates, of 
cancellation of cash advances. And the worst one is the 
increases in crop insurance premiums. And Saskatchewan 
people are calling on the Premier to stop laying down for 
Ottawa and start standing up for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And I think that the most serious one, the most serious effect of 
all, is this tremendous reduction in the price of our grain, the 20 
per cent cut — 81 cents a bushel cut on the price of grain. 
 
Avery Sahl from Sask Wheat Pool met with us yesterday and he 
calculated with Sask Pool’s research people that we need a 
deficiency payment, a support payment of $2 billion. If the 
targeted price for United States grain is 6.05 a bushel in 
Canadian funds, and the average export is 18.5 million tonnes, 
that makes $1.34 billion, Mr. Speaker — 1.34 billion. You add 
the other grains in, it makes a $2 billion deficiency payment 
that the Sask Wheat Pool is asking for. And he says we should 
have an agreement from all parties. 
 
So I challenge members opposite, I challenge the Minister of 
Finance, to stand up in his seat in spite of the trouble he has at 
winning his own nomination, to stand up in this House today 
and say that your party supports these commodity groups that 
are saying we need a deficiency payment. 
 
Bud Morken from the UGG was there. He said . . . And he 
called it the low price blow that hit Saskatchewan farmers. The 
consequences, he said, is a $1.5 billion drop in farm income. He 
said the buying power of Canadian farmers is the lowest since 
1930 and the UGG’s calculation of $3.15 a bushel . . . You 
know how much that makes in 1930 dollars, Mr. Speaker? 
Eighteen cents a bushel. That’s what you’re getting for your 
wheat when you compare it with the buying value of the 1930 
dollar — 18 cents a bushel. That’s the thanks we can give Brian 
Mulroney for what we’re getting for our grain. 
 
He calls for a summit. He calls for a federal-provincial and 
farms groups getting together and talking about an offset 
payment in the tune of $1.2 billion. 
 
A very interesting paper was presented by Barb Isman and Paul 
Sim from the Wheat Growers. These people agreed that we 
need to ask for an offset payment to fill in the short term. On 
the long term they had a two-pronged approach that I thought 
was very effective and very good, and they said: to make up the 
deficit that’s created in the farm income by Saskatchewan 
farmers, we need to have an injection of cash. SARM was there 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and they said they passed a resolution 
that farmers should be guaranteed at least a minimum of 
$40,000. They felt that the $10 a bushel should be  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

789 
 

targeted, that it would be made across the board that farmers 
would get it. He said we can reduce the cost of chemicals if 
they would cut all this nonsense advertising. We could save 10 
per cent on our chemical costs. But their argument is that 
farmers are losing $2 billion a year because of the subsidies by 
the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It is my duty to 
inform the member his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to enter into the debate today. I was just 
listening with some interest to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and some of the comments that he 
made about our Premier and his do-nothing attitude about 
agriculture. 
 
And before I get into that statement, I would just like to take us 
all back a ways in history. Although I’m a fairly young 
individual, Mr. Speaker, I can remember when I started farming 
in 1970. And of course at that time we had a great program 
called the LIP program which cam along. And I recollect a 
hearty endorsement by the then newly-elected NDP government 
of such a program. And I remember going to the elevator with 
my first crop in 1970 and receiving $1.28 a bushel for it. And it 
makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, how we can get some of the 
statements about $3.50 wheat when we were getting $1.28 in 
1970, and 1971, and 1972. And it wasn’t till 1973 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The members complain when 
others holler when they’re on their feet, and I would ask them to 
have the same consideration they would expect for themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Anyway, Mr. Speaker, it all goes back to this 
attitude and this statement that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg about our Premier and his do-nothing 
attitude, because it seems awful strange to me, in those three 
very tough years which we had in the beginning of the ’70s, and 
as you well know as a farmer what we went through in that 
particular period of time. 
 
And it really makes me wonder how the members of the 
opposition can stand there and berate our Premier for his 
do-nothing attitude toward agriculture when we suffered those 
three devastating years in rural Saskatchewan and there wasn’t 
one single program which came out of that government. There 
was not one single effort by that government, the former Liberal 
government in Ottawa, to do anything to solve some of our 
agricultural programs. And to me, any program which came 
along and told farmers to summer-fallow twice in two 
successive years had to be utterly foolish, and I did not hear 
anything out of that government complaining about such a 
program. 
 
Anyway, let’s get back to the Premier of this province and also 
our agricultural minister and his do-nothing attitude toward 
agriculture. We have farmers with a cash flow problem in 
Saskatchewan, and I think everybody admits that. So we come 
along with a program called the production loan program. This 
is probably the most significant farm program that’s ever been 
introduced by  

any government in the history of Canada. And the fact that our 
farmers can get $25 a cultivated acre at 6 per cent interest — 
and this works out to an average loan of $20,000 per farm — to 
me is pretty significant. And that is a recognition by this 
government, by our Premier, by our Minister of Agriculture, to 
say yes, there are problems out there and we are doing our best 
to attack them. 
 
(1515) 
 
We’ve heard a lot in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, about the oil 
companies and about the non-benefits which accrued to the 
people of Saskatchewan. The fact that one-quarter of all the 
revenue generated in this province in the last year was from the 
oil companies, I think is significant. But also the fact that this 
year farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker, are going to receive 
21 cents a gallon — about $42 million — going out of 
agricultural producers in this province, and that is a direct result 
of what this government has done with the oil patch. 
 
And when I think of every farmer in my constituency getting an 
average of $650 through this refund program and what 
difference that’s going to make to his input costs in 1986, I 
think that’s fairly significant, and that goes directly in the face 
of the statements made by the previous speaker. 
 
When I think of our livestock industry and the tremendous ups 
and downs which occurred all through the ’70s, all through the 
time that the NDP were in government . . . One year the 
livestock producer is doing fine; the next year the commodity 
prices drop, and he’s down. 
 
Our government, our Minister of Agriculture, spearheaded the 
$125 per head cash advance, and I think that’s pretty significant 
because the advance which our grain producers have had for 
years and years in this country is now available to our livestock 
producers, and we can take some of the humps and valleys out 
of the cost of producing livestock to give a guy a little bit of a 
cushion between that calf crop and when it’s sold the following 
year. And to think that 14,000 agricultural producers in this 
province have already taken advantage of this, I think speaks 
for itself as to the acceptance and the goodness of this program. 
 
You combine that with the livestock investment tax credit and 
think that 7.5 million in tax credits have already been issued to 
7,000 producers in this province, and you know, Mr. Speaker, 
that our Minister of Agriculture has been acting on agricultural 
issues. 
 
We’ve also had the question of people in trouble with lending 
institutions in trouble because of poor commodity prices, in 
trouble because of drought. And I can remember droughts 
occurring back in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker, and in the early ’80s 
when we faced 22 per cent interest rates, when everyone had an 
operating loan which they were having a tough time paying 
back, and nothing was done. There was no representation by the 
former government to the federal Liberals at that time, no 
representation at all. 
 
This government has acted. It has brought forward the  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

790 
 

counselling and assistance program which has guaranteed 
operating loans to those producers who have been faced with 
low commodity prices and drought. And finally, we have had 
The Farm (Land) Security Act, which has provided a forum of a 
person’s peers to appear before farmers — not bureaucrats, but 
farmers. So that a fellow that is having difficulty with a lending 
institution, he’ll go talk to people who understand his problem, 
who will have sympathy with what he’s trying to do. And if he 
can show that he is trying and making an honest effort and is 
viable, then they will got to bat for him with the courts and with 
the lending institutions. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, of something like our natural gas 
distribution program. For years and years we were told in this 
province that we just didn’t have enough natural gas for our 
farmers to have the same benefits that our city dwellers had. 
And when you think of what’s happened with the price of 
heating oil, what’s happened with the price of propane, whether 
this be grain drying or heating your shop or heating the hog 
barn, all of these are direct costs to our agricultural producers. 
And once again it flies directly in the face of the statement 
made by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that our 
Premier has not done anything to fight for agriculture, has not 
been innovative, has not brought forward programs. And the 
fact that we’ve taken natural gas, gone into this province, found 
it, developed it, and now brought it to the people of this 
province in the rural areas, is fairly significant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my riding alone there are now 1,300 kilometres 
of gas line. Every one of the farm producers there that’s hooked 
up is saving easily 50 to 60 per cent of his costs, his heating 
costs, no matter what he’s using it for. And that is a very 
significant reduction in the cost of production for those 
agricultural producers. Mr. Speaker, we will not be stopped or 
intimidated until that natural gas program has been run through 
this entire province, so that our farm people and our small 
towns have got exactly the same benefits that other people in 
this province have enjoyed for years and years. 
 
As far as the Nielsen task force, Mr. Speaker, I have only heard 
two significant things come out of that. One was something 
about taking away the farm fuel rebate program, which the 
member mentioned, and then I hear that it’s been extended to 
1988. I wonder where he’s coming from on that one, because 
that’s in law. And the other one was the Churchill line 
abandonment. All of a sudden the federal Minister of 
Transportation comes up with a $14.5 million upgrading for it, 
which means that the Churchill port is probably going to double 
its capacity. 
 
And then I go to rail lines, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is the 
really significant one — that all through the ’70s, when we 
were faced with this problem of rail line abandonment, in 1979 
the then Prime Minister of Canada, the Hon. Joe Clark, had an 
M.P. who happened to be my M.P., by the name of Doug Neil, 
step in that summer and do a comprehensive study of rail line 
abandonment in this province. Doug Neil probably saved more 
rail lines in the eight months the Clark government was in than 
the NDP ever did in the 11 years that they were government. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today in support of the motion put before us, moved by my 
colleague from Quill Lakes. 
 
It’s quite interesting. The member from Thunder Creek who has 
just taken his seat, and a well-known farmer in his area, has 
indicated to this House publicly that he has never read the 
Nielsen report. And I think that, being a member of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, that he should read that report. He 
indicates that — and this is his words — that he claims to have 
heard what was in that report. Well I tell you, what was in that 
report, to the member for Thunder Creek, is very important to 
your constituents, and I suggest that you read that report. 
 
The issue before us is clear, simple, and important to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Why won’t the Devine government protect 
Saskatchewan interests? Why won’t the Conservative 
government oppose forcefully the threats from Ottawa? And 
why won’t the Conservative government in Saskatchewan stand 
up for Saskatchewan? 
 
I would like to focus and concentrate on one particular aspect of 
this problem, the federal Conservative government’s cut on 
basic health care funding all across Canada, including here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As all members know, last May the Michael Wilson budget 
announced the Conservatives’ intention to cut back on basic 
transfer payments to the province by $2 billion by the year 
1990-1991 — by 1990-91 to achieve a $2 billion a year 
reduction in these vital payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the leadership of the CCF and the NDP 
in this country, because of the leadership of men like Tommy 
Douglas, all Canadians today have access to medicare and 
hospitalization. And the federal government carries a major 
national responsibility to ensure national standards, to ensure 
universality, to ensure access to all Canadians in poor provinces 
and in wealthy provinces and also into our regions. And we see 
in our regions, and especially in the far North where these 
transfer payments — and you see the reduction of money that’s 
coming is starting to fall on the backs of the poorer regions of 
our province. And we take a look at where the cuts are being 
made, and they’re being cut drastically. 
 
The $250,000 cut in the food transportation subsidy — and that 
is a program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that provided fresh food and 
vegetables and fresh meat and produce to the citizens up there 
so that they would be more healthier. But instead, this 
government has chosen to cut $250,000 off that program, and 
they’re going to continue to cut. 
 
And I just ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you take a look 
at what the folks are paying up there now, and what they’re 
going to pay if these cuts keep going until 1991, what it’s going 
to be like. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s paying for it? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Who’s paying for it, the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake is saying? Well let me tell you,  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

791 
 

the folks up in northern Saskatchewan are paying for it, and 
they’re finding it very hard. They’re finding it very hard 
because in Black Lake today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a litre of 
milk — and children need milk and all families need milk for 
good health — costs $2.23. A dozen eggs up in Black Lake is 
$2.45 a dozen. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in your home city and in your 
constituency, you don’t pay $2.45 for a dozen of eggs, you pay 
$1.29 for large eggs. And that’s what they need. But they’re 
being cut back. And you don’t pay $2.23 for a litre of milk for 
your family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatoon you pay $1.73. 
But the folks up in the North where this food transportation 
subsidy was taken off, and they no longer can get the types of 
food that they need for good health, and on top of that they’re 
paying these enormous prices. 
 
But now the Mulroney Conservative government says, no. They 
are betraying that responsibility, betraying that sacred trust and 
are now planning to cut back on those transfer payments by $2 
billion by the year 1991. Well I’m sure that the former minister 
of Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is chattering from his 
seat, knows full well that he doesn’t pay the same price that the 
folks up in Black Lake are paying, and it costs a lot of money to 
live up there. Basic health costs are expensive — a lot more 
than in your constituency, I suggest, of Weyburn. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll speak for Weyburn, thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That’s right, you speak for Weyburn, and 
I’ll speak for northern Saskatchewan. But when it comes down 
to cutting up the pie, when it comes to cutting up the pie and 
providing good health services and food transportation 
subsidies for my constituency in northern Saskatchewan, let me 
tell you, the member from Weyburn has had a say into the 
$250,000 that were cut back . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. He’s the one who sits in cabinet and makes those 
types of decisions. 
 
The Minister of Health claims to be not informed about the 
impact of these cuts on Saskatchewan. He claims not to be 
interested. He claims to trust his good friend, the federal 
Conservative minister. He’s like the Premier who repeats over 
and over again — keep up the good work, Brian. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s just not good enough where 
the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about the 
Conservative cuts to basic health care services. The people of 
Saskatchewan are opposed to those federal cuts, and they want 
the provincial government here in Regina to stand up for 
Saskatchewan, speak out against those federal cuts, to speak out 
directly and to speak out clearly, for the impact of those federal 
cuts will be severe in Saskatchewan. 
 
The cuts for health care alone have been estimated by the 
Canadian Hospital Association — and these are their figures, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — federal funding cuts up to $54 million 
per year for Saskatchewan health care alone. One just has to 
realize what that means. It means that basic services are going 
to be cut. Federal funding cuts  

totalling 154 million over the period until 1990-91 for 
Saskatchewan health care alone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of my constituency and the 
people of Saskatchewan are opposed to this Conservative plan 
to cut back federal funding to the provinces for basic health 
services. They are tired of the Premier’s cheer-leading support 
for every move of Mulroney’s. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want leadership, not more Devine 
cheer leadership. The people of Saskatchewan want their 
provincial government to protect Saskatchewan interests. They 
want a government that will stand up to Mulroney, that will 
stand up for Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when you . . . 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you see the types — the massive 
cuts of up to $2 billion for the basic education and health, to 
maintain that in this province, one knows that the citizens and 
the children, especially of this province, are going to suffer. 
 
(1530) 
 
When you take a look at what’s happening in our schools today, 
we have schools up North where the teacher-pupil ratio is in the 
35-student range, and that’s just not acceptable. You can go into 
Stony Rapids and not only find the teacher-pupil ratio at 35 and 
above, but you see teachers who are now teaching three classes 
in one room. And they tell me that they just can’t do a good job 
with the students because there are some students that are at a 
different level than other ones, and when they’re cut back in 
staff — and they are cut back — they’re cut back in materials 
up in them areas. I have teachers and administrators who are 
telling me that the basic materials that they need to teach the 
children, they’re being cut-back in that. 
 
Stony Rapids is a good example, where they don’t even have a 
maintenance man to look after — and I believe that they have 
around 30 furnaces in that school up there, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— and they don’t even have up in that school a maintenance 
man. They have a maintenance man who may fly in there from 
Prince Albert to give some instructions, but you have teachers 
who are actually not just teaching the children in the 
class-rooms, but are maintaining the furnaces in those 
class-rooms, and that’s a fact. 
 
And I suggest that the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
take a look into some of these situations, because we live in a 
province where I believe that we should have equality. We need 
equality for our citizens; we need equality in health care; we 
need equality in education; and that’s what we should all be 
working towards. And let me tell you, that’s not happening up 
in Stony Rapids, and it’s not happening up . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s my duty to remind 
the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

792 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
rising today I’m reminded of a phrase which the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly told me about a couple of years ago. He 
said he wished he had a dollar for every time he had a member 
rise and say: Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to get into this 
debate — but I guess I’m in that position today. 
 
It wasn’t until after lunch today, in fact just after a caucus 
meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had a chance to take look at the 
motion that was being presented under rule 16, and I’d like to 
note from that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first couple of 
lines. It says: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the provincial government 
has failed to stand up for Saskatchewan interests in Ottawa 
. . . 

 
And then it divides up into several segments. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take a look at these 
first couple of sentences and take issue with that particular 
statement. Now my colleague from Thunder Creek has already 
taken issue on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, on 
behalf of our Premier, who is the Minister of Agriculture, and 
he has pointed out many of the things the Premier has done for 
agriculture in Saskatchewan in conjunction with, and not 
always with the total co-operation of, the federal government. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to standing up in 
the Assembly or standing up in public and speaking on behalf 
of this province, our ministers and our MLAs this side of the 
House are not found wanting. I heard reference today to the 
member from Redberry. One member who was speaking 
pointed to the member for Redberry and he said, why doesn’t 
the member of Redberry speak out? Why doesn’t he stand up? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you in this Assembly there is 
not a member more industrious, more conscientious, and more 
devoted to his constituency than that member from Redberry 
sitting over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, he is not atypical 
of the members on our side of the House, and I’m proud to call 
the member from Redberry, not only a colleague, but a close 
friend. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to standing up and 
speaking up for Saskatchewan on behalf of my department or 
my constituency, I don’t like to think that I have exactly been a 
shrinking violet either, certainly not on the floor of the 
Assembly, and certainly not when it comes to constituency 
matters and dealing with the problems that beset my 
constituents, many of which were carry-overs and held-overs 
from the previous administration, I may say. 
 
But as for standing up for Saskatchewan interests in Ottawa, 
when I took a look at that motion, several things came to my 
mind very readily. And the first one that came to me was a 
freshwater fish marketing corporation. Well  

in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn’t like some of 
the regulations, and we didn’t like the way some things were 
being implemented because they were detrimental to our own 
producers. So we changed them. We talked to federal officials; I 
talked to the federal minister and said, we don’t like this. This 
isn’t good for Saskatchewan and we want changes. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we made those changes. 
 
Turning to another aspect: the North American water-fowl plan 
— an example of something we’ve been involved in as a 
provincial government, and certainly as a department, because 
we felt it was good for Saskatchewan. It is good for more than 
Saskatchewan, but primarily that was our interest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’ve had co-operation from the federal government, 
our own provincial government, the federal U.S. government, 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation on behalf of its 35,000 
members, Canadian wildlife service, natural history society, and 
various other conservation groups too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As an example, I think, of standing up and speaking out for 
Saskatchewan and making something come true . . . And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’re talking about water-fowl management. 
But we’re talking about a deal that is not only good for the 
water-fowl of Saskatchewan, but will be good for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and good for the conservation groups in 
Saskatchewan, good for the wildlife federation in 
Saskatchewan, not to mention the vast infusion of funds that 
will come about as a result of this program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That, I think, is another example of speaking out for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the area of parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve worked with 
the federal government, the previous government — the 
previous federal government; we’ve had discussions with them 
about grasslands national park, the Webb interpretive centre. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we spoke out for those projects, and when 
they get stalled because of a government in Ottawa which may 
be of the same political stripe as us, we don’t sit back and say, 
good job guys; sorry, we can’t work it out. 
 
That’s not our way. That’s not the Conservative way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We go down there, and I have no hesitation of 
fighting with those people. I don’t care what political stripe they 
are. If it’s not good for Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re going to hear about it. And I for one, and I know my 
colleagues feel the same way, we’re not afraid to stand up and 
speak our minds and speak out on behalf of Saskatchewan. 
 
Turning to another area, forestry — and I know that in 
Saskatchewan we’re generally regarded as being small players 
in the forest industry. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was 
at the national forestry congress in Ottawa, they had a panel of 
ministers on a stage and 500 members — leaders, organizers, 
professionals, foresters, and government officials — out front 
asking questions. And the moderator was one Pam Wallin of 
CTV fame. And her opening question to me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was couched in terms such as: well, in Saskatchewan I 
know you don’t have any trees, but . . . 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

793 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took gross exception to a crass 
remark like that from a Saskatchewan native. And I pointed out 
to her, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that should she be interested 
enough to come back and visit her native province, I would 
personally be delighted to arrange for her a tour of our 
approximately 20 million acres of productive, commercial 
forest. It turned out later that the woman did explain to me she 
was being somewhat facetious because she thought she could 
spark a trifle controversy. She exceed beyond her wildest 
dreams, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well we may be small players in the forest industry, but it’s 
Saskatchewan’s second-largest manufacturing industry, and it 
directly creates more than 3,000 jobs. Another 5,000 people are 
employed in forestry-dependent industries and services. In 
economic terms, we’re talking about $71 million in annual 
wages, and these industries generate $172 million of economic 
activity in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that may sound like small players in 
the industry, but I believe that we are a very significant part of 
Saskatchewan’s economy in forestry. 
 
With regards to standing up and speaking out for Saskatchewan, 
I may say that the federal Minister of State for Forestry has 
visited Saskatchewan twice in the last year. He took part in 
National Forest Week in Prince Albert, and at that point 
officials from my department and officials from his department 
met, and they put together the paperwork as a culmination of 
some discussions he and I had held. As a result, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re committing to spend some $28 million on a 
50-50 basis, federal-provincial, over the next five years in 
Saskatchewan, concentrating on such areas as reforestation and 
silviculture and research. 
 
On the topic of research, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re on the 
verge of bringing in some very exciting innovations in our 
forest industry. This year will be the first year where we’re 
going to be planting seedlings, which we think will achieve a 
40-year forest. Normally a forest would take some 90 years to 
grow to commercial value, and if our research is proven 
accurate — and I believe it will — we will be capable, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan of producing a 40-year forest 
which has tremendous economic implications for this province. 
 
In addition to that, because we stood up, because we spoke out, 
and because we told Ottawa of our needs here, I’m pleased to 
say that we were successful in getting a $3 million plant, 
nursery plant, in Big River which, coincidentally, is in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very pleased to say it’s 
there. It’s a beautiful facility, producing an excellent product. 
We’re very happy to see it come about. 
 
On the subject of forestry, as you would be aware, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, very recently we successfully concluded some 
negotiations that means the forestry giant, Weyerhaeuser, will 
establish a corporate presence in Saskatchewan. And as by way 
of . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to remind 
the member that his time has elapsed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also very pleased 
to get into this debate today, Mr. Speaker. I want to get into it 
mainly because of some of the things that some of the members 
in here are saying. And I want to go to the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Now he stood up in this House and he talks about how hard it 
was in 1971, how badly farmers were suffering, and the fact 
that prices of grain were low, in his opinion, at $1.50 a bushel. 
 
An Hon. Member: — $1.28. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, some members say $1.28. 
He should remember also that that was the cause of eight years 
of a Liberal government that made our life pretty miserable in 
the 1960’s, the same as what’s happening with this government 
now in the ’80s. 
 
And I can understand why the members opposite want to holler 
about it. I know why, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like to hear 
some of the facts. They don’t want to hear the truth. That’s why 
they holler from their seats. The member from Moosomin is 
really disturbed about it, and I can understand why. I can 
understand why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we only have to go back to either that $1.28 or 
$1.50 a bushel wheat, that the member from Thunder Creek was 
talking about, and put in perspective the cost that the farmer had 
then, too. I remember fuel at that time, diesel at 18 cents a 
gallon. Now I wonder if we can get 18 cents a gallon diesel 
today when the price of wheat is only $3 a bushel. With the 
decrease in the price today, we’re going to be looking at $3.18 
at the elevator. And is our fuel 18 cents? Or is it 36? Let it 
double. Let it double. Can we get diesel at 36 cents a gallon? 
And I’m not talking a litre, I’m talking a gallon. Can we get it, 
Mr. Speaker? No. They neglect to mention that. They neglect to 
mention that. 
 
What they should be talking about is not what happened in 1970 
or 1960 or 1950. They should be talking about what is 
happening now, today. And they should be saying to Ottawa, 
like they say they have such good rapport with, that they can go 
there and ask for anything and get it. Well I can say then, to the 
Minister of Agriculture, today’s Premier, he should go to 
Ottawa and say to Brian Mulroney, or as some of the 
Americans refer to him as “Muldoney,” say to him that we need 
deficiency payments. We cannot allow our agricultural industry 
in this province to have to fight with the treasuries of the U.S. 
or of Europe. They cannot do that, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
this government should be doing. 
 
But do any of them in this House get up and do that? Does the 
Premier go to Ottawa and say, we have to have deficiency 
payments? No, none of them do it. In fact, a lot of them don’t 
even want to get up and talk about it because they know, Mr. 
Speaker, that agriculture is not going to survive unless we have 
a government in the province and in Ottawa that is going to 
look at what the concerns and the problems are and do 
something about it. 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

794 
 

(1545) 
 
They talk about the port of Churchill. They had one little thing, 
Mr. Speaker. And we can get on the Nielsen task force report, 
and if one ever looked at that task force report and looked at 
what is being proposed in it, we see that what that task force 
report was proposing is that agriculture in this province is going 
to suffer even more than it is suffering today. They are talking 
about increasing premiums for crop insurance. They talk about 
introducing variable freight rates. They talk about forcing rail 
branch line abandonment and cancel the grain cash advances. 
They want to undermine the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. 
Speaker, and they want to close down — that’s in the report — 
they’d like to close down the port of Churchill. They would like 
to do all of those things, and they suggest to the government 
that this is what should be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the government isn’t . . . They’re saying, 
we’re not going to do some of that and we are not going to 
consider that report. And one would wonder why you would 
bother to have a report like that. Why commission any kind of 
report if you’re not going to look at it or consider it? What they 
would like to do right now is say, we’re just going to put it on 
the shelf for a while until we think it is possible for us to go 
ahead with it, and then we’re going to implement every one of 
those items in that report. 
 
But they have to somehow get the heat off themselves, because 
it was put on them once that report was brought out. There’s no 
question that they felt the heat from it. So they announce a little 
bit of expenditure at Churchill, and it’s long overdue. And it 
wasn’t because this government did anything about it, and it 
wasn’t because the government in Ottawa did anything about it. 
They did it simply because of public pressure. 
 
And one has to look at organizations like the Hudson Bay Route 
Association. They worked hard to try and show the people that 
the port of Churchill is an important port in this province and 
for Saskatchewan people. It’s one of the closest ports for some 
of our importers of grain, like Poland and the Soviet Union. 
They would prefer to go to Churchill to pick up their grain, and 
we should have developed that port a long time ago, to have 
more capacity where we could fill that port with grain, and 
these ships can come in through the summer and pick it up. 
 
But no, they kept that port from being developed. That’s what 
Ottawa believed in doing, both the Liberal and the Conservative 
government — it didn’t matter which was in there; they 
wouldn’t listen. But they had organizations like the Hudson Bay 
Route Association that worked hard and they got some success 
out of it. And I think, Mr. Speaker, this government is going to 
realize eventually that people do have a voice and that they will 
speak out and that they will accomplish some of the things that 
they think need to be done in this province. They will 
accomplish that because they are going to work hard for it. 
 
They know that they can’t depend on this government to  

do it. This government will not do it on their own. They believe 
in getting rid of everything they could. That’s what they would 
like to do. And they don’t want to tell the people what’s really 
going on. 
 
That is the other unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker. They refuse to 
give information to the people of this province, the taxpayers of 
the province. They like to keep everything hidden, slide 
something in every once in a while that the people won’t realize 
is coming, and then they defend it and they say, well we can’t 
do anything about it; it’s in already. 
 
This government has proven over the past month that they will 
not give out any kind of information that will enlighten the 
public on what’s happening in the province. We can go to many 
areas and we can go at Health estimates that we’ve just gone 
through a while ago — the EPF funding. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister could have been 
straightforward and told the people of this province the federal 
government is proposing to cut back on the EPF funding, and 
that will mean that we are going to have some problems in this 
province. We are going to have some problems regarding 
keeping the health care system as we know it, keeping it to the 
level that it is. 
 
But no. Will the minister get out and say that? He tries to 
defend the federal government in saying, we don’t know what 
it’s going to cost us. It’s going to be about 9 million this year. 
But whatever it’s going to be next year, we’re not even going to 
talk about that. We’d just like to forget about that. We’ll worry 
about that when next year comes. 
 
He should be telling the people: this is what is being proposed; 
this is how it’s liable to affect our province over the next five 
years, and we have to do something about that. 
 
But the minister chose the other route. He chose to try to avoid 
telling the people of Saskatchewan just what is happening. And 
he continued to do that day after day, and week after week, 
refusing to give out any kind of information. And every 
member, or every cabinet member of that government is going 
to be the same. 
 
And it could be we’re going to be here for a long time if that’s 
the way they’re going to be dealing with agricultural issues, 
health issues, or any other issues that we have in this province. 
We will take the time in here to try and get that information to 
the public. We will work at it day after day and get out as much 
information as we can so the public of this province can know 
exactly what is happening, and that they can decide what kind 
of action they have to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to spend that time here. We are 
prepared to ask the questions. We would only hope that the 
minister would take the time to answer some of those questions, 
rather than refusing to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Thunder Creek talked about all 
the good things that they were doing for farmers. Well it’s not 
only farmers that are suffering; it’s business people that are 
suffering right now. All the people that are  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

795 
 

on welfare or on unemployment — they are not finding it easy. 
Everyone in this province is having difficulties. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the member his time 
has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to say 
to the hon. member for Pelly that his sudden interest in the 
public welfare is most touching. During the 11 years that they 
the NDP were in power, they talked about doing great things for 
the public, but I can remember some of the things that they did 
that they thought were great. 
 
For example, in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
supporting health care, and instead of supporting nursing 
homes, we built wonderful monuments to the NDP which are 
now liquor board stores. They came out and opened liquor 
board stores — 3 to $400,000 to put up a liquor board store 
while they had a moratorium on nursing homes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, moneys were available from Ottawa at that 
time. Cost-sharing arrangements were available. And did they 
go to Ottawa? No, Mr. Speaker, they did not. They took their 
dollars, our tax dollars, and they built liquor board stores — and 
they were proud of it. The then premier came out — a great 
fanfare, a great parade. And they condemn our government. 
They condemn the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, I ask you: the 
Conservative government has done more for the people of 
Saskatchewan in dealing with Ottawa than the NDP ever did. 
And that’s just one small example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Shaunavon likes to speak from his seat, as I’ve 
noticed. He cries and whines from his seat. Perhaps that gives 
us a definition of nine NDP in a basement — you call it a whine 
cellar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, and in constituencies all over 
this province, the Conservative government under Premier 
Devine has moved to bring money in from Ottawa that the NDP 
left alone. We brought in thousands and thousands of dollars, 
and we’ve worked it out, not through confrontation, Mr. 
Speaker, but rather through consultation — rather through 
consultation. 
 
We’ll work with the federal government. The NDP believe in 
grandstanding. They stand up and do chicken-clucking 
exercises. They stand up and hand socks out. They can’t talk to 
people. The Conservative government works with people. We 
do not believe in grandstanding. 
 
If you take a look at many of their federal members — and we 
don’t have many in Saskatchewan, but the NDP do have a 
couple, and one Mr. Nystrom in particular. He’s a master at 
grandstanding, and I’m sure that’s where the rest of the little 
chicken-cluckers here in the province have got their cue from 
and their grandstanding tactics. He gets up in the House of 
Commons and he talks about a parity Bill — let’s have parity. 
But he doesn’t say parity on what; he just says, let’s have 
parity. And he throws that word out to the public, and nobody 
knows what it means, and he  

causes a furore. And the NDP stand up in this House and yell 
and scream about parity and how Ottawa should do something. 
 
Our government is talking with Ottawa. We’re working 
programs out on crop insurance that are comprehensive, Mr. 
Speaker — comprehensive, long-term, and far-reaching. 
 
That same particular grandstanding M.P. gets up on a television 
station and proceeds to talk about the big, bad chemical 
companies that are ripping everybody off, and we should do 
away with patent rights. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s 
anybody in here that would disagree that patent rights have 
perhaps become too extensive and allowed chemical companies 
a monopoly situation. That same member, however, neglects 
the second part that’s involved with chemicals and chemical 
companies — and that’s product-specific registration. He goes 
on and on about patent laws, but then says product-specific 
registration is okay. And product-specific registration, Mr. 
Speaker, is something with indefinitely extends patent rights. 
 
So he speaks out of both sides of his mouth, or either face, 
depending on which crowd he’s talking to. But he grandstands 
again without understanding the basic concepts involved, and 
that’s because he’s been an M.P. for 20-some years and has 
never lived in the real world. And that’s the problem that we 
have with many of our NDP members in here today. They have 
never worked in the real world. They have not been part of it. 
They have never risked their money. They have never gone out 
and spent an honest day’s labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those same members sit there and sanctimoniously 
say, oh we’d go to Ottawa and fight for the farmers. But Mr. 
Speaker, would they accomplish anything? Has fighting ever 
accomplished anything? Confrontation tactics look great in the 
press, and they look great to the people out there that are 
watching their television sets, but they do not do justice to those 
same people. 
 
Anybody can pick a fight. Anybody can stand up and say, hey I 
don’t agree with you, and go on and on and on about any 
particular topic. But it takes a big man, it takes a man of 
understanding, a person of understanding, it takes women with 
courage and with integrity and with foresight to sit down and 
talk about their problems and, in mutual agreement, do what’s 
right for the people. Any fool can stand up and yell and scream, 
and the NDP are living testimony to that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our government, which is now under 
criticism by the NDP opposition in this motion today for not 
having gone to Ottawa, is responsible for working out 
arrangements with Ottawa in areas like nursing homes, in areas 
like Sask Housing, where Saskatchewan taxpayers would like to 
put up fewer dollars and the federal government would pick up 
more. We’re responsible for negotiating upgraders, where the 
federal government, ourselves, private industry, are partners. 
 
That’s consultation, not confrontation. And it’s tough to get that 
message out to the people, but we’re doing it, Mr.  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

796 
 

Speaker, and the polls show that we’re doing it. Consistently we 
have risen, time and again, on every poll that’s been done. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that ties into our agricultural 
programs, those programs that we’ve developed, trying to take 
some long-term, common-sense approaches to the problems 
that we found in agriculture today. And the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker, has gone along with us. They’ve talked to us, and 
they’ve agreed that you can’t have ad hoc programs every year. 
They’ve agreed that you can’t solve problems that are 
weather-related, that are long-term problems, by simply every 
year pouring more money into it, throwing some little programs 
here, throwing a program there, drawing lines. 
 
And today in a ministerial statement, the Minister of 
Agriculture got up and talked about crop insurance. And then 
the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg jumps to his feet, 
screeches and hollers, demands a bunch of answers to questions 
which were included in the ministerial statement to do with 
crop insurance. And that crop insurance agreement has been 
worked out in conjunction with other provinces and with the 
federal government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I’m trying to demonstrate here by these 
examples is that our government has been working, and has 
been consulting, and has tried to move in a direction that has 
some common thread to it. And it’s succeeding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our farmers out there today have got money to put their crop in 
the ground. Implement dealers have got money from the 
farmers for buying their badly needed parts for their equipment. 
Seed companies have got money from farmers through us. That 
helps keep their books balanced; that helps them employ 
people. Small business in general, Mr. Speaker, is dependent on 
agriculture across Saskatchewan, and they are experiencing the 
benefits of our programs. And I have to go back to my own 
constituency. 
 
(1600) 
 
In 1982, Mr. Speaker, when I was running for office, I could 
have had my pick of five or six empty buildings on the streets 
of Wadena or of Foam Lake or of Kelvington. Well today, Mr. 
Speaker, those buildings are all filled. They have businesses in 
them. They have businesses in them. And that’s something that 
only come about in the last three or four years. And that’s right 
across the whole province. And that wouldn’t have happened if 
we had a government that wasn’t standing up for rural 
Saskatchewan. That wouldn’t have happened if we had a 
government that was shirking its duty, as the NDP did. That 
wouldn’t have happened if we had a government that believed 
more in building great big liquor board stores than nursing 
homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those liquor board stores give the lie to the NDP 
when they talk about how much they cared for people and how 
much they did for Saskatchewan. They thought more about 
having great big openings so their premier at that time could 
come out and say, isn’t it wonderful; I’m here, folks; and cut a 
ribbon in front of a liquor board store. They thought that was 
wonderful; that  

was great. 
 
Three hundred to $400,000, a moratorium on nursing homes, no 
assistance for interest rates for farmers like myself who were 
just starting out — and the NDP say they were doing good 
things for Saskatchewan. I have to disagree with that. Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t support this motion. It just doesn’t make any 
sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk about working with the federal 
government, working with Ottawa, working with other 
provinces, I think we’ve led the way, Mr. Speaker. Other 
provinces are now copying many of the programs that we have 
brought into being. When you talk about working with Ottawa 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
member his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 
seems to be no rules whatsoever to this debate, so I suppose I 
can speak on whatever I choose. Everyone else has. It so 
happens, though, that I want to spend some time on the Nielsen 
report. It happens to be a subject of some importance. 
 
What the federal government has been doing is attempting to 
balance its budget at the expense of the provinces. And it is 
going to succeed. Particularly . . . There are fewer supine Tory 
governments around than there used to be. They are getting to 
be fewer and fewer. With a bit of luck there’ll be one left in 
western Canada and two left in the Maritimes and none in 
between. 
 
It is high time someone started speaking up for the taxpayers 
and someone started putting the interest of the provincial 
governments forward in a forthright fashion. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the Nielsen report and the failure of 
Conservative governments to take any stance . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 
member the allotted time has expired. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 5 — Hospital Expansion in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
move resolution no. 5: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Minister of Health and 
the Government of Saskatchewan for initiatives taken to 
expand hospitals in Saskatoon for the benefit of citizens in 
Saskatoon and in northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, during the 1970s, talk was cheap. Words more 
often than not replaced actions. Promises were made by the 
members opposite but they were never kept. The former 
government had a motto, Mr. Speaker, and that was: never do 
today what can be put off until tomorrow. They proved that by 
saying they’d fix the Regina water when it was politically 
expedient to do so. That’s when they were going to do it — 
when it was politically expedient. And they put lots of things 
off, that’s  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

797 
 

what they did. 
 
When this Progressive Conservative government assumed 
office in 1982, the people of Saskatchewan were made aware of 
a few shocking facts. The health care system in Saskatchewan 
was deteriorating. Under the previous administration, cancer 
treatment services were allowed to deteriorate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon seems to want to 
talk from his seat. I invite him to do so. He’s the one that stands 
up and crows and crows and crows about members from this 
side speaking out of turn or from their seats. Now he’s 
demonstrating that. If he wants to get into this debate, let him 
do it from a standing position instead of sitting from his seat. 
 
Staffing cuts in hospitals had taken place under the NDP. In 
1976, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they cut 400 nursing 
positions — they cut, they chopped 400 nursing positions in 
Saskatchewan. Construction had fallen behind. They put a 
moratorium on nursing homes, a moratorium on nursing home 
construction. 
 
Under the NDP, new technology had become a luxury. Mental 
health therapy was reduced to a skeletal operation. Potash and 
the family of Crown corporations had taken precedence over the 
health of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, this was all part of 
the NDP government’s commitment to health care — or 
non-commitment. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Opposition summed up his party’s 
position quite well when speaking on a radio open line show in 
1985. He explained that the Heritage Fund, the so-called 
Heritage Fund, was used to invest in the NDP family of Crown 
corporations and projects like Saskatchewan oil, Saskatchewan 
potash, and uranium mines. And it was not the belief that the 
money would and should be there in cash to build hospitals or 
nursing homes. That as on the CFQC open line show on 
November 7, 1985. That’s what the Leader of the Opposition 
said. 
 
In 1982 the people of Saskatchewan cast away the old and 
brought in the new, a government with fresh ideas and a desire 
to serve the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government recognizes the 
importance of protecting Saskatchewan people. This 
government is working to ensure Saskatchewan people from all 
walks of life are receiving the best possible health care. From 
new-born babies to senior citizens, all are being protected and 
protected equally through a commitment by the Premier and my 
colleagues to maintain and improve Saskatchewan’s health care 
system. This government is ensuring we have one of the best 
health care systems in the world, a system which provides a 
comprehensive range of services, services spanning both rural 
and urban areas of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my government is developing new and innovative 
responses to the needs of the 1980s and beyond. To tackle these 
challenges, government is not working alone. We’re being 
supported by all participants within the health care system in 
Saskatchewan, working  

together in a creative and meaningful way, and providing a 
level of health care unmatched anywhere in Canada. This is 
being achieved through responsible financial management and 
through a wide range of innovative programs and initiatives, at 
a cost which society can afford. 
 
This government, this Progressive Conservative government, 
intends to ensure that over the next five years residents of 
Saskatchewan are assured of unequalled health care facility 
construction and renovation. That is why this government has 
committed an additional 300 million to the health capital fund. 
We have laid the necessary foundations and have begun 
building new hospitals and nursing homes in Saskatoon and 
throughout this province. 
 
In 1984 we announced a five-year plan to build and replace 
over 1,500 special care home beds, special care home beds to 
help our elderly during their latter years. The previous 
administration, Mr. Speaker, had built only 245 nursing home 
units in a nine-year period. That averages out to 27 nursing 
home units per year — another example of too little too late. 
 
And why did the former minister, one Walter Smishek, put a 
moratorium on nursing homes? This Progressive Conservative 
government does not believe in placing moratoriums on health 
care and nursing homes. We have the following excerpt from a 
secret NDP memo back in those days. January 4, 1976 is the 
date on the memo. And they’re not proud of this but they should 
hear it again. It’s from W. Smishek, chairman of the treasury 
board, to H. Rolfes, minister of Social Services at that time. 
And it says, and I quote: 
 

Treasury board is seriously concerned about the level of 
construction occurring in the special care home sector. The 
level of activity proposed in the 1976-77 budgetary request 
would result in a surplus of beds without considering the 
impact of a home care program. Treasury board deferred a 
decision on the level of funding to be approved for this 
activity pending the review of more detailed information 
on all committed projects. Until such a time as the need for 
additional beds can be clearly identified and a suitable 
construction policy defined, a moratorium (a moratorium!) 
on further commitments should be enforced. 

 
This was written by the former NDP minister, chairman of the 
treasury board. 
 
They must have known at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the 
elderly population of Saskatchewan was increasing. They must 
have known the numbers. They can read numbers. At least, I 
would think they could. And they decided to put a moratorium 
on, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan can hardly 
believe that. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, another former member of the NDP 
administration who is now trying to make a Cinderella 
come-back, is quoted as saying: 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s that? 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

798 
 

Mr. Sandberg: — Well, he’s running in Riversdale against the 
sitting member. And what does he have to say about level 3 and 
4 nursing homes? He says in an article in Hospital Products and 
Technology, dated August/September edition, 1985, and the 
headlines says, “Building more institutions for the aged is road 
to disaster . . .” says the former attorney general of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I want to tell the senior citizens in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Centre, in fact all the senior citizens of Saskatoon 
and Saskatchewan, that the former attorney general says that 
building more level 3 and 4 nursing homes is not the route to 
go. That’s not the route to go, says the former attorney general, 
and he wants to be the Cinderella come-back story. Well, we’ll 
see if he makes a come-back. I’ll tell him that the seniors of 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan don’t believe that he stands for 
their best interests. 
 
Under the leadership of Premier Devine, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has built 433 special care home beds in Saskatoon 
alone, including the creation of a 24 million, 238-bed special 
care nursing home, the largest in Saskatchewan’s history. 
Unlike the previous NDP administration, this Progressive 
Conservative government is committed to health care for our 
seniors who now comprise over 12 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 
population. 
 
As I indicated earlier, in the constituency of Saskatoon Centre 
it’s estimated that there are well over 15 per cent of the 
constituency. So seniors are important to me as the member for 
that constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a PC government senior citizens are 
benefiting from a fair and equal health care system, one which 
is building and expanding new hospitals in Saskatoon. As a 
matter of record, $202.9 million worth of planned and ongoing 
hospital construction is taking place in Saskatoon today. St. 
Paul’s and University Hospital are currently being expanded 
and a new City Hospital will soon be constructed in Saskatoon. 
 
And I’d just like to go through those projects in some detail for 
the members of the Assembly. University Hospital, Mr. 
Speaker, is proceeding with a two-storey addition to 
accommodate approximately 300 medical, surgical beds at an 
estimated cost of 27.1 million, plus a new 44-bed psychiatric 
ward at $2.8 million and internal renovations to the old hospital 
of 5.3 million. Total grants will exceed $35 million. The net 
result will be the addition of 78 new beds at the University 
Hospital. 
 
And on the way down from Saskatoon on Monday morning I 
stopped and just drove around that complex. Mr. Speaker, there 
are three cranes now in process of putting up that new addition 
and it is indeed a welcome addition to University Hospital and 
welcomes by the people of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 
 
In the City Hospital, Mr. Speaker, which is located in the centre 
of the Saskatoon Centre constituency, it will proceed with a 
new 482-bed hospital at a cost in excess of 115 million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

(1615) 
 
Well I see the member for Regina North East is clucking from 
his seat again. He is the one who can sit down there and bellow 
and talk away; has no good suggestions to make. All they can 
do is detract and preach doom and gloom to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They have no suggestions for building and 
expanding, but they can sit in their chairs and talk and cluck 
like chickens and do all those silly things. That’s about the only 
thing they’re good for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back to City Hospital again. They will proceed, as 
I mentioned, with a 482-bed hospital at a cost in excess of $115 
million. Construction is expected to begin in the spring of 1988. 
A new psychiatric ward was completed in 1985, and this 
increases the psychiatric in-patient accommodation from 16 to 
25. The existing hospital is being upgraded pending completion 
of the new hospital. At that time the existing hospital will be 
demolished. Government grants will be 100 per cent of 
approved project costs 
 
Then there’s St. Paul’s Hospital on the west side of Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. It has begun construction of a $52.7 million 
six-floor addition, including an energy centre, materials 
management, emergency, out-patient, radiology, and critical 
care facilities for a final bed count estimated at 442. This 
increases the bed capacity by 112 from the current level of 330. 
Government grants will be 52.7 million. 
 
And one final note — the cancer clinic at the University 
Hospital site. Tenders for a new cancer clinic and research 
facility were received in February. A contract in the amount of 
$13 million has been awarded. The total project cost is expected 
to exceed $16 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, services within our hospitals are being 
upgraded through new equipment and additional staff also. 
Presently Saskatchewan has 21 per cent more nursing staff in 
our hospitals and 36 per cent more hospital beds per capita than 
the national average. On a nurses per capita basis we currently 
rank number two in all of Canada. 
 
Even with these impressive figures the Progressive 
Conservative government of Premier Devine is still making 
improvements. It is the goal of this government to ensure 
patients in Saskatchewan hospitals receive the best care and 
attention. To uphold this commitment, Saskatchewan’s Health 
minister recently announced an additional $100 million has 
been allocated to enrich hospital and special care home services. 
 
Patient care will be further improved through increased 
services, staffing, and equipment. Currently there are 3,400 
registered nurses in Saskatchewan hospitals and soon there will 
be close to 4,000. These measures will benefit people living in 
Saskatoon and throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP reduced patient-days in hospitals by 5 
per cent, causing 400 staff to lose their jobs throughout 
Saskatchewan hospitals in 19756. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is committed to bettering health  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

799 
 

services for Saskatchewan people, and the initiatives continue 
— establishment of a provincial chiropody or foot care program 
for seniors; a new pediatric unit to help sick children at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon; over $11 million in grants to 
organizations in support of handicapped in Saskatoon since 
1982 — many of these grants to better the health of 
handicapped individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, a new $17 million cancer clinic is 
being built in Saskatoon — and, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent 
financed by the Government of Saskatchewan. A new CT 
scanner for the people of Saskatoon to be located at St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon — and I’m proud that that piece of 
equipment is going in there. It was announced by the Premier. 
They’re being bought for six Saskatchewan hospitals from 
Canadian General Electric for $4.7 million. In exchange for the 
scanners, General Electric will undertake to market $4.7 million 
worth of Saskatchewan products over the next year. 
 
The first three scanners will go to Pasqua Hospital in Regina, to 
Regina General, and to St. Paul’s in Saskatoon. Three other 
hospitals will each receive a scanner over the next 18 months. 
So that’s indeed good news for the health care system of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 72 more psychiatric nurses in 
Saskatchewan since 1982, and the establishment of new 
legislation to uphold the rights of patients. By working with 
service organizations, the first eye bank in western Canada has 
been established right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Also it was this government that put an end to extra-billing. 
Where were the NDP? They had 20 years to do it. They didn’t 
do it; this government did it. And, Mr. Speaker, I quote the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s remarks on the Progressive 
Conservative government ending extra-billing. He said, and I 
quote, “I congratulate the Conservative government of 
Saskatchewan for doing so.” That was again on the open line 
show in Saskatoon on November 7, 1985. So even he admits 
that we did it, and they didn’t and wouldn’t. 
 
These are just a few examples of how the strong commitment of 
our government is protecting people from all walks of life in 
Saskatoon and throughout Saskatchewan. Children, the elderly, 
and families are all encompassed within this commitment, a 
commitment growing stronger every day, strengthened by 
leadership and vision — leadership which is responsive, 
responsible, and fair to the people of Saskatchewan; vision 
which is meeting the challenges of today and tomorrow. The 
leadership and vision of Premier Devine, the Minister of Health, 
and this Progressive Conservative government of Saskatchewan 
— leadership that has put action before words. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I again move the resolution: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Minister of Health and 
the Government of Saskatchewan for initiatives taken to 
expand hospitals in Saskatoon for the benefit of citizens in 
Saskatoon and northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Seconded by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon  

Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to second this 
motion. I think that this motion is one that all members from 
Saskatoon can take heart in. We certainly have went a great 
distance in Saskatoon with the health care facilities since we 
took office four years ago. 
 
In addition to all the things that have been mentioned earlier by 
the member from Saskatoon Centre, I would just like to point 
out and add to the record that there’s been an additional 3.5 
million, Mr. Speaker, just recently, to reduce the waiting lists in 
Saskatoon hospitals. This 3.5 million certainly will benefit the 
families by increasing surgery, day surgery, and the number of 
in-patients at the University and City Hospitals. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that this being over and above the recent 
$100 million announced by our Minister of Health, this 
additional 3.5 is in sharp contrast to the position taken by the 
NDP when they were in office. And I want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, their former minister of Health, Herman Rolfes, who 
has the gall to be running again in Saskatoon, his idea on 
waiting lists was as follows: on December 1, 1981, and I quote 
him, he says: 
 

In order to run an efficient hospital you must have a 
waiting list. 

 
And that is the contrast in the positions taken by their minister 
of Health and the positions taken by our Health department, and 
the Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that we must be commended for our position and 
certainly one must hold in some doubt the true heart of the NDP 
as it was in years gone by under their administration. They had 
run us, Mr. Speaker, to a position of being eighth out of 10 in 
health care spending per capita in Canada. Yet they had the gall 
to run elections or attempt to run elections on the health care 
issue, when they had ran us down to that position in Canada. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, our budgetary expenditures in the 
amounts of $1.2 billion, which is 11, $1,200 for every man, 
woman and child in Saskatchewan, are the highest that I’m 
aware of in the world. They’re the highest, certainly, in North 
America. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that our resolve on the 
health care issue must be commended and we must commend 
our Minister of Health and our government for the amount of 
bucks that we have put towards health care systems. 
 
Now certainly this wouldn’t have been necessary, Mr. Speaker, 
if the NDP had kept the health care system up in their 11 years 
of office, but over their last seven years they let it run down. 
They put a moratorium, as mentioned earlier by the member 
from Saskatoon Centre, on nursing home constructions. 
 
And I’d just like to tie that in, Mr. Speaker, what that does to 
the hospital situation, which is the subject matter of this motion. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

800 
 

About my first year in office we did a tour of both St. Paul’s 
and City Hospitals, and I remember Elmer Schwartz, the 
director of the City Hospital was telling us what the stacks were 
in his hospital with respect to geriatric type patients occupying 
his acute care beds. And at that time he had 15 per cent of his 
beds in City Hospital occupied by geriatric type patients who 
had entered the hospital, usually through the emergency doors 
with an acute problem; they had broken a hip or had come upon 
some other accident or illness to bring them into the hospital. 
 
The initial cause of their entry into the hospital had been cured, 
and when it came time to discharge them, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the NDP moratorium and their total lack of address to the 
nursing home situations, these poor people had nowhere to go, 
and they were left basically in the charge of the hospital 
administrator. He couldn’t do anything with them. He couldn’t 
turn them on the street. The nursing homes were full. In oft 
cases their children had been driven out of the province and 
they weren’t even in the province to look after mom and dad. 
So what he would have to do was keep these people in an acute 
care facility. And effectively, Mr. Speaker, this reduced the 
number of beds in Saskatoon; i.e., their lack of addressing the 
nursing home shortage caused problems in the acute care 
hospitals. And I think that if one looks at it that way, Mr. 
Speaker, one can see very well how their policy of moratoriums 
on nursing home constructions has had a terrible effect on the 
hospital bed situation in my city of Saskatoon. 
 
We certainly have, I would think, Mr. Speaker, done everything 
imaginable. Like our record in agriculture, our record in health 
is such that no one would believe that any government would 
have done more for health care than what we have done in our 
four years in office. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our aggressive nursing home construction 
policy ramifies in a very direct way on this motion and the 
number of hospital beds available. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
time will tell in Saskatoon, what people think of the three 
cranes that the member from Saskatoon Centre noticed when he 
came in today, that are under construction. There’s going to be 
a whole new City Hospital, and expansion is on the way in St. 
Paul’s. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what was brought out here in our Health 
estimates — the way the NDP elbowed out the nuns in what 
was formerly the Grey Nuns’ Hospital here in Regina, and what 
some believe to be their hidden agenda for the St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon. And certainly their lack of funding for 
hospitals in Saskatoon, I think, would add evidence to the 
possibility of them attempting to have all hospitals run by the 
provincial government. 
 
I think — and certainly all of us in Saskatoon know — that St. 
Paul’s Hospital has the best record of providing health care per 
bucks granted of any hospital in the province. It’s hard to 
compare them with the University Hospital, which has a 
teaching aspect to it as well. But certainly when compared to 
other hospitals which are not teaching hospitals, they have 
certainly done very well with the money they have received to 
run a hospital. 
 

I want to commend the people in St. Paul’s for the program that 
they have had, and ensure them that under a PC government we 
won’t be attempting to elbow out their administration and 
replace it with a government administration. Certainly it’s 
doubtful as to what their future would be with an NDP 
government, but I know that our government respects and 
values the administration brought to that hospital by the nuns. 
And certainly if all hospitals could squeeze a dollar as hard as 
they do in St. Paul’s, we would certainly have a lot more for our 
dollar here in Saskatchewan, out and out. 
 
(1630) 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that part of the Progressive Conservative 
government’s commitment to protecting hospitals has been the 
$100 million that I had mentioned earlier in my speech to enrich 
hospitals and special care homes, basically towards staffing. 
Some of it went towards the six CT scanners mentioned by the 
member from Saskatoon Centre. But I think that address to the 
problem, after we had established hospitals as one of our four 
pillars and had went the 40 miles on them with respect to 
construction, just goes to show that this government and our 
Minister of Health has far from left it be and is far from being 
satisfied with our health system the way it is, and is continually 
addressing the problems as they arise, both the $100 million 
address and the $3.5 million address that I mentioned when I 
just started up. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to point out that what we have is a 
Department of Health and the various hospitals. I imagine that 
about 85 per cent of the cost of health services goes to wages 
and salaries. And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s our duty 
to provide the hospitals with funding with as little strings 
attached as possible and allow the professionals, the hospital 
administrators and their boards, to decide on just how best that 
money should be spent. I think that we have an admirable 
record in that regard and that far be it from us to really decide 
how the hospitals should be run. 
 
It’s our primary job to provide hospitals with funding. I think 
we have a very commendable job with over $1 billion in 
funding on the health care scene in that regard. And I think that 
all of the administrators in Saskatoon and their administrative 
staffs must be commended. They’re the people at the controls, 
that make important decisions in health care. And as far as I can 
see, they have done a very good job. And I think we have done 
a very good job in providing them with the moneys that will 
allow them to make those discretionary spendings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s been mentioned earlier, the $17 million cancer clinic that is 
being built in Saskatoon. This one, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
point out for the people in Saskatoon and the northern areas, it’s 
100 per cent financed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And just while I’m on that, Mr. Speaker, I think for other 
members of the North, it basically goes that from Davidson 
north, clean up to Uranium City, the Saskatoon hospitals are the 
hospitals of last resort. When someone gets a very serious 
problem they wind up usually in one of those hospitals. And the 
Regina hospitals work from maybe Davidson south. 
 
And accordingly, all of this money that we talk about here  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

801 
 

that’s being poured into the Saskatoon hospital systems is not 
specifically for people in Saskatoon. Certainly the people of the 
North will be making use of the advanced technology and 
advanced diagnostic equipment and procedures that exist in 
Saskatoon. Should they find themselves in a grave situation or 
should they be unfortunate to catch cancer, then they would 
probably find themselves in the new cancer facility being built 
in Saskatoon. 
 
So these facilities, Mr. Speaker, have a far reaching range 
throughout northern Saskatchewan. And certainly they are not 
just political fodder for us members from Saskatoon, but I 
believe they are significant to all members of the public in 
northern Saskatchewan, because some day they may all be 
using those facilities. And I think that that should always be 
kept in light when addressing Saskatoon hospital construction. 
 
I believe Dagnone points out that something like 60 per cent of 
the people who come into his University Hospital are from 
outside of Saskatoon, from northern Saskatchewan. And when 
looked at in that regard, Mr. Speaker, that hospital would be of 
more use to people out of Saskatoon than actually the people 
right in Saskatoon. And I think that’s a statistic that stands 
behind the point I’m trying to make. 
 
We have the new pediatric intensive care unit for children at the 
University Hospital, Mr. Speaker. That is something that is new 
and certainly has been long overdue. I think that, as has been 
pointed out earlier and which was totally unnoticed by the NDP, 
we have an ageing population, Mr. Speaker, and the 
moratorium was a total denial of that fact. 
 
We have taken a number of steps, Mr. Speaker, that will help 
relieve the loads in hospitals and nursing homes, by our seniors’ 
programs which will go a long ways to try to keep seniors in 
their own homes as long as possible. Certainly most seniors 
want to stay there. But if circumstances are such that they need 
someone to come into their house once or twice a day or once 
or twice a week to make it possible for them to stay there, our 
government has went the 40 miles to try to help them to 
maintain themselves in their home. And that in turn, Mr. 
Speaker, has helped out the hospital and nursing home situation. 
 
And again, all of these health policies dovetail together and 
work towards an overall better health care system. And we can’t 
look at one in isolation from the other. 
 
And on that, Mr. Speaker, our grants to improve housing for 
seniors, there are senior citizens’ home improvement grants 
available to people with incomes less than $1,500 and up to — 
or pardon me; $15,000, Mr. Speaker — and up to $1,000 to 
improve their home, to ensure a higher quality of life for 
seniors. 
 
The income supplement for low income earners has doubled, 
Mr. Speaker, for couples; and an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 75 
per cent for seniors who are singles. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 
the largest increase ever, and that shines in comparison to the 
$5 increase which is all the NDP government can claim over 
their 11 years in office.  

It’s certainly a far cry for that and certainly a very worthwhile 
addressing to the seniors in this province, and something again 
that will help them stay in their homes, Mr. Speaker, and help 
take a load off of our nursing homes, and in turn our hospitals, 
as I’ve related earlier. 
 
Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, patients will receive better care 
and attention from our hospitals in light of our $100 million 
towards more staffing. The increase at the top is 421 positions, 
and currently there are 3,400 registered nurses in Saskatchewan 
hospitals. We have, Mr. Speaker — I’ll get into that a little later 
in my speech — we have the highest, in Saskatchewan, number 
of beds per capita. And I think that when we look at this, Mr. 
Speaker, the facts are that we lead Canada, and we have 36 per 
cent above the Canadian average in number of approved 
hospital beds per capita. 
 
Certainly we lead Canada as well; we have 21 per cent above 
the Canadian average in number of general hospital nursing 
staff per capita. So we can see here, Mr. Speaker, that in general 
nursing staff we have more than the Canadian average, and 
certainly in number of beds per population we have more than 
the Canadian average. And I think that that is something as 
well, Mr. Speaker, that we must commend our government on, 
and our Minister of Health on, is keeping up the funding and the 
beds and the staffing in hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out that what we have in 
Saskatoon is ongoing. You can drive to any of these locations 
and see what’s happening. You can go to St. Paul’s and see the 
construction. You can go to the University Hospital and see 
three of those big cranes swinging around, doing the 
construction. Everything is ongoing. 
 
The NDP would like to paint a picture that all of these sorts of 
proposals of the Devine government are just announcements 
and that there’s nothing to it, but unfortunately none of them 
come from Saskatoon. But if, perchance, they should get to the 
city, they will see what is in fact happening up there, and they 
will realize that these are ongoing construction projects. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it is a far cry from an 
announcement and a far cry from anything ever done under the 
NDP. The only thing that Saskatoon can claim under 11 years 
of NDP administration is the Sturdy Stone Building — Roy 
Romanow, 11 years, one building, named after themselves, no 
less. What we have in Saskatoon just in hospital construction 
alone, and I’ll leave everything else out — just in hospital 
construction — far outdoes them in four years from what they 
did in 11 years. 
 
And we look at the St. Paul’s Hospital expansion: it’s $52.1 
million project, total cost; 100 per cent of the construction costs 
are paid for by the provincial government; 300 new permanent 
jobs — new jobs for janitors to nurses; 8 new operating 
theatres, Mr. Speaker; one ENT room; one ophthalmology 
room; two . . . (inaudible) . . . rooms — I’m shot on my 
pronunciation here; two endoscopy rooms; one orthopedic 
room; and one laser procedure room, Mr. Speaker; 105 new 
hospital beds — the first expansion since the hospital was 
opened  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

802 
 

in 1963, Mr. Speaker, together with the new CAT scan X-ray 
machine, the first for St. Paul’s Hospital. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s just one hospital I went through, and it just gets better. 
 
At the cancer clinic, which isn’t a hospital, but it’s $16.1 
million project, a new 80,000 square foot building to replace the 
30,000 square foot existing building; a new high and low 
energy treatment facility; a low energy accelerator, six Mev 
(million electron-volts), whatever that means, Mr. Speaker; two 
high energy accelerators 20 Mev; new processing labs and 
treatment rooms. A guy’s got to have a medical degree, Mr. 
Speaker, to read what’s happening in the treatment rooms, but 
the figures make sense. A new research and administration 
areas will all be included in the new cancer clinic, Mr. Speaker. 
And as I said, it just gets better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we got university hospital expansion. That one is 
$30.4 million, and that’s where we find the three cranes in 
Saskatoon; 140 new permanent jobs; 78 new hospital beds; new 
teaching and research facilities; and the City Hospital — that’s 
the biggest one of them all, Mr. Speaker — 120 million 
smackeroos for a brand new hospital; 510 new beds and new 
permanent jobs. 
 
And when they ask, Mr. Speaker, why you’d build a new 
hospital when you have an old one — but again a figure I 
pointed out earlier — 85 per cent of the cost of health care’s 
wages. And that works out to three years operational, Mr. 
Speaker, would equate to the capital cost of a hospital. And 
thus, if you say that a hospital has a 30-40 year life expectancy, 
any efficiencies that can be brought into the hospital system 
through the design of the hospital — if, in fact, three years of 
operational budget would equate to the entire construction cost 
of the project — then any efficiencies that you could work into 
a new building by design would pay for themselves many times 
over in the long run of things, in wider hallways, wider doors, 
or whatever you can work into a hospital for a better design. 
 
And certainly this is long-term planning and good planning for 
the city of Saskatoon. It’s something that I said earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, would benefit all people in northern Saskatchewan. 
The University Hospital is our prime research hospital and 
training hospital, and in that respect it benefits all of 
Saskatchewan, but primarily northern Saskatchewan will 
benefit greatly from these three new hospital expansions. 
 
Our nursing home construction program could be described as 
nothing but aggressive, Mr. Speaker, and that’s going to take a 
load off of the acute care beds and allow more beds to be used 
by acute care patients. We have the largest nursing home 
project in the history of Saskatchewan going up, going under 
construction, in the Fairview constituency. And as mentioned 
earlier, all over Saskatchewan — Moosomin and Lashburn and 
on and on and on — there’s these nursing homes going up 
which are going to take the load off of the existing hospitals in 
Saskatoon and, in the end, provide much better health care 
under our government than what was provided under the NDP. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, with pleasure I second the  

motion of the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
a few remarks on this motion. And although I think it is clear by 
the remarks of the two members who have spoken — the mover 
from Saskatoon Centre and the seconder from Saskatoon 
Eastview — that what they say clearly cannot be substantiated 
to any great extent by what the facts really are. 
 
And it’s interesting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There they 
go again. You get a member of the opposition up, and the 
majority of 54 members have got to yell and scream and try to 
get the member to not be able to have his say. If that’s the way 
they want to carry on, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to wait and be 
quiet until they settle down. And now that they have settled 
down I will continue with my remarks. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting when one follows a debate and 
listens to the members opposite that they fail to talk about what 
the real issues are in health care. Both of the members from 
Saskatoon talked about leadership and vision. Well let me tell 
you what this Conservative leadership and vision have brought 
about in this province. 
 
In the very city of Saskatoon, where the two members are from 
who have just spoken, this leadership and vision on the part of 
the Premier and the Minister of Health have brought about 
8,800 people on waiting lists waiting to get into a hospital bed. 
Now I don’t know if ever in the history of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, there have been anywhere waiting lists of this 
magnitude. And they stand up, and they try to claim what a 
great job this government has done in four years. 
 
Well I want to say that if 8,800 people, sick people, waiting to 
get into a hospital bed is a good job, I would most certainly hate 
to see a bad job. That is not a leadership envision, Mr. Speaker, 
that is simply four years of neglect; four years of trying to 
govern by polls; four years of weak leadership resulting in a 
situation of crisis which now this government is trying to bail 
itself out of by making all kinds of announcements, in all kinds 
of fields, to try to recoup some political gains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a government of failure. The 
member from Rosemont holds up the annual report of the 
potash corporation. Well there is a perfect example of the 
failure of this government. Prior to 1982, Mr. Speaker, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made a great deal of 
money and paid to the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think the member would have 
much difficulty in relating potash to the motion that’s before the 
Assembly, and I’d ask him to get back to the subject. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, potash and revenues from 
potash contributed a great deal towards funding in the 
provincial treasury and helped pay for health care  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

803 
 

funding and health care programs. And what I’m saying is that 
prior to 1982 revenue earnings, corporations like the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan made large profits. Those profits 
were taken in as dividends to the treasury, Mr. Speaker, and that 
helped to pay for health programs and education and many 
other kinds of programs that the people of this province 
appreciated and wished they still had at the quality level that 
they used to have. 
 
The member from Rosemont holds up the potash corporation 
which shows once again, in the fourth year in a row, that under 
this government and its mismanagement that potash corporation 
has lost money. And instead of having those dividends coming 
from the potash corporation to help pay for some of the needed 
services, they have run it into the ground, just like they have run 
the health care system into the ground and now, prior to an 
election, try to make all kinds of announcements to try and save 
their political hide. 
 
Eight thousand eight hundred people on a waiting list in 
Saskatoon hospitals, Mr. Speaker, is nothing to be proud of. It is 
nothing to be proud of. It should never have happened. It only 
happened because they forgot that they had a responsibility for 
four years as a government, and only realized it on the eve of an 
election. 
 
We have had four years of neglect, and now they are bearing 
the fruits. And that’s why the Premier again and again and 
again, when he is on the verge of calling an election, turns 
around and runs away — because he’s afraid to do it, because 
he knows that the same thing as happened in Prince Edward 
Island is going to happen here when he finally screws up his 
courage and calls that election. 
 
One of the important components in health programs . . . If the 
member from Weyburn will settle down and stop his nattering 
and chattering, I will continue. He doesn’t come in here often, 
but when he does, he tries to make a lot of noise from his seat, 
disrupting the proceedings of the House. But if he is prepared to 
be quiet, I will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the very foundations of the health care 
system across this country is the EPF program — established 
program funding. Through that program, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government made it possible across this country to have 
a certain standard of health care no matter what province you 
may be living in at any particular time. 
 
The federal government has now announced, made it very clear 
to that Minister of Health and that Premier, that they are going 
to cut back established program funding by over $2 billion by 
1990. And this government has yet to this day to make a 
statement on it with any kind of strength and determination and 
to tell the federal government that that’s unacceptable. 
 
We are told by the Canadian Hospitals Association that that 
may lose Saskatchewan in the area of $153 million, and that 
minister and that government remain silent because they do not 
want to tell the federal government that they’re wrong. And I 
tell them, and they should listen, that they should correct the 
error of their ways. 
 

And if they didn’t believe it before, they should believe it now, 
because they just had a Conservative government in eastern 
Canada that got defeated defending the federal Conservative 
government and the Prime Minister, who is Mulroney. 
 
If they persist in this kind of attitude, Mr. Speaker, they are 
most surely going to be going down the same road when they 
call the election. 
 
I really believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s totally unacceptable for 
this government not to take a strong position on what Michael 
Wilson has said in his budget, on what the Nielsen report says 
in the task force report as it applies to established program 
funding. I think it’s unacceptable for this government to ignore 
that and let the federal government continue in its merry way, 
cutting back this funding for health and post-secondary 
education in such a massive, massive way. 
 
I want to tell the members who spoke on this resolution that 
they should also not neglect one other thing. Buildings alone are 
not good enough. Whether it’s a school without teachers or a 
hospital without adequate staff, if that’s the kind of approach 
that the government takes, that’s not good enough. And they 
only need to look at even comments made by Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, who have said it very clear last weekend 
at their annual meeting, and I quote: 
 

Hospital expansion should be curtailed until hospitals have 
enough money to operate properly. 

 
All over this province, Mr. Speaker, hospitals have had to hire 
professional fund raisers, they have had to run lotteries, they 
have had to get revenues from Nevada tickets, because this 
government has not provided adequate funding. And they want 
to stand up and boast about that. Well, I’m prepared to let them 
boast about that. That’s a choice that they can make and they’re 
quite capable of making it. 
 
What I’m saying is that the voters of Saskatchewan and the 
citizens of Saskatchewan will have no part of it. It is not right 
that the hospitals in this province need to be able to shore up 
their funding by going through fund raising programs such as 
Nevada tickets and professional fund raisers and sending letters 
to people who just leave the hospital, saying, you were just in 
the hospital; please send us money because the provincial 
government, although it funds hospitals, hasn’t provided us 
enough. That’s what’s happening. That’s what’s gone and 
happened in our health care field. 
 
Buildings aren’t enough. If you’re going to build buildings, 
members of the treasury benches, and not provide adequate 
staff, as you have not provided, to get the job done in those 
buildings, you will have failed again as you have failed in the 
last four years. It has got so bad that every sector in the health 
care field has now said to the government that they’re wrong. 
Even the Saskatchewan Medical Association has said, and I 
quote again from their annual meeting: 
 

Doctors should abandon their traditional allegiance to the 
Progressive Conservative Party  

  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

804 
 

because of the latest dispute with the government. 
 
They have alienated everybody in the health care field because 
of their neglect. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that will 
not be soon forgotten. 
 
Now the member stood up and talked about all the additional 
beds that have been built. Well I want to put on the record a 
letter which I just received today. It so happens, Mr. Speaker, 
that the issue that we see in Saskatchewan has gone far afield 
because even people in Calgary, because that’s where this letter 
came from, know about it. And I got this letter from a young 
couple in Calgary addressed to the Regina Assessment and 
Placement Service, with copies to the Premier and copies to 
myself as well as other people. And let me tell you what that 
letter says, and I think it tells the story clearly. It says: 
 

I am writing this letter in regard to my father . . . 
 
And I am going to leave out the names because I don’t think it 
will be appropriate to use them. 
 

I am writing this letter in regard to my father who has been 
. . . 

 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member from 
Weyburn yells in somebody else’s seat now, Mr. Speaker, not 
wanting this debate to continue. Obviously he is a little stung by 
what the facts really are. Now if he wants to continue, if the 
member from Weyburn and Turtleford want to continue yelling 
from their seats, that’s fine with me. But it doesn’t do much for 
this House nor does it do for their own image very much. 
 

I am writing this letter in regard to my father who has been 
in the Regina General Hospital since the middle of January 
this year. (That’s a long time, Mr. Speaker.) As you are 
aware my sister and I both live in Calgary and the only 
family in Regina is my sister (and I will not mention the 
name) who is totally blind. (This sister) . . . has had the 
responsibility of Dad and during the past year has had 
extreme difficulty looking after him due to his health. Dad 
has had numerous strokes and in January collapsed at 
home and the emotional trauma for (the sister) was very 
extreme. 
 
The family was led to believe that Dad, who is in his 80th 
year, was a top priority to be placed in the Regina (blank) 
senior citizens’ home when his health stabilized enough to 
be released from the hospital. There is no way that my Dad 
could move back home as it is a physical impossibility for 
(the sister) to give him the care that he requires. 
 
I believe that Dad as a native-born Saskatchewanite and a 
resident of Regina since 1940 deserves more consideration 
than the assessment and the placement service is giving. 
Prior to his recent hospitalization we were told that Dad’s 
level of care was not severe enough to place him in the 
senior citizen home. Since his stay in the hospital his level 
of care has been reassessed and we were told admission to 
the . . . home was imminent. 
 

(My sister) phoned today. She had a call from a Social 
Services worker (one of the member from Rosemont’s 
people) and was advised that he could not be admitted to 
the . . . home now as he was bumped off the admittance list 
and the person who replaced him was more in need and 
was a local resident. 
 
I don’t know what this implies — “that Dad is not a local 
resident and not in need.” It is not that Dad has not had his 
application in for placement. His initial application early in 
the 1980s was lost by the assessment and placement 
service and a new application was submitted in 1985. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the nature of the problem that exists there. 
The Minister of Health will get this because I’m writing him a 
letter to which I will attach this and ask him to look into it, and 
I know that he will. 
 
But the point is that sons and daughters in Calgary now looking 
for a job and found a job in Calgary, even though things are 
difficult there, should not have to be concerned about their 
80-year-old father who’s been in a hospital bed since January 
because he cannot get a bed in a nursing home because of the 
neglect of this government. 
 
That’s the situation that’s there. And I could continue on with 
more, Mr. Speaker, that is attached to this letter which I 
received this morning, but I don’t think the time today will 
present this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the arguments that the members make in this 
debate are arguments that don’t hold any water. The fact of the 
people who have felt the pain out there tells you that the 
problem is there and all the poll taking and politicking of this 
government is not helping them, and the people will not forget 
it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the motion does 
not deal with the real issue, I want to move the following 
amendment, seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Shaunavon: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
Regrets that the provincial government’s underfunding of 
hospitals has caused a severe nursing staff shortage; regrets 
that the current provincial budget contains inadequate 
funding for hospitals and no funding for hospital 
construction; and regrets that the provincial government 
has failed to oppose federal cut-backs to basic health care 
services. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The debate continues concurrent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. speaker, I have about 30 seconds to 
deal with this most important issue. And I must say that I’m 
surprised. And what an irony that we would be in the Assembly 
today, a day after the doctors demanded the resignation of the 
Minister of Health, and  
  



 
April 22, 1986 

 

805 
 

this arrogant government is bragging about how well they’re 
doing in health care — how well they’re doing in health care. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker — and the members can shout 
from their seats all they want to try to stifle the debate in this 
Assembly. I say this is an arrogant government that pats 
themself on the back at the same time as we have 8,000 people 
waiting for beds in Saskatoon, the very place that they’re 
bragging about doing a good job. 
 
Now I would say to you that we have a great problem of 
credibility and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I have many more 
things to say about the disaster in health care. We will be doing 
it in estimates tomorrow, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


