


















































June 12, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 12, 1986 
 
 

1925 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, yesterday I started asking you 
about the Nielsen task force report and you assured the 
Assembly that . . . When I asked you about the 
recommendations . . . We were going down the list. On the first 
one: does the Government of Saskatchewan support the Nielsen 
report recommendation to have farmers forced to change from a 
cash basis of accounting to accrual? – and you said, definitely 
not; you don’t support that – and then kind of made the 
statement that we shouldn’t be using agricultural estimates to 
talk about the Nielsen task force report. Well I want to tell you, 
Mr. Minister, when you have a blueprint for the future that’s put 
together by the Tory party, for the Tory party in Ottawa, that 
has some very, very serious implications for farmers – I want to 
go through about 12 more short, quick questions that really 
concern me and disturb me – that if they’d be implemented, that 
would be the end of farmers as I know and the ones I associate 
with. That’s something we couldn’t live with in my generation. 
 
I really appreciate your stance as Saskatchewan’s spokesman 
for agriculture, that you don’t agree with the accrual basis for 
accounting, because that to me would spell an increase, that 
could result in an increase of 50 per cent on our income tax at 
least, if the farmers won’t be able to take care of that aspect. So 
I appreciated your straight, forthright answer on that. 
 
And I want to now go through some of the other issues. And the 
second one: do you support other tax changes that the Nielsen 
task force recommended? And on that list are four more issues 
as far as changes that that group of Tories that put together that 
set of recommendations. And they said that, number one, you 
have to abolish the five- to six-year block averaging that 
farmers can get involved in; number two, elimination of the 
flexible livestock inventory accounting, that has been a real 
advantage to the people in the livestock industry; and then the 
one that so many people use, and that is the deferral of income 
on forced destruction of livestock. You know, they can defer 
the income to a year when they repurchase some or defer it to 
future years. And the fourth one that concerned me, of that little 
package of tax increases that Nielsen recommended, or tax 
changes, is in . . . And I think this is probably the most 
important one of all for Saskatchewan, and that is the abolishing 
the right of deferral of income from grain sales. You know, 
close to the end of the year the farmer adds up how things were 
this year compared to last year, and sometimes does a deferral 
to the following year on his sales. 
 
So I’d just like a commitment from you that you have the same 
opinion as you did as far as the accrual method of calculating 
their tax. You said you are definitely against that. What is your 
position as far as these changes and how it would affect the tax 
picture that farmers have come  

to live with and appreciate and understand, that that is their part 
of the bargain as far as the income tax structure is concerned? 
So maybe a quick comment on that and we could go on with a 
few more issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am in favour of any 
tax changes that allow farmers to have advantages and to 
encourage them. With respect to these income tax changes, I 
find it a little bit strange because the hon. member questioned 
the income tax changes that I’ve just introduced – in fact we 
changed today. And he said that he didn’t think these were a 
really good idea, because they only help those that had income. 
And now when the Nielsen tax force talks about, we’re going to 
change some income tax, then he’s against it. So he’s kind of 
sitting on both sides of the fence. 
 
Why don’t you recommend that they cancel all these tax 
changes and come out with a subsidy for low-income farmers? 
That would be more consistent with the kinds of thing that you 
normally do because for the last couple of days in estimates, 
you have not been in favour of income tax deductions for 
farmers. And you’ve said that very clearly. And the member 
from Quill Lakes said the same, that you are not in favour of it. 
Now when the Nielsen task force says that they were going to 
examine them, you’re quite concerned. Well I don’t think you 
can have it both ways. Either you’re in favour of it or you’re 
not. 
 
I’m not in favour of them because I believe the income tax 
system should be used to allow farmers to have as much 
incentive to invest as possible. And that’s my position. I have 
encouraged them to reduce the tax on farm fuel, take the capital 
gains tax off farm land – the biggest tax change in 
Saskatchewan’s history with respect to the federal government. 
I’m in favour of those changes and the changes that I have made 
to allow them to have $25 a head tax break, or $3 a head; all 
those things apply to the very people that I think are important. 
So I would not be in favour of these kinds of changes. I’m in 
favour of the kinds that we’ve had. I’m in favour of the tax 
breaks that the federal government has already given. 
 
But I haven’t spoken on both sides of the issue saying one time 
that I’m in favour of it and the next time I’m not. So I mean I’d 
like to know what your position is. Are you in favour of income 
tax breaks? If you are, then say so. If not, then you’re going to 
have to correct all the things you’ve been saying for the last two 
days. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a series of questions here that I want to 
know where you, as our Minister of Agriculture, and you, as 
our Premier, stand on the Tory policies and the Tory changes 
that are recommended from Ottawa. And I’m saying that 
Nielsen’s report recommended those changes; and the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, and I as the 
agriculture critic for our party, want to know where you stand 
on those issues. You say that you don’t support those issues. I’ll 
put a big “no” on beside there saying that those are issues you 
stand up and will not support. And I appreciate that because 
farmers are concerned with the present system and the structure 
that’s in place. 
 
Drawing into another argument, I was saying that if the  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1926 
 
 

province is going to spend 450, 500, 200, 300 million; however 
much money you want to put, $60 million, whatever price tag 
you put on it – I’m saying that new money spent in agriculture 
as far as the livestock industry is concerned, new money you’re 
spending. I have no problem with the position take on that. The 
money could better be directed to help those stay in business. 
These are programs that we now have, that we now enjoy, and 
that are in place. And I’m wondering when your government 
and your friends in the PC government recommends those be 
changed. I wanted that answer; you gave me the answer. 
 
Don’t worry about trying to defuse the issue. You’re great at 
that. You want to skip around and get away from where you 
really stand, but the book’s been published on where the Tory 
party stands and the Conservative position – Nielsen’s report. 
And those recommendations are far-reaching. 
 
The next one, the sixth item that I’m concerned about does the 
Government of Saskatchewan oppose or support the Nielsen 
recommendation to scrap the prairie grain advance payment 
program? When the crops are in the bins, and the bins are full 
and the farmers aren’t selling their wheat, and they get a cash 
advance – where do you stand on the cash advance program? 
Straight out question, simple as can be. Don’t deflect from the 
answer. Let’s deal with this topic right here. Where do you 
stand on the cash advance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
asked me not to deflect at all from the answer. I won’t deflect if 
he won’t deflect. I guess we can play by the same rules. 
 
I introduced a brand-new cash advance system in the province 
of Saskatchewan – introduced it based on the principle of cash 
advance. And you’re asking me where I stand on cash advances. 
When you were in power for 11 years you never introduced 
anything associated with a cash advance for the livestock 
industry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you didn’t. Mr. 
Chairman, this is the first one ever in Saskatchewan, and the 
first one in Canada, and we introduced it. And he’s asking me 
where I stand. 
 
The individual a little earlier was all against the universal 
systems: universality in terms of cash advances; being able to 
borrow money at low interest rates. Wasn’t fair, they said. Zero 
interest or any interest, at 6 per cent, zero per cent, and they 
were against it. And now they’re asking me my position when 
I’ve introduced a brand-new one. I mean it’s . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
can only say that I favour the cash advance system; I introduced 
a new cash advance system; I introduced a farm production loan 
program at 6 per cent which is universal, based on the same 
principles. We’ve got three of the best cash advance systems 
you’ll find any place in Canada or its history, right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So you want to know my position? 
Just look at the record. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You still haven't told us if you’ve instructed and 
used your office to influence the federal government on 
cancelling the cash advance program. Can Saskatchewan afford 
to pick up all these programs that  

are in place now that the federal Conservatives are 
recommending that it be removed? And the question is simple: 
do you favour it or don’t you? You should have put a yes or no 
on this one. 
 
You haven't made a statement public. You have never, since the 
Nielsen task report has been out, have you made a statement 
where you stand on that report. And so tonight in agricultural 
estimates, it’s time we try and nail jelly to the wall. And you try 
and get an answer from somebody that’s a cheer-leader. 
 
So you talk about everything else when the Nielsen task report 
says that every fall when harvest is due, if the farmers have 
some wheat, we’re not going to put up any more bucks. That’s 
what the Nielsen task force report says. And I’m asking you, are 
you for it or against it? Should I put a yes or no beside that one? 
The farmers want to know. 
 
You say you support the cash advance system. Tell your friends 
in Ottawa so they don’t change that one, because that’s slated 
for a change according to the Nielsen task force report. And 
that’s going to cost agriculture in Saskatchewan a lot of money. 
You can defuse the issue. You can talk about everything else 
but talk about what your brothers in Ottawa are doing and what 
their recommendations are. 
 
The next one is even worse. Does the Government of 
Saskatchewan support or oppose the elimination of the federal 
fuel tax rebate on farm fuel which is recommended in Erik 
Nielsen’s report? 
 
Now you think that’s a joke. But you’re transferring one dollar 
after the other back to the province, and you’re unloading and 
unloading programs. And can we afford to pick those up? 
They’re talking about taxing that program. Where do you stand 
on that one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is asking 
again whether this government believes in taking the taxes off 
gasoline and farm fuel. And all he has to do is look at the 
election in 1982 and know that that was the number one issue, 
or the second most important issue to help people all across the 
province. 
 
Then he looks at the biggest farm fuel rebate in the history of 
Saskatchewan, which was introduced, and he asks me whether I 
believe we should take the tax off farm fuel, diesel fuel, 
gasoline, or anything. 
 
Again I go back and I just ask the hon. member to look at the 
record. You are, sir, you are what you do. You are what you do. 
 
We have done these things – cash advances, brand-new ones, 
supported them, taken the tax off diesel fuel, taken the tax off 
gasoline, convinced the federal government . . . Imagine he’s 
asking this question. As an agriculture critic he’s asking me 
whether I favour it. And he’s known that I have gone to Ottawa, 
spoke in this legislature and encouraged the federal government 
to take the tax off farm fuel. And I’ve got it off farm fuel for the 
first time in history. And he asks me, are you in favour of it? 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1927 
 

I mean, you must have a little bit more respect for the people of 
Saskatchewan and this legislature to get into questions and say, 
am I in favour of a mortgage program for homeowners at 13 
and a quarter. Why don’t you ask me if I’m in favour of that? 
For Heaven’s sakes, I mean, that’s the things that we 
introduced. 
 
The line of questioning, Mr. Chairman, has nothing to do with 
the estimates. It’s nothing to do with what we’re doing. He’s 
asking me questions that I’ve already endorsed. I’ve convinced 
the federal government to do these very things and he says, are 
you in favour of it? Quite frankly, somebody in public school 
could be coming up with more important questions and direct 
questions with respect to agricultural policy. 
 
Of course, my friend, I’m in favour of cash advances. I 
introduced them here. Of course I’m in favour of fuel rebates 
and taking the tax off farm fuel. Of course I’m in favour of 
taking the capital gains tax off farm land. None of those were 
ever done until I got here. They weren’t done. And as a result, 
people appreciate those things and you can see it here. And he’s 
asking . . . I suppose that if you want to look at all the things 
that we’ve done in agriculture, you could ask me and I’ll just 
keep saying, you bet – and that’s why I’m here and you’re over 
there. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That’s great, because I appreciate you coming 
clean on this. There’s a report that’s in the Deputy Prime 
Minister’s hand that your people – your people, your friends, 
your supporters – your people wrote and tabled that had 13 
issues on there that are very unlucky for Tories – and maybe 
that’s why you’re so popular. 
 
Maybe that’s why you’ve called an election in April, and June, 
and last September, or whenever. Maybe that’s why you’re the 
longest-sitting Premier in post-wartime years – the longest time 
around in one term. You’ve taken advantage of that. Maybe 
that’s why . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
(1915) 
 
I’m at question 8; I’m going through to question 13 no matter 
what you say about these questions because the people want to 
know where you stand on the Nielsen report. The Nielsen report 
is a document . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s your point of order? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I believe the Nielsen report and with all its 
implications is not directly related to Agriculture estimates. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I disagree with you. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Well, then I would ask you therefore to 
move your line of questioning on to Agriculture estimates and 
off the Nielsen report, unless you can specifically direct, tie in 
questions to Estimates. Otherwise I’ll have to rule your 
questions out of order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I intent to ask questions that  

relate to Saskatchewan farmers, and the only one that’s 
speaking for Saskatchewan farmers in Ottawa is our Minister of 
Agriculture and our Premier. We’ve only got one, and we 
should have two. We should have a Minister of Agriculture and 
we should have a Premier. 
 
And I want to tell you that it’s important to me and it’s 
important to the farmers of Saskatchewan whether we have an 
elimination of the federal fuel tax, and whether we have farm 
improvement loans, and whether we have a recommendation to 
get rid of the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration). Those recommendations are real to farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and they make up an integral part of the farmers’ 
income. And I intend to ask these questions, and I intend to put 
on the record where our Premier and our Minister of 
Agriculture stand on issues that affect farmers. That’s what I’m 
talking about. 
 
That’s what I’m talking about, and if you want to switch my 
light off, switch it off. Go ahead. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I repeat, once again, my ruling that 
if your questions are not related to Agriculture estimates, they’ll 
be ruled out of order, number one. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I intend to talk about issues that are related to 
farming, Mr. Premier, and as far as I’m concerned . . . Do you 
have a public opinion on PFRA? The Nielsen report said 
they’re going to recommend cancelling the PFRA program – 
gone; the systems they’ve done in engineering; the drainage 
systems. Are you in favour of that one? You can handle a 
couple at a time. 
 
We haven't heard you raise any objections publicly to the 
proposal made by your brothers, the PCs in Ottawa. And do you 
want to denounce here and now that the stabilization fund, the 
western grains stabilization fund, is a bad idea? We’ve talked 
about it today. On a number of times we’ve discussed the 
western grains stabilization fund. And I want to know, will we 
have that abandoned if the federal government has its way, or 
are you going to stand up and fight for Saskatchewan? That’s 
point number three. 
 
And the fourth one I’m talking about: does the Tory 
government of Saskatchewan support or oppose the 
recommendations of the Nielsen report calling for farmers to 
pay even higher crop insurance premiums? That’s an issue that 
affects us directly; that’s an issue that Saskatchewan agriculture 
depends on to guarantee their income. Are you in favour of 
doubling the premiums like the Nielsen report says should be 
done? And I think those are issues that are important to farmers 
across Saskatchewan. If the chairman is afraid of sensitive 
political issues and you want to rule them out of order, I’ll fight 
with you on that one. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Is the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg questioning the impartiality of the 
Chair? Is that what you are questioning . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Another comment like that and I’ll move to the 
next questioner. I do not appreciate members dragging the 
Chair into their questions, and that’s the second time you’ve 
done that since we moved to Agriculture estimates. 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1928 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the entire 
Assembly believes that the Chairman is impartial. I will address 
those three things. I want to just add one thing with respect to 
the whole question of tax reform, and the whole idea of making 
changes and modifications to reform systems. 
 
I believe that, as the Premier of Manitoba has put many times, 
we need to examine the entire tax system in Canada, and I 
endorse that. I believe that we have initiated reforms, and 
there’s more to come, and we should be initiating reforms. Fair 
enough? I mean, I think we both agree on that. 
 
With respect to making modifications, we have made changes 
in crop insurance. We have made changes with respect to a 
disaster mechanism. We have made changes with co-operation 
with respect to the kind and size of payment of the western 
grains stabilization program. We have initiated co-operative 
changes with respect to irrigation studies associated with PFRA, 
and there may be more to come. 
 
So I mean, can you only live in the past? I mean, when we were 
looking at making changes, I certainly support what the PFRA 
has done, but I wouldn’t be above seeing us making 
modifications and changes to make sure we have more research 
money on water management in PFRA. And I believe that’s a 
good thing to look at and examine, and I think that you could 
endorse that. 
 
With respect to grain stabilization programs, we argued hard to 
change that so that we would have more money spent out here, 
and I believe you think that’s a good idea. And with respect to 
crop insurance premiums, we’ve redesigned the crop insurance, 
and we’ve made some modifications that are generally popular, 
certainly an awful lot more money. 
 
I wouldn’t endorse the doubling of premiums unless I could see 
corresponding benefits coming to farmers. I wouldn’t rule out 
that we couldn’t make modifications to PFRA, the western 
grain stabilization, or crop insurance, to make them better. 
 
I believe it’s unfair – and, you know, I suppose you might want 
to do it in a partisan sense, politically – making people 
frightened of a change that we might have on the western grain 
stabilization program or in crop insurance or others. I mean, 
that’s not what we’re about. I believe with co-operation we can 
make them better – make them better. 
 
And you can be saying, well will you even look at this or will 
you look at that? I will examine things that will improve the 
position for farmers. So with respect to PFRA, western grain 
stabilization, and crop insurance, I’m 100 per cent in favour of 
it. And I would endorse keeping cash advances. 
 
And if it isn’t PFRA, something that is the same or better, I 
would not rule out something new – unless you would rule out 
something new. I mean, there’s more than just the past; there is 
the future and doing things better. And I would certainly look at 
new modifications with respect to  

irrigation, with respect to various kinds of economic 
development packages we could put together. You might not 
even call it PFRA; you could call it something else. But the 
same kinds of things to get the job done, I would encourage. 
 
New modifications to western grain stabilization, I wouldn’t 
rule them out. I mean, there’s more than just the past. We have 
to have some vision about what we can do for the future to 
make sure farmers can live and compete and do the kinds of 
things that they know they have to, to make sure that they can 
have a standard of living as well as anybody else in North 
America. So I would endorse the kinds of changes that we’ve 
seen coming down the pike. And I would certainly endorse 
PFRA, western grain stabilization, and the crop insurance 
program. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Premier, the only reason I raise this 
tonight is because you have . . . Before tonight you have never 
publicly gone on record opposing the Nielsen task force report. 
 
There is a vision for the future as laid out by the Tory 
government. The PC government has laid out a vision for the 
future. Part of that vision spelled out variable freight rates. Part 
of that vision talked about doubling crop insurance premiums. It 
talked about the Canadian Wheat Board and its ineffectiveness. 
And those issues, farmers tell me they want to know where this 
junior PC government stands compared with their brothers in 
Ottawa on the vision they have for the future. 
 
The millions and millions of dollars that went into the Nielsen 
task force report – and I know it was an expensive one – the 
money that went into that laying out the future vision as the PCs 
see it, scared me. I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, it worried me 
because it doesn’t pay to farm in Saskatchewan if we don’t have 
a Canadian Wheat Board. And it doesn’t pay to plant your grain 
if there’s going to be variable freight rates and they’re going to 
do out my branch line and make me haul 30, 40, or 50 miles 
further. Those are issues that are affecting farmers. 
 
And if you publicly denounce this report, then the farmers know 
they don’t need to worry about it; you’ll fight for them. Because 
the farmers of Saskatchewan, over the history . . . And I can 
take you back and take you through the steps it took to get the 
Canadian Wheat Board in place. I can show you comparisons of 
marketing grain in United States . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
It doesn’t pay to have order in here. You can let your colleagues 
talk and yak away at the same time. You don’t need to worry 
about that, do you? We don’t need to have order, even if they’re 
not in their own seats. But if the member from Lloydminster 
wants to talk, we’ll give him a turn. But let’s not have two or 
three people trying to talk at the same time. It doesn’t make for 
order in this Assembly and I think you should exercise your 
authority you have in the Chair to have other people keep order, 
as well as the opposition. I think that would be wise on your 
part. 
 
But the point I’m raising, Mr. Premier, loud and clear, is that if 
you publicly would have . . When we asked you the question 
when the Nielsen report was first tabled and the House was 
sitting here, and we brought that report in  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1929 
 

question period after question period and talked about issues, if 
you’d have stood up and said: that report does not represent my 
views; that report is not written with Saskatchewan’s best 
interests in mind; it’s written from an Easterner’s perspective 
that doesn’t want to spend any more money in Saskatchewan 
than they have to and they want to get out of programs that are 
costing some money – if you’d have stood up and done that 
right away, we wouldn’t have had these 13 questions debated 
here tonight. 
 
But the Tory policy, their hidden agenda . . . You try and accuse 
others and you try and raise an issue and a flag out across 
Saskatchewan and say, don’t trust those socialists; they’ve got a 
hidden agenda. Well I’ll tell you, our agenda’s up front. We 
don’t have task force reports hiding in the closets, that we’re 
going to recommend. We don’t have blueprints for the future 
like you do – like you do. 
 
Your plan called for, and it’s written publicly, and stated that 20 
per cent of the farmers can do the farming. Well on that terms 
you could have branch line abandonment. That’s maybe why 
you support it hiddenly. In your secret heart of hearts, I think is 
your word; in your innermost conscience, is your words – down 
deep, you really believe that 20 per cent of the farmers . . . In 
your heart of hearts, in using your own words, 20 per cent of the 
farmers could do it. That’s your philosophy. That’s what you 
preach. 
 
I can bring you notes from young people that studied 
agriculture under you, that will say that that’s the philosophy – 
buy bigger equipment, buy more land, get in there and expand 
because you’re going to be the guys that are doing the farming. 
Twenty per cent of you can do it. That was your philosophy – 
12,000 farmers in Saskatchewan is enough. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, I don’t have that kind of hidden agenda. I’m 
saying 100,000 farmers would be ideal in Saskatchewan. They 
could live out in the country, enjoy a life-style, train up your 
children in the way that they should go, and they would have a 
fruitful, healthy existence. 
 
But why should we have programs in place that are supported 
by the Conservative party, that do away with the underlying 
issues that we believe in, that we worked for? My grand-dad 
rode a train to Ottawa to initiate the Canadian Wheat Board – 
fought hard to get it in place. They fought hard to get 
established the pools and the co-operative system that makes 
things go. 
 
You fellows with your private enterprise approach and your 
dog-eat-dog approach to society have a hidden agenda that’s 
destroying this. And out came a book, written by your people, 
written by your supporters, that denounced the very principles 
agriculture is based on. 
 
I want to tell you, I’m glad that specifically and individually 
tonight you stood up in this House and said that you’re against 
those 13 issues. I’m glad you finally stood up and said: I’m not 
a Tory like the rest of them; don’t accuse me of being the same 
as Erik Nielsen and the Nielsen report; I’m like you guys, I’m 
along with you on the Canadian Wheat Board and I don’t 
believe in variable  

freight rates; I believe in equal rates for equal distance. 
 
You believe that? Well, Nielsen doesn’t. Nielsen says crop 
insurance should be actuarially sound and the premiums should 
be doubled. And that’s what scares farmers because we finally, 
in my day, working with our government, finally got crop 
insurance for every farmer in Saskatchewan. When the 
right-wing governments were around, only a select few on the 
best land could buy crop insurance. But back in ’71 we got a 
government elected that represented farmers. We went out 
around the country and we had a committee that got crop 
insurance out to every farmer no matter where they farmed, be 
it in Fox Valley or in the best land in the country, but we got 
crop insurance available for everybody. 
 
Now you guys are saying: we can’t afford it; it’s too rich, it’s 
too rich; we’ve got to double the premium. Well, I want to tell 
you, I’m glad you came out and made it clear that you do not 
support . . . I can show you press releases that go away back 
where Blakeney says Devine should reject the report. We never 
heard any rejections from you, but tonight finally – finally 
tonight you came on record. The pool officials say farm groups 
will contest the report, and they ask . . . Different ones from 
Sask Wheat Pool suggested that you stand up and be counted. 
Well tonight we finally took some time to get you on the record 
and we’ll be able to say our Premier doesn’t agree with the 
Nielsen task force report. And I’m pleased we accomplished 
that much. 
 
(1930) 
 
I feel there’s another issue in the news that is scaring pork 
producers across Saskatchewan, and when they watch TV and 
they watch what’s happening, they don’t like the kind of friends 
you made and the kind of deals you made to bring in that kind 
of business men. When we watched Peter Pocklington on TV 
the other night, and with his idea of right to work and back to 
work and no union – an anti-union man – I’m not sure that the 
financial aspect of the deal was the worst part of the deal, I’m 
not sure that it was. But can you give us some details of the 
arrangement your government has with Gainers and Peter 
Pocklington. What are the specifics of that deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have $7,500 in the 
industrial incentive program, Mr. Chairman, that if you open up 
a new business and create a new job, that you will receive 
$7,500 for every new, permanent job that you create. As well as 
that, you can get Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) financing, and the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development corporation is there for that reason. So you put 
those packages together. If somebody can create 1,000 
brand-new permanent jobs in building a new car manufacturing 
plant or a processing plant, then it’s $7,500,000, because it’s 
$7,500 for every new, permanent job created. That now allows 
us to compete with Manitoba, Ontario, Alberta, or British 
Columbia in attracting new businesses into Saskatchewan. 
 
So the new packing plant or new bacon plant that comes in here 
is subject or eligible for the industrial incentive program, plus 
the Sedco package that allows them to get financing over a long 
period of time. And we provide that  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1930 
 
 

package to anybody in the province, or those that want to move 
in and create long-run, permanent, new jobs. 
 
Mr. Engel: — did existing Intercon get the same kind of deal 
with the expansion they announced, or they’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Similar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You know, it’s interesting when I see that the 
track record of one Peter Pocklington . . . Maclean’s in the 
December 9th issue said about him, and I want to quote a few 
lines: 
 

Without a steady supply of hogs for his packing company, 
Pocklington’s plans for financial (ruin) renewal are 
threatened . . . 
. . . the recession struck Western Canada in 1982, and 
Pocklington’s empire began to crumble . . . in 1983 .  . his 
most important companies – Fidelity Trust Co. and Patricia 
Land Corp., both of Edmonton – were about to fail. 

 
And we have a fellow here that has a track record with pretty 
well everything he owns has gone under. 
 

. . . since the failure of Patricia Land Corp. and Fidelity 
Trust in 1983, Pocklington has relied on profits from 
Gainers to finance his business ventures. At one point he 
pledged his Oilers hockey team and associated television 
and promotional rights against bank debts. (Pocklington 
said): “Sure I’m using profit from Gainers in other 
businesses. I’m a businessman, and that’s what (businesses) 
do.” 

 
I’m wondering, will you not concede that making this kind of 
deal . . . Maybe I’ll wait till I get the Premier’s attention, or at 
least one of his deputies. 
 
Will you concede that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan took an 
extraordinary risk putting up this kind of loan guarantees and 
$10 million in forgivable loans to a guy that had this kind of 
track record, when farmers that were in the same boots as this – 
farmers who were in the same boots as this – couldn’t borrow 
the $25 an acre? They had no worse a track record than old 
Pocklington did, but Pocklington was given a $10 million gift, 
plus the Sedco loans and the whole guarantee – and has a track 
record of failure. 
 
And yet I’ve written you letters from four different farmers in 
my riding, and they all got the same answer back, that you pay 
back your old debt to farmstart. One, they’ve written off . . . 
they made a deal with farmstart back in the ‘70s – made a deal 
with farmstart, wrote off the debt; that’s finished, you’re done. 
They’re still farming. Nine years later they come to you and 
they want to qualify for a universal program, they’re turned 
down, poor risk. Nine years ago we had to deal with you on that 
funding. 
 
Here is Pocklington, who this year, the year he comes to you for 
this big hand-out, has his businesses fail all around him, his 
empire toppled, and you give him that kind of a deal. Do you 
consider that good, prudent  

business management? Do you consider that, on behalf of your 
government and as Minister of Agriculture, prudent, just from 
that one aspect? 
 
When we had a company in Saskatchewan that, two years ago, 
you wouldn’t get involved in, and you let the business close that 
was doing the same kind of thing here in Regina, put 82 or 85 – 
and we’re talking from memory now, or was it 185 workers? – 
out of the job, closed it down. And yet you decided it’s wise a 
year and a half later to build a new one for that kind of money, 
with that kind of public financing. I think that’s a financial 
decision that was based on the inner heart. Your conscience 
factor overruled your good judgment because of who he was, 
and here’s one that sought the leadership of the Tory party. 
There can’t be another reason in the world why this man got 
that kind of a loan guarantee, with the kind of track record he 
showed and what’s happened to him in the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
member opposite and his leader have publicly said that they are 
against the bacon plant in North Battleford. The people of North 
Battleford know that the building is up. The building is up and 
there’s going to be 200 brand-new jobs. The people in the 
community of North Battleford are very happy with the fact that 
there’s a brand-new processing plant there that will have 200 
people working, and that there’s local people involved in 
building it and constructing it. It’s going to be in operation this 
fall. And you’re against it. 
 
And you said that you’re against it. You raised it again here that 
you’re against it. The NDP is against processing and 
manufacturing. They live in the past. This province should be 
into diversification. And I know and I understand your 
philosophy, but your philosophy does not allow for 
diversification and the value-added products. Packing plants 
leave and shut down when you come into power. 
 
I can go through a whole list of projects that are brand-new, that 
are being created in processing, manufacturing, value-added, 
looking for new markets in Japan and the United States and 
others, that weren’t here because you don’t endorse that. You 
would buy them or nationalize them or chase them out. Burns’ 
packing plant in P.A. – very, very similar. Potash mines, you 
buy; you won’t create a new one. Why didn’t you just take the 
money and create something new? 
 
We encourage people from Japan, from the U.S., from other 
parts of Canada, to come in here and build. And that bacon 
plant is now up – not finished, but the insides and everything 
will be finished by this fall. Two hundred new jobs, and you’re 
against it. You’re against it because you don't like, obviously as 
you’ve pointed out and your colleague from Quill Lakes, that 
you’re a democratic socialist, and you’re against free enterprise. 
And you just went on for some time about Conservative 
governments support enterprise, and you’re against that. Well 
obviously all the small businesses and all the businesses in this 
province are free enterprise, so you’re philosophically against 
them. 
 
So we lay it out quite clearly that you, for example, do not  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1931 
 

support the paper-mill. That’s free enterprise. You don’t 
support the bacon processing plant. We provide industrial 
incentives to encourage people to process and manufacture 
here, and to look to the future in terms of making sure this 
province is not just a province where we mine raw resources 
and are hewers of wood and drawers of water, but we process 
them and add value, and put people to work in all those areas. 
 
And you say, well for Heaven’s sakes, we don’t get enough 
money out of eastern Canada. If you look at those kinds of 
things . . . I mean, I know who controls the NDP party in 
Canada. It’s the labour leaders in Ontario. Everybody knows 
that. I mean, you said, we’re worried about eastern Canada. 
Well there you are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that if you look at the bacon 
processing plant, you said it’s not a good idea that we put the 
money in. It is. And we encourage people to come in here and 
process and manufacture. We will, whether it’s Supercarts, or 
paper-mills, or upgraders, or fertilizer plants, or bacon plants. 
 
None of those things take place under an NDP administration. 
They just don’t happen. They do under ours, because the 
philosophy is, we trust people. We trust people to invest, and 
we will protect them against high interest rates, and we’ll 
encourage them to run their own business and to create jobs. 
You don’t trust them, the member from Quill Lakes doesn’t 
trust them, he wouldn’t even lend them money. He wouldn’t 
even believe in universal cash advance systems. 
 
So when you look at incentives for people that come into the 
province of Saskatchewan, or those that are here to invest, we 
provide them and are very proud of them, and they work. And 
they’re very, very, very powerful . So I would suggest that the 
philosophy is different, and that’s fair enough. 
 
We will encourage any packing plant. It could have been 
Fletchers. You’d have been against Fletchers coming in. It 
could have been Intercon with a bacon plant. It could have been 
anybody from the U.S. or Japan. If they wanted to set up a new 
bacon processing plant here, we would provide them with the 
kinds of incentives that would let us compete with Alberta, 
Manitoba, and others. Those incentives never were here before, 
but they’re here now. That’s why you see that economic 
development and it works. 
 
And in summary, it’s very important to a community like North 
Battleford – very important. You may come out against it. 
That’s fair ball. You may say, as you did in 1982, you’re going 
to run on an election that said the Crow rate was the issue. Now 
you’re going to have your little election platforms going to be 
the Nielsen task force report, which is bureaucrats examining 
all the tax changes that we have in agriculture and other places, 
a whole list of them. There are some of them that you may even 
endorse, but if you want to run on that, if that’s going to be your 
election issue, fair enough. 
 
You tried it on the Crow and you were way off base. You’ll try 
it on the private sector and investment; you’ll be way off base. 
You can try it on tearing down bacon plants and  

paper-mills; you’ll be way off base. 
 
So I mean, in terms of policy, you want to look at real policy, 
you can talk about bureaucrats examining policy. We’ve got 
NDP policy right here. This is hard-core stuff. This is the NDP 
executive and this is an expansion of land bank, and the only 
thing wrong with the land bank system was there wasn’t enough 
land in it. Now that’s policy. And on the streets of 
Saskatchewan all over the place we’ll know what the policies 
are and what the alternatives are. 
 
If you want bacon processing, manufacturing, and value-added, 
you can have it this way. If you want the land bank and the 
government to own more land and see it in a resolution as your 
party’s platform, it will be quite clear that’s on the other side, 
and I’d be glad to meet you in any town, any place, on those 
two issues. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I guess you would. You’d love to keep it to 
those two issues, Mr. Premier. But take off your rose-tinted 
glasses. Face the reality of what you did. You’re dealing with a 
guy that’s bankrupted Alberta. You’re dealing with a guy that 
tried to break the back of the Alberta hog marketing board. 
You’re dealing with the guy that went around offering 
premiums to guys that were selling pork to the Alberta hog 
marketing commission, and he got run out of Alberta. He got 
run out of Alberta. Now you’re dealing with a guy that will 
come on TV and wants to go back to a feudalistic system of 
saying, I’ll hire who I can, and when he gets enough people 
hungry, he’ll get them for 50 cents an hour. That’s the kind of 
guy you’re dealing with. 
 
You close out guys like Olaf Friggstad. You let him go under. I 
witnessed that. I flew down. He picked me up at the airport and 
took me to meetings. And I saw what you did to Olaf Friggstad. 
You wouldn’t . . . you connived a deal that the guy had to go 
under. You wouldn’t renew his loans. 
 
And you blatantly, you blatantly denied Sedco loans and 
contracts to our Saskatchewan people who are honest business 
men, and you deal with guys like Peter Pocklington. Show me 
one labour relation problem that Olaf Friggstad had; show me 
one deal he had where he wasn’t paying his wages. But I’ll 
show you a man that expanded his plant, and when the drought 
hit and his cultivators weren’t selling, you pulled the rug out 
from under him – you pulled the rug from under him. And I’ll 
tell you that people down South remember that, because those 
that had Friggstad cultivators knew that the guy was making 
good stuff. 
 
Morris Rodweeder grew up in our time. Don’t tell me about 
business men we don’t trust and we can’t work with, because 
I’ll show you a Saskatchewan that had more small 
manufacturers than any other Tory province anywhere – 
anywhere! They were around and they did well under our 
administration. 
 
But guys like Peter Pocklington – that’s the only kind of guys 
you bring in. Guys like Weyerhaeuser – you’ll give him a 
pulp-mill for nothing down and don’t pay for a thing unless you 
make some profit. Those are the examples you use. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1932 
 
 

Push the button, switch it off. I challenge you, because he could 
talk about everything you wanted. He could talk about our 
affiliation with unions or whatever and who calls the shots, and 
you didn’t stop him. And I even called you unfair. But the 
minute I get to a sensitive issue, then you want to switch my 
light off. 
 
(1945) 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, that isn’t going to work 
because your little leader was afraid to call an election because 
he’s in trouble. You’re dealing with people that are corrupt. 
You’re giving deals that aren’t fair. You’re making loans – 
you’re making loans to your friends because of political 
connections. And the Saskatchewan farmers that want to get 
$25 an acre, what did you write them? You told them tough 
luck; you pay your 12-year-old loan – you pay up your 
12-year-old loan and we’ll give you money to survive. Well I’ll 
tell you, that’s why you didn’t call an election. That’s why, 
because people know the kind of guy you are. They’ve got your 
number. And once people lose confidence in you, in your 
government, once they know what makes you stand, and once 
they know how fair it is, they’ll never go back. 
 
When a car dealer pulls a fast one on me – when a car dealer 
pulls a fast one on me, I’ve never been back at that car dealers. 
And all Saskatchewan farmers operate like that. 
 
And when you pull a fast one, you can give all the money to 
Peter Pocklington you want, but it’s not going to buy you an 
election. I’ll tell you what, that’s not going to buy you an 
election because people know you’re not fair. They know you 
don’t treat everybody the same. You’ve got one class of 
operation for the wealthy and your friends, and you’ve got 
another when you deal with the ordinary people. And that is, 
you don’t deal with them; you don’t deal with them. You say, 
tough luck, make it on your own, tough luck buster, go see 
where you borrow your money, we’re not going to give it to 
you. You have two sets of standards: the guy that can borrow 
$100,000 and invest it and make his money – it’s there, you can 
have it – but the guy that needs it – the guy that needs it – 
couldn’t get it. 
 
And I’ll tell you, that’s why I used this example here. That’s 
why I used the example of Peter Pocklington. Here’s a guy that 
the story is out loud and clear. His business has failed – his 
business has failed – and these are the kind of guys you deal 
with. 
 
I ought to tell you, Gainers might have difficulty borrowing 
money to buy a new plant. Indeed Gainers has already used $42 
million of a $70 million line of credit it has with a 
Toronto-based Continental Bank of Canada. In announcing the 
contract with Alberta hog marketing board, which increased by 
nearly 40 per cent the number of hogs that Fletcher kills each 
week, he said that the company will add 130 employees on a 
second shift in order to handle the increased supply of pigs. 
 
And I want to tell you, this guy, this guy was run out of Alberta, 
and you welcomed him with a $10 million gift.  

That’s what you call fair. Well I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to decide when you can get 
up your nerve. 
 
You put those flamingos out to indicate that you’re nice and 
warm on your front lawn, you know. And you know that 
insulation story with the flamingos – the more money you save 
in heat, the more flamingos you put out. Well I understand you 
only had six. The guy in the news ad had his whole lawn full – 
he didn’t only have four or six. But you could hang all the 
flamingos out front you want; but unless you get up your 
courage to call the election . . . 
 
And you won’t know if the people like our programs better than 
they like yours. We’re not going to find out. We’re not going to 
find out till you screw up enough courage to call an election. 
Then we’ll know whether the people say, we like a Premier that 
deals with Peter Pocklington or we like a Premier that deals 
with all farmers the same, and treats all farmers the same. 
 
And I want to tell you, people are anxious in my area to tell you 
who they believe. They’re anxious to tell you if they like a 
government that is fair, picks people to deal with not according 
to their track record . . . The farmer, if he’s got a bad track 
record, is out of luck. But Peter Pocklington has a track record 
where all the companies he’s ever owned before have gone 
broke, and everything’s mortgaged to the hilt. That’s the kind of 
guy you can give 40 million bucks to. Well I’ll tell you, that’s 
the measure of a man. You measure a man by what he does and 
who he deals with. That’s how you tell whether he’s fair or not. 
And I don’t believe that some of the things you’ve done 
indicate that you’re fair. 
 
So the arrangements with Peter Pocklington are as vague as 
ever. You can’t tell us the specific deal you’ve got and how 
much money. You don’t want us to know. You don’t want us to 
know the kind of contract he got. So we’ll move on to another 
issue. 
 
I asked the chairman of your special committee on farm input 
costs how much that committee cost to run around the country. 
And he didn’t know. He didn’t know how much it cost to bring 
in a guy that run forest products. And he chaired a committee; 
he didn’t know how much that was either. But he told me, wait 
till agricultural estimates and they’ll tell you. 
 
So we’re wondering, what did those 13 meetings . . . And you 
should have had one more because it was an unlucky series of 
meetings for the farmers, because nothing has come out of them 
yet. But what did those 13 meetings that you held around the 
province, by your farm input cost committee, what did that cost 
in the newspaper ads, the advertising, and the travel expense, 
and so on, the arrangements that you made? 
 
Can you give me a little breakdown about that little PR venture? 
I think that’s what you called it in the House here. I could get 
Hansard out and detail the exact line you said. But you said that 
part of their work is to find out what it cost but the other part is 
to inform farmers of what programs we have available and do a 
little PR. So what did that PR committee cost you? 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1933 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Was $127,883, which includes 
everything – rent of facilities, travel costs, advertising, the 
words, for 13 meetings held throughout Saskatchewan in 
February and March. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you. Some of the recommendations that 
came forward from that committee – what changes have you 
made and what new initiatives are you prepared to offer because 
of the recommendations from that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the report of the cabinet committee 
is at the printers right now, and it’ll be out as soon as we get it 
bound. And at that time, all the details of the recommendations 
and our response to the recommendations will be there. 
 
So in just general terms, I can say that the major concerns in the 
farm input hearings were for lower costs in terms of fuel prices, 
chemicals, interest rates, and so forth. And that’s where we 
focused on, and as you know, farmers suggested several things 
that might be possible. We’ve summarized them all. We have a 
list of their major recommendations and list of things that the 
committee recommends that the government does. And they’ll 
be out as soon as it’s published. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One of the areas that show that farmers are 
facing some pretty serious stress-related problems is that there 
is a dramatic increase in the number of farmers and farm family 
members using the services of the psychiatric services branch of 
the Department of Health, and regional mental health services. 
And that frustrates me. 
 
I raised that some time ago in the House, on some figures that 
were stress-related. And when I hear reports of how far north 
grasshoppers are found around – and we have a good crop 
coming on like you already agreed to – and the possible threat 
of having these little grasshoppers eat up our crops is a mental 
stress that farmers are facing, is an indication that farmers are 
under more stress than they’ve been for a long time, and 
operating in very, very serious conditions. Nervous 
breakdowns, suicide, family violence, excessive use of alcohol, 
are some of the results of . . . And like your member indicates 
that the two sitting there – we’re going to get a picture on them 
right now – they’re pulling their hair out in distress, you know. 
 
But it’s a serious problem, and I felt that somewhere along the 
line we should be making a recommendation re input costs and 
farm chemical costs. And I honestly think that tonight we 
should discuss this whole grasshopper situation and what could 
be accomplished if the farmers would get their grasshopper 
spray for half price. 
 
I think you have a responsibility. It’s not a normal-style pest. 
It’s something that moves and moves. They’ll get so far, they’ll 
lay their eggs, they’ll hatch and they’ll move further. And it’s 
an attack. There’s a front line where we need to take these 
grasshoppers on head-on. I know a lot of older people around 
are saying that it’s going to take an act of God or some act of 
nature that’s going to stop the grasshoppers in their tracks. 
 
But I believe that you have a serious responsibility to help  

farmers defray their chemical costs. In the light of what the 
price of grain is going to be, they’re using up all their resources. 
I talked to one farmer last night. On his 12 quarters of land he 
has already spent $1,000 a quarter fighting off grasshoppers, 
and he’s had about 170 acres to reseed – about the same amount 
as we’ve done on our own farm. 
 
It think it’s a serious problem, and it’s one that I’m sure was 
raised with the farm input cost committee, that the price of 
chemicals is something that the farmers .  . Grasshoppers are 
different than other chemical. I think people right across 
Saskatchewan understand grasshoppers. It’s a different problem 
than wheat midge or some of the other issues because of the 
way they . . . If you don’t control them here, they’ll be there; 
and if you don’t control them there, they’ll be there. 
 
What impressed me last Thursday night when I was up in my 
colleague’s home town, his wife told me that her garden up 
there was eaten by grasshoppers last year. Now that means 
we’re losing the fight, if they spread that far north to Buffalo 
Narrows. They can get around, these grasshoppers can, and 
there’s a lot of land between. I just couldn’t believe they’d even 
be up there. 
 
But I think we have a responsibility as a province to have all the 
taxpayers share the expense of fighting grasshoppers, not just 
the farmer on the front line. The farmer on the front line 
shouldn’t have to fight it alone. So I think that you, in 
consultation with your officials, should come up with a similar 
program to what Alberta has and pay half the costs of fighting 
grasshoppers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
can’t really comment very accurately with respect to the farm 
input committee hearings. Because when the committee 
hearings were in his jurisdiction and his riding, or when the 
committee was in the Shaunavon riding and 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg riding, neither one of the members 
even bothered to show up. They didn’t even care to join farmers 
and come to the meetings and express their views. After it’s all 
over, they can talk about the farm input committee, the cabinet 
committee, and nobody was there. The NDP didn’t show up. 
 
I mean, the agriculture critic stands in this legislature and talks 
about all the concerns that he has, and we have farm input 
committee hearings and the agriculture critic for the NDP is 
nowhere to be found. He doesn’t show up – right in his own 
home town. Not even there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He doesn’t care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I don’t believe that he does care. I mean, 
he can talk. I don’t remember any of the programs or packages 
to help people fight grasshoppers in 1961 or 1975 or when the 
drought was here. Talk is pretty cheap, Mr. Chairman. He can 
go on and talk about all the concerns that he has, all the things 
that should be done with respect to drought and grasshoppers, 
and if you look at their own record, they never did a thing. 
 
I mean, I didn’t recall when they had a chance in the last 11 
years that they were here, to punch a bunch of money into 
protecting people against drought and grasshoppers.  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1934 
 
 

And we had drought and we had grasshoppers. In 1961 they ate 
most of southern Saskatchewan along the east side. Not one 
thing from his party. Nothing. Zero. Not a thing. 
 
And he can stand in here today and say, well, Mr. Premier, you 
need three more billion dollars. And we’ve come in with 
billions. And he’ll say, I think that you should pay for this and 
pay for that and pay for this and pay for that. 
 
And obviously he isn’t even concerned enough to go to the 
committee hearings with his neighbours that showed up. Wasn’t 
even there. Nor was the member from Shaunavon. Never even 
showed up. They’re pretty quick in this House to ask for $100 
an acre. We’ve heard them do that. And on 4,000 acres, we 
know what that’s worth to a very large farmer who happens to 
be the MLA from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or from Shaunavon. 
 
Do you think that’s fair? I mean, you complain and complain 
and complain because we have 6 per cent money to farmers all 
over the place and it’s unfair, like a cash advance. And guess 
who asks for $100 an acre on a 4,000 acre farm? The very 
members that stand up and say, oh, we’re for the little guy. 
We’re for the little guy. If you’re for the little guy, why don’t 
you carve up your farm, 4,000 acres, and spread it out a little 
bit? Why don’t you give a little bit to a neighbour and a little bit 
to a neighbour and a little bit to a neighbour. 
 
I mean, they come out on both sides of it. They don’t stick up 
for farmers. They didn’t when they were in power. They don’t 
now. And all they can do is sit there and whine a little bit, 
whine a little bit. 
 
Talk is cheap, Mr. Chairman. It’s very cheap. They never put 
the money into agriculture. They never delivered. They don't 
even show up at the hearings. They’re against any kind of help 
that’s universal. But as soon as they can get help for their big 
farmers, farmers that have 4,000 acres like 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the MLA, farmers like the salt-water 
sheik from Shaunavon who has 4,000 acres, they’ll take $100 
an acre. Boy, they’d just love to have it. And they’ll use it. And 
it amounts to a small fortune – half a million dollars per farmer 
for these little wee tiny NDP farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, they made a straw man in 1982 and said, 
oh, they were going to protect farmers. Do you know what? 
Farmers don’t believe you. You’ve had your chance. Farmers 
all over Saskatchewan don’t believe you. 
 
When the CCF decided to join with organized labour leaders 
and create an NDP party, they left the CCF alone and they left 
the farmers out. The PC Party has replaced the CCF all over 
rural Saskatchewan and you know it. Every seat but four was 
there, and it’s because of people just like you who will farm 
4,000 acres and get down on your knees and beg for $100 an 
acre, half a million dollars to a guy just like you, and at the 
same time you didn’t do a thing for farmers when you had a 
chance. 
 
(2000) 
 

You talk out of both sides of your mouth, and talk is cheap. You 
can talk in this legislature as long as you like. People don’t 
believe you. I’ll tell you what they believe. They believe the 
truth. Your policy, where you can have 4,000 acres yourself and 
you want the rest of them to farm for the government. It’s right 
in your recent NDP resolutions. That’s the kind of thing you 
want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — A cheer for the little cheer-leader. Great. The 
Premier is giving too much loose talk. You know, if everything 
you tell me is exaggerated four-fold or five-fold, like the size of 
my farm, that’s great. The records will show how much land I 
farm, and I don’t need to tell you; you’ll find out for yourself. 
But you’ve exaggerated by 400 per cent – 400 per cent 
exaggerated. But I want to tell you, Mr. Premier, I can go to 
Assiniboia without a police guard. 
 
I was at Swift Current and the Mounties had to come and 
protect you when the farmers were begging to meet you. The 
farmers were begging to talk to you. One thousand farmers 
stood on a playing field at a school yard, 20 feet away from 
you, and you ducked out the back door. I would call that . . . 
 
You know what Tommy Douglas says about you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Tommy Douglas, the one you say you take his 
place. Tommy Douglas said about you, the only time you open 
your mouth is to change feet. The only time a politician like you 
. . . you put your foot in your mouth, because you said I didn’t 
go to a political meeting to influence farmers. You were going 
to do a little propaganda story. 
 
I didn’t want to get involved in that Tory meeting with the 25 
farmers, but 1,000 farmers wanted to meet you and you refused 
to attend. You refused to show up when you were right there, 
when farmers were facing their most severe drought ever, and 
you got out under police escort. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well on a point of order, Mr. Chairman. I 
mean, this has gone about far enough. They are the most 
arrogant bunch of government members – there’s 53 of them. 
And I’ll tell you we are going to deal with estimates. And surely 
you could get your people here, that are not even in their seats, 
to keep their mouths shut and allow the member to address the 
Premier with questions. What is your duty if it’s not to keep 
order in this Chamber? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The point of order, as is it phrased, 
is not well taken. I believe that members from both sides of the 
House have been particularly raucous and therefore I would ask 
members from both sides of the House to please tone down and 
allow the debate to continue. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I challenge that ruling. Our members were 
sitting here not saying a word, Mr. Chairman, and here you sent 
over some of the goon squad, and I’ll tell you I’m not going to 
stand for it. Point of order. I’ll tell you, you’ll  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1935 
 

have to bring some dignity back into this House, Mr. Chairman. 
I mean, we’re dealing with estimates in Agriculture, and 
certainly the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can have 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order. Would the 
member please sit down. Would the member please sit down. 
As I have said earlier both sides of the House have been guilty 
tonight of causing disorder. I do not want to point to any 
particular members, but some who complain the loudest 
sometimes holler the loudest. So I would simply like to ask all 
hon. members to please tone down and allow the debate to 
continue in an orderly manner. 
 
Mr. Engel: — There’s a couple of members sitting in the seats 
of the third party that are making a lot of noise. One of them is 
the member for Moosomin, and the other member is from 
Lloydminster, and I cannot . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Could we please have order. Could 
we please have order. I’m afraid that I must ask the members 
who are not in their seats to please be quiet because I have 
stood on my feet two times to rule on this, and I ask you to be 
quiet. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The Tory members are getting very loud trying 
to defend you, Mr. Premier. When you need a police guard to 
leave a meeting and won’t attend a public meeting with 1,000 
farmers, that is very serious news. And if you want to emulate 
Tommy Douglas, try . . . and I’ve given you this advice 
personally before. You know, don’t accuse members. 
 
We were at the opening function and you accused my colleague 
from Shaunavon for heckling you and he never said a word 
when that goon squad was doing the hollering behind us. And I 
think that that kind of action isn’t going to get you anywhere, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
When you go to a place in a town and are 20 feet away from 
1,000 farmers that want to see you, and you could take 30 
seconds off, or a minute and a half, or two or five minutes, and 
address that crowd and listen to their concerns – and you duck 
out the back door, that doesn’t show to me very much courage. 
You could have brought your police guard with you to the 
meeting. 
 
And you stand up in this House and you accuse me for not 
attending a Tory meeting, a Tory meeting that was made up of a 
bunch of political hacks that got $130,000 of taxpayers’ money 
to travel around the province to do, in your own words, some 
PR – to do some PR. A member was sitting on that committee 
that had his way paid to Venezuela by a chemical company and 
he was going to write a report on how to reduce chemical 
prices. People like that . . . And you wanted me to go to that 
meeting, after you set an example at Swift Current and refused 
to attend a meeting. 
 
I went to meetings in Bengough that weren’t in my riding. I was 
in Climax. I went over to Kayville, I was in Swift Current. I 
was in Ponteix. I was at a lot of meetings in my own riding. I 
met with more than 6,000 farmers last summer, listening to 
their concerns, and every one of those farmers that came to 
those meetings said, look, if we’re going to survive and we’ve 
got a drought, we need  

$100 a seeded acre. That’s what the farmers were telling us. If 
we get $100 a seeded acre, put a ceiling on, put 200 acres on it 
or 300 acres, or 400, whatever you want, but give us enough 
money to survive as far as a special drought assistance program. 
 
You laughed and scoffed at it. You met with your oil executives 
in the class-room in the school. Right outside your window, 
down there on the playing field -–you know, 20 rods away – 
were the thousand farmers gathered together. And you used the 
excuse and said that was a politically motivated meeting, and 
wouldn’t attend. And you wanted me to attend a meeting with 
six of your turkeys. I was supposed to go to that meeting. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, I travelled around the country with the fire 
prevention committee; I was on the committee. But if you 
would have had the guts as a Premier to say, I’ll put an NDP 
member on that committee and I’ll let a parliamentary 
committee go out and do a hearing, I’d have gone along. I’d 
have gone along to every one of those meetings. But you didn’t 
want an NDPer on that committee because you knew when I 
went along on the fire prevention committee – one to six – that I 
held my own at every meeting. And so you said, we’re not 
going to put an NDPer on that committee. We’ll put all Tory 
members on and we’ll do PR – we’ll get out and we’ll do a little 
PR operation. Well that PR operation cost the taxpayers 
$130,000 and didn’t gain you one vote. It didn’t gain you any 
support at all. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, the kinds of decision you make and the kinds 
of decisions you take are decisions that are based on politically 
motivated decisions. You mentioned yesterday that loans and 
interest rates .  . And you tried to blame the NDP for the high 
interest rates. Well inflation has come down and the loan 
interest rates normally at banks are down. Why don’t you 
encourage the Saskatchewan credit corporation, Farm Credit 
Corporation loans to give us the loans at the same rate – 
inflation plus 2 or 3 – and have the farmers pay their fair share? 
Why would you still let the Saskatchewan credit corporation 
and your brother, the Farm Credit Corporation in Ottawa, gouge 
farmers to the tune of 12, 13, and 14 per cent interest rates on 
their farm loans? 
 
Why don’t you have the guts to stand up like Bill Uruski, the 
Minister of Agriculture in Manitoba, and say, we’re going to 
take these guys on and we’re going to lower all the farmers’ 
interest rates – not just the 6 per cent on $25 an acre, but the 
ones that hurt, the ones that hurt. Why don’t you stand up and 
get your buddies in Ottawa to stand up and take the banks on 
and bring the interest rate down? And I’d say a good margin is 
3 per cent – inflation plus 3 – so you’ve got zero or 1 per cent 
inflation and 4 per cent loans. Anything above that is usury. 
 
I believe in that philosophy. That’s what should work. And 
that’s what was in place when there was 20 per cent. Inflation 
was 18 per cent – 19 per cent inflation rates. So the interest 
rates are 2 or 3 per cent higher. The farmers had that additional 
income. There was no crying, and there was no thousand people 
showing up looking for Blakeney in Swift Current during those 
days. There was nobody around then. But they were around 
looking for you, and you ducked. You ducked. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1936 
 
 

And you want to accuse me and Lingenfelter of not going to a 
meeting like that. Well I’ll tell you, we’re not afraid to meet 
with farmers. I met with 6,000 this summer, and I have very 
few farmers that discouraged me. They were very anxious to 
meet. And they said that, we’ve got to get rid of those Tories. 
Tory times are tough times, is what the farmers were telling us 
across southern Saskatchewan. 
 
This year we’ve got a threat of grasshoppers. They’re coming 
on. Farmers have sprayed two and three times. I’ve asked you 
that you should consider making a contribution towards half of 
the spray costs because that’s unique to that part of 
Saskatchewan. The guys that have grasshoppers have a different 
problem than any other farmer. And I think that the chairman 
should try and control these Tories that are doing all the 
shouting. 
 
I think that that’s one issue you’ve got to get involved in, and 
that is to help control grasshoppers. And we can do that by 
matching what the farmers spend. And he’ll get out and spray 
them, . If he needs to spray six times, he’ll spray six. 
 
I wish you’d have been right when I asked you that question 
last week and said they’re all going to hatch at once. Because at 
my farm that didn’t happen. At my farm that didn’t happen. 
They’re still hatching. And land that was flooded – had a foot of 
water on it all spring – when it finally drained off and dried and 
was dry enough to seed, that’s where the grasshoppers were the 
worst. And so the moisture and the snow didn’t affect the 
grasshoppers. 
 
The best land has them, and everybody’s spraying one, two, 
three, and four times. And I think it’s a good idea you’d get 
involved in matching. So I wish you would give us your reasons 
why you think you don’t need to get involved in helping control 
grasshoppers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, somebody just said, what 
kind of an agricultural critic do we have in the legislature? Let 
me just make a couple of comments. 
 
With respect to agricultural policy, I would have to ask the 
member opposite: isn’t it true, isn’t it true that in 1982 the NDP 
lost every rural seat but four? That’s a fact. That’s a fact. You 
lost all rural seats – you lost all rural seats but four, and the two 
northern seats. You lost them all. Now that’s a fact. 
 
Why, if you had all the answers and you had spent all the 
money and you helped people with grasshoppers and interest 
rates, would you lose every rural seat but four? Why? Why did 
you lose? Why did you lose all those seats if you had all the 
answers with respect to the kinds of things that should be done 
in agriculture? I ask the member opposite: why did you lose? 
You lost every single one of them but four. You lost. 
 
Do you know why you lost? It’s because when interest rates 
were 22 per cent – were 22 per cent – and farmers were crying 
out, you did just like they do in Manitoba. This is the 
Agriculture minister in Manitoba a few weeks ago. 
 

(2015) 
 
The Manitoba government turned down a request from the 
National Farmers Union for an $80 million aid package to help 
struggling farmers put the crop in. That $80 million won’t do 
when it comes to the grain industry and they recognize $80 
million is not enough. Uruski said he agrees that many farmers 
are in trouble, but it’s up to the federal government, not the 
provincial government, to keep the farmers in business. That’s 
the NDP answer. 
 
Well, that’s exactly the answer they got here in 1982, and you 
lost every seat but four. Every seat but four you lost. And now, 
and now the NDP again – and we can show it all over – they 
say the grain industry is a federal responsibility. How do you 
like that? When the grain farmer’s in trouble, the NDP says, no, 
you’re a federal farmer. You’re a federal farmer. 
 
When the NDP are in power in Saskatchewan, and there’s 22 
per cent interest rates, they say, no you’re a federal farmer. We 
won’t help you. 
 
Well do you know what? The PCs in 1982 won every rural seat 
but four. And in 1984 they picked up seats here in 
Saskatchewan because of your attitude. 
 
Because talk is cheap. You call a cabinet committee, a 
Government of Saskatchewan . . . You have no respect. I mean 
no respect at all for this Assembly or for cabinet ministers at all. 
For two of them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well their 
member from Regina North East yells out, for cabinet ministers 
that are of this persuasion, he has no respect. For PC cabinet 
ministers, he says, he has not respect. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I hope that everybody in Saskatchewan 
can listen. They don’t have respect for duly elected cabinet 
ministers. They don’t. And you know what the leader of the 
NDP has been going – He’s got the same attitude as the 
member from Regina North East. Do you know what they say 
about the 1982 election when they lost all the seats but four? He 
said, the people made a mistake. That’s the attitude. The people 
made a mistake. You lost every seat in the province but eight, 
and you look at the people and you say, the people made a 
mistake. 
 
And you have no respect for cabinet ministers because they’re 
not the cabinet minister that happen to be with your political 
party. And you just . . . And it’s in Hanford tonight. You called 
cabinet ministers turkeys, and you’re proud of it, and you smirk 
and you laugh. You have no respect for this legislature. 
 
Well you better not be laughing, because people who are duly 
elected by the people, elected people in this Assembly that form 
Executive Council or cabinet ministers, deserve the respect of 
all people in the province because they were duly elected. And 
the people are not wrong in a democratic system. When they 
elect a government, they are always right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So in 1982 your farm policy had  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1937 
 

never been any clearer, never been any clearer. And you’ve 
asked me with respect to the cabinet committee, what it 
recommended, and I said, you don’t even have the courtesy to 
show up to the cabinet committee. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ve been asking for some order in the House 
here so that we can conduct the estimates and so that we can 
listen to what the Premier is saying. And I wonder whether the 
members behind the bar have a right to speak. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The point of order is well taken. Hon. 
members, regardless of where they’re sitting, should not be 
interrupting the speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just 
point out that any cabinet committee, if it’s duly elected and 
holds public hearings with respect to drought, or grasshoppers, 
or forestry, or the environment, deserves the respect of at least 
the members of this House – absolutely. And it shouldn’t be 
called turkeys, and they shouldn’t be called anything else. I 
mean they’re elected. These are public official. In a democratic 
system . . .You may like the Soviet system where they’re not 
elected, but under our system, they’re elected and they deserve 
respect. 
 
So you can’t put down the committee. As a partisan committee, 
it’s duly elected, and cabinet ministers represent everybody in 
the province. And you know better. And as critic in agriculture, 
I mean it’s just too bad the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
have a little bit more to choose from, but unfortunately he 
didn’t after the last election because of his agricultural policy. 
So he’s stuck with that kind of attitude in agriculture. 
 
With respect to the Swift Current meeting, I met that day with 
several groups, including the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and 
said, I would seek your views. And when I go from place to 
place, they can come in and we have a good discussions. It’s a 
little difficult to carry on a conversation with several hundred 
people, so I said, I will meet with your leadership and I’ll listen 
to everything. I said at the same time the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool came in, made their recommendations and I talked to 
them, and I said so on the radio afterwards. And the people of 
Swift Current were embarrassed by you, and the member form 
Shaunavon, and the former member from Morse, Mr. Gross. 
They were ashamed of what you did, putting yourself on 
national television as a bunch of left-wing eccentric individuals. 
 
And they were not all farmers, and you know that. I recognized 
some of the faces there, and they weren’t farmers, not the 
farmers that I grew up besides and I know. They were an 
embarrassment, an embarrassment. And it’s the whole reason 
that you’ve lost the respect of agriculture and rural people. You 
took the old CCF party, and put it to bed with a bunch of union 
goons and you called it the NDP. And you will never, ever, ever  

again have the respect of rural Saskatchewan as a result of that. 
When you’ll have to show up by hundreds and try to put the 
boots to an elected cabinet minister or a premier – and that’s 
your strategy – your respect goes way down. 
 
And I can say, Mr. Chairman, I invited any number of groups to 
come and see me, and I’ve visited with them all over the 
province of Saskatchewan. And when the member opposite 
can’t show up at public hearings, but he can run around and 
organize hundreds and hundreds of people that he’s talking 
about, with respect to not even having the courtesy to come in 
and sit down and talk about it – wouldn’t even come in the 
room. And I invited them in. No, no, they wouldn’t come in. I 
invited them and I make it very, very clear. I said, I will listen 
to any group. I did before I went here and while I was there, and 
the wheat pool came right in and responded very naturally and 
normally. 
 
Well I just point out, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member should 
apologize, apologize to his colleagues in the legislature for 
calling elected people in this Assembly turkeys. He should 
apologize, Mr. Chairman, to the people of Saskatchewan for 
showing no respect for duly elected officials, cabinet ministers, 
or others that could hold public hearings on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan with a duly elected government. I don’t 
believe . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think he might have been talking 
without really thinking about it, but I would suggest that if he 
doesn’t have respect for this Assembly and those that are 
elected here, he doesn’t have respect of the process. And what 
he is, is typically indicative of his leader who said the reason 
that they lost in 1982 is that the people were wrong. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the people are never wrong. The people are never 
wrong in a democratic system when they elect people, and they 
deserve the respect. And those elected members from all 
political parties deserve the respect. And your attitude with 
respect to the people being wrong and not trusting them, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, is exactly the reason that you got into 
trouble with respect to all kinds of people in rural 
Saskatchewan, and why you’ll stay in trouble all over rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I sat here tonight and I listened to 
somebody that wants to emulate Tommy Douglas – someone 
that calls himself a Tommy Douglas. I’ve heard Tommy 
Douglas more times than I’ve heard our person that I have to 
call our Premier. I’m embarrassed; I’m embarrassed that this is 
being televised tonight, Mr. Premier, for the sake of that office. 
When somebody stand sup and has somebody come to a 
meeting, and if they don’t present the position that you think is 
your position, you call him a union goon . . . That’s your word 
for farmers that were in distress. 
 
You said you saw them out there. You looked out the window 
and you looked and gazed out across the multitude of farmers 
that were there – 1,000 of them. And I looked at them, and I 
don’t know who you’re talking about as a union goon. I don’t 
know if you’re  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1938 
 
 

talking about the guy in black home-made pants and a beard 
and a black hat. Was the man from the Hutterite colony a union 
goon? Is that who you’re calling union goons? Are the farmers 
that gather together . . . and some implement dealers were there, 
some implement dealers came along with them, even some 
from Gravelbourg. Are they the ones that are the union goons? 
Just because they don’t agree with you, they’re a union goon? Is 
that how you intend to be a premier statesman like Tommy 
Douglas was? Can you imagine Tommy Douglas standing in 
this sacred Assembly, talking like you did tonight? Can you 
imagine that? 
 
I’ll tell you what, Mr. Premier. That’s why you’re afraid to call 
an election. Tommy Douglas never went beyond four years ever 
– never. But when he was cornered, and when people didn’t 
agree with him, and when the doctors didn’t like what he was 
doing, he sat down and listened to them, and he figured out a 
way of bringing the people together. 
 
And he’s a statesman that will go down in history as someone 
that implemented change in Saskatchewan, someone that 
brought about programs that give the average underdog, after 
living in Saskatchewan for 55 years under Tory . . . five years 
of Tory government and the rest of the time conservative 
government – somebody that was around not 55 but 40 years – 
after 40 years he came on the scene and he gave farmers a 
chance. He gave the working people a chance. He gave sick 
people a chance. But he never called anybody a goon, not a 
resident of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’re our Premier. I’m ashamed of you – I’m ashamed of you. 
I talk to you in the hall, and I respect your office, and I thought 
you were a pretty nice guy. But when you’re in a corner, and 
when you’re backed into a corner, Mr. Premier, I don’t know if 
you need psychiatric help or not but I’d recommend it. I’d 
recommend it to you because this is serious . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. I believe I should ask 
the hon. member to withdraw that and apologize . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I don’t believe that the hon. member is 
showing another hon. member respect when he’s implying that 
he has some mental problems and that he should go and be 
examined. I would ask the hon. member, for the sake of orderly 
conduct, to please apologize for that remark. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, if I said that our Premier should 
get some advice, I apologize. I apologize. But when somebody 
that holds the highest office in Saskatchewan calls my 
neighbours union goons – union goons – he gets himself a 
police guard and creates a confrontation and you say that that’s 
great – I’m telling you to restore respect and to show and 
determine whether there’s some respect. 
 
This man should resign and call an election. His term is up – 
he’s gone beyond his term, he’s gone beyond his term – and let 
the people of Saskatchewan decide where  

he’s gone. And anybody that would do that to my friends who 
are suffering, who can’t make ends meet, and they see the kind 
of deals you did with the oil companies and all, I think it’s time 
– I think it’s time we have a review. 
 
If the Premier thinks it’s disrespectful when I said I wouldn’t go 
to a political organized meeting that he himself in this House 
said was going to be one that would be a public relations 
operation, and I’m going to instruct my cabinet and the 
back-benchers that are going along to do a public relations job 
and inform the people of all the good programs we have for 
agriculture. Well he went around and at his $130,000 little 
operation still didn’t convince the people of Saskatchewan to 
support him. The polls still didn’t look good. He was still afraid 
to call an election. And then he says the farmers that gathered 
together are union goons. 
 
And he had time to look out the windows and, he said, come on 
in and I’ll see you one or two at a time. And the guy got up on 
the platform and took the mike and said to the people that were 
standing out there – and farmers are generally a well-natured lot 
– and he said to them, the chairman that was chairing the 
meeting – and I don’t even know his name; I don’t remember 
who it was – but he said into the mike, he said, should I and two 
or three go in and meet the Premier? 
 
And they hollered a resounding no. We want to hear the 
Premier ourselves; we came to Swift Current from Gravelbourg 
and from Cabri and from Ponteix and Shaunavon and 
Assiniboia and around; we came in to hear the Premier, from 
Vanguard and wherever there was a drought; we came in, we 
want to hear the Premier. 
 
But he said, they’re union goons. They’re organized by the 
NDP because I happen to have been invited to show up; I was 
invited to come and be there. Hazen Argue was another one of 
these guys that must have been a union goon; he, the senator, 
was there. And different ones were there to meet with the 
people, but the Tories couldn’t show. The Tories wouldn’t show 
– the Tories wouldn’t show. And I think that it’s an indication 
of why we haven’t got an election today. The agricultural . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
(2030) 
 
I don’t like competing with . . . And I wouldn’t call people that 
cackle like chickens or turkeys anything else but that, but the 
hon. members sitting here, that are trying to compete and are 
trying to chide from their seats – and even some of the cabinet 
ministers – are making it very, very difficult. 
 
Your role is one that makes me wonder if you’re neutral and 
treat us all the same because my colleagues are quiet. They’re 
all supportive of what we’re doing here together, and I think 
that a number of them have some questions. I know the 
members from the North had some areas they wanted to 
discuss, and the members from Quill Lakes and Pelly. So I 
think I’ll give them a chance to ask the Premier some questions 
before we go into some of these other details. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just . . . An  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1939 
 

interesting response that my colleague, hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who said that he would not attend the 
hearings, the public hearings, and he didn’t like them, and he 
said that they were politically motivated. So we’re just finished 
saying that, right here on television. 
 
And in the Leader-Post it says here: 
 

MLA Allen Engel (NDP – Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) says he 
welcomes a government decision to hold public hearings on 
rising agricultural costs, (and he hoped) the government 
(would) not use the hearings to avoid taking action. 

 
Well, if you welcomed the hearings and you thought that they 
were a reasonable idea, and then you stand up and say, well you 
wouldn’t go – tonight – because you didn’t think that they were, 
I mean, obviously you’re just making noise. You’re just making 
noise. 
 
You’re in the legislature; it’s the Premier’s estimates in 
Agriculture; and you have to show the people that you can say 
something. so you'll say one thing one week and one thing the 
next – that first you think it’s a great idea – then you stand up 
and say that it isn’t. Well, it’s a reasonable idea; then you stand 
up and you call them all a bunch of turkeys. Well, I mean, Mr. 
Chairman, if we want to get into Agriculture estimates – 
Agriculture estimates – on where we are spending money, what 
our budget looks like, all the kinds of things that are important, 
rather than calling cabinet ministers turkeys, I think it would be 
reasonable. The public expect you and I to carry on intelligent 
conversation. 
 
So if we can get down to it and get discussing it rather . . . I 
mean we have different philosophical views, and that’s quite 
clear, but if we can get into the nuts and bolts of the programs 
and so forth, I think it would be fair to the public and we 
wouldn’t waste the taxpayers’ time. We could get right into it. 
So I would entertain questions on northern agriculture, or 
southern agriculture, or Agriculture estimates of anything. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just one comment, Mr. Chairman. When it was 
first announced there would be a committee of legislative 
members looking at farm input costs, I welcomed it. And I’m 
glad you read the whole article, but when we asked you a 
question in the House about it before the committee went out on 
the road, and you gave us the answer that this is going to be a 
little PR operation – the committee is going to go out and it’s 
going to talk to farmers about the agriculture programs we have 
available. You’ll remember that. You remember saying that. 
You remember saying that. It’s in Hansard; we’ll dig out the 
record because I asked you the question specifically: what is the 
role of this committee and what are they going to do and who’s 
on it. 
 
You listened and told us who’s on it after I did that little story 
with the Leader-Post. You told me who was on it and what their 
role was going to be, and that’s quite another story. Once you 
advertised that committee as the one that’s going to be an 
information meeting, that then  

becomes a political meeting, and then you’re using taxpayers’ 
money to try and further, and try and boost and shore-up your 
sagging fortunes. That’s what you were trying to do with that 
committee. You were trying to shore-up the Tory sagging 
fortunes. 
 
And I wouldn’t waste my time going there, and in fact when 
they were in Assiniboia, I wasn’t even in the country. I was out 
of the country at the time, but I didn’t miss that one 
intentionally; I’ve taken in meetings locally. I’ve taken 
meetings locally. But I was at Lloydminster, and I didn’t bother 
going; they were right there when I was there. We had our own 
meeting and met with farmers. 
 
And as far as the people in Swift Current being ashamed, that’s 
your story. Call an election and we’ll decide. 
 
Here’s an example. This member’s an example of what 
happened when you called a by-election in Regina North East. 
And I’m sure when you call an election, I would be very 
concerned if I were the member from Swift Current because 
John Penner did very well because of that farm meeting in Swift 
Current, even though the farmers came there, because the 
people in Swift Current felt the plight of farmers and know how 
severe it was. And they don’t like . . . 
 
And after tonight we’ll circulate Hansard to those farmers that 
were there. We’ll let them know what you think of them. I’ll let 
them know that you called them goons, in fact, you said worse 
than that, you said they’re union goons. And I want to tell you 
that the farmers will appreciate that coming from their Premier. 
They’ll appreciate that. 
 
I’ll tell you, those kind of insults prove what I said about you 
before. They prove that we have a Premier that lacks a little 
statesmanship qualities, lacks a few of those qualities – 
somebody that comes on the defensive, that doesn’t want to get 
into Agriculture estimates, but wants to talk politics, always 
turns every question around and turns it back and says, this is 
what NDP are, and try make up stories and try and pick out 
little things out of the air, and pick a feather out of their hair, 
and try make up a story what we would do. Well I’ll tell you, 
we can go beyond that because the people know over the years 
what we do and what we can accomplish. And I’m proud of our 
record. I’m proud of our record. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, in 
my whole tenure . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’d like to ask the member 
from Regina North to please allow the member from Pelly to 
begin his line of questioning. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was just talking to one of the members. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — . . . (inaudible) . . . who you were talking to. 
Please refrain from interrupting the speaker. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, I have never in my tenure in 
this legislature witnesses what went on in this House today. I 
can tell you, we see a Premier of Saskatchewan and also the 
Minister of Agriculture, during his estimates,  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1940 
 
 

that got into a little bit of trouble. And what happens? He gets 
some of his tough guys from his side of the House to come over 
on our side and make it as hard for us as possible to conduct 
these estimates. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman, they wouldn’t even sit in 
their own seats. They would sit in the WCC seats. And they 
think that somehow that’s going to distract me. Well, Mr. 
Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Once more I 
must ask hon. members to please tone down the noise. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, somehow they think that this is 
going to distract me. Well it certainly will not, Mr. Chairman. It 
certainly will not. They can holler and they can say everything 
they like. It won’t bother me one bit. But I am surely 
disappointed at the kind of Premier we have and the way he 
handles his members in this House. He has no control over 
them whatsoever, no control over them whatsoever. They do 
whatever they like. There is no decorum in here. And if he gets 
in trouble or any of the ministers get in trouble, they send 
someone over here to give us a hard time. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, they can continue to do that. They can 
continue to do that. We are going to keep on the estimates, and 
we are going to try to do the business of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people that are paying their wages here. And 
we are going to keep up with those estimates, trying to find out 
and get information that will inform the people of what’s 
happening. 
 
I know this government doesn’t want to give out information – 
everybody knows that – and they do everything that they can to 
try and avoid giving information. The Premier today talked 
about everything he could think of. He talks about union goons 
and farmers, calling them union goons, and doing everything he 
could. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose given the kind of government 
we have, that’s really not surprising. I’m not totally surprised. 
And it doesn’t bother me that much. I’m not totally surprised. 
And it doesn’t bother me that much. The people are the ones 
that are eventually going to decide what they think this 
government has done or what they haven’t done. 
 
The Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, today says that we are 
against free enterprise. Well I suppose one can say somehow 
free enterprise certainly is involved in agriculture. But I can tell 
you we had as much, if not more, free enterprise operating in 
this province prior to ’82 as we have today. And they were all 
doing not too badly. And I know a lot of those farm implement 
dealers, farm machinery manufacturers, the small ones, that are 
out of business today. Those were the free enterprise people. 
They were doing well, and they were doing a good job in this 
province. 
 
But this Premier and this Minister of Agriculture thinks that the 
only kind of free enterprise that’s good is the Peter Pocklington 
type of free enterprise, the Weyerhaeuser type of free 
enterprise. Those are the only good ones that you should be 
bringing in. The small business  

entrepreneur is not important. He isn't that important to them. If 
they go broke, well, that’s tough. They just couldn’t survive, 
and they should get out of the business. 
 
But when you get to Peter Pocklington and a bacon plant, well 
there’s $10 million grant. There’s another 20 million in loan. 
You get the Weyerhaeusers, the same thing. There’s all kind of 
money for the rich multinationals, the multimillionaires. And to 
them that’s a joke. 
 
But you get a small-business man that’s in trouble – and I know 
a lot of them; there are some in my constituency that are finding 
it difficult — they can’t come to this government and get a $10 
million grant. 
 
The farmers are in trouble. And what’s the Premier say? Well, 
look at all the good things I’ve done. I gave them $25 an acre. I 
gave them $25 an acre. And that was supposed to pay for their 
. . . At least when he brought it in, that was supposed to pay for 
their seeding operation this spring; pay the input costs. 
 
And he says all of this now. We’ve got grasshopper problems in 
the South again, but there is no additional assistance. He didn’t 
ask the federal government for some assistance. He says, well, I 
gave them $25 an acre. There’s a billion dollars out there. Well, 
Mr. Chairman, this Premier didn’t give them $25 an acre. He 
gave them a loan that they’re going to have to pay back. He 
gave them another debt on to of what they already have that 
they have to pay back. 
 
What they actually got – what they actually got, Mr. Chairman, 
was maybe $1 an acre in the variation of the interest that they 
are going to save. That’s all they got. And that’s not very much 
when every farmer takes a look at what he really got that he’ll 
be able to keep. And it’s just a differential in the interest 
because the rest he has to pay back. So he got a loan. Instead of 
getting it from the bank, he got it from the government this 
time, with a little lower interest rate. And he’s going to have to 
pay it back. 
 
He maybe got a dollar, a dollar and a half an acre out of the 
deal. That’s what this government really gave him. And yet 
they brag about the billion dollars that they’ve given to the 
farmers. Well it’s not very much that they really got, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
What they need right now . . . And they’re finding it very 
difficult, because that $25 . . . And like I said, it’s a loan; it’s 
not a gift that you gave them. And you shouldn’t even tell them 
that it is, because it certainly isn’t. 
 
If you’re going to tell the farmers that you gave them a billion 
dollars, then you should be telling them also that they don’t 
have to pay any of that back. Then I would say you gave them a 
billion dollars. But you didn’t. You didn’t give them that billion 
dollars. You just gave them a billion-dollar debt, and you gave 
them a small amount of the interest differential that they won’t 
have to pay back. That’s all that they got out of it. 
 
In the northern part of this province, the cost of fertilizer 
amounts to $25 an acre to most farmers. You’ve got chemicals 
that you have to put in there; you’ve got fuel. That $25 loan was 
just another operating loan like they  



 
June 12, 1986 

1941 
 

would have had from the bank. But a lot of them are in trouble 
where they couldn’t get it from the banks any more. 
 
So what did the banks say? We can’t afford to carry the 
farmers. We can’t risk it. Let the government carry it. And the 
farmers can pay us off. And we’ll be doing fine. And let the 
taxpayer put up the money now. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, who did you really bail out with that program 
of yours? Did you bail out the farmer? No. You bailed out the 
banks again. They were the ones that were crying. That’s who 
you bailed out with that billion dollars. And now the farmer’s 
going to have to worry about how he’s going to pay the 
taxpayer of this province back, because that’s what he’s going 
to have to do. He’s going to have to pay the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan back, with interest. 
 
Mr. Minister, we certainly, in this side of the House, are not 
against free enterprise. We’re not against free enterprise. Free 
enterprise has always survived and they’ve done well in this 
province. And I was in business at one time too and I never was 
hurt by the NDP. They didn’t take my business away and they 
didn’t say that I shouldn’t operate as a private business man. 
There’s a lot of them out there in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, 
and there always has been and there always will be. 
 
(2045) 
 
And there’s a lot of farmers in Saskatchewan too. They are free 
enterprise people. Farmers are free enterprise people. They are 
running a business and they’re trying to run it the best they 
could. But they are finding it difficult because there isn’t a 
government in Canada or in this province that’s really willing to 
stand up for the farmer. You should be out there – not saying to 
the farmer, here’s another loan; it will maybe keep you going 
for a year and then you’ll have to go broke anyway. You should 
be saying that it’s time the farmer got a proper and a decent 
price for the product that he produces. 
 
We said to you not too long ago that the farmer should be 
having a deficiency payment because the Americans have 
decided that they’re going to give their farmers a deficiency 
payment, and our farmers cannot afford to compete with the 
American government. And, Mr. Minister, you disagreed with 
us. You were against a deficiency payment for farmers. You 
were against it a few weeks ago. Every member in this House 
was against it. 
 
But now you found that the farmers realize that they can’t 
survive with more loans. They need to get a decent price for the 
product that they produce. And now you’re saying, yes, we 
should have a deficiency payment because other provinces have 
realized than that’s what’s needed. So you’re going to go along 
with them. And it’s time that you did. It’s a little late, but 
you’ve decided to go along with the rest of the provinces. And 
you’re not asking for a total deficiency payment. You want only 
part of it. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, as the Leader of the Opposition mentioned 
earlier today, you’re asking for only a part of what the farmers 
really need. We’ve lost in our initial payment price, come 
August, what you’re asking for in 

 the deficiency payment. 
 
So where does that put the farmer of Saskatchewan? That puts 
him right back where he was in’85. That’s where it puts him. 
And he needs a little more than that because he can’t continue 
to compete with the American government or the European 
governments. Against any of those governments the farmer 
cannot compete at $3 or $ a bushel grain. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you continue to brag about all the money you 
put into agriculture. But yet the farmer does not see any of that. 
It’s nothing more than a lot of words on your part, and a lot of 
promises. And farmers are still going bankrupt. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All on public relations. Millions of 
dollars spent in public relations. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, as my colleague says, your 
government operates more on public relations than it does on 
concrete programs or promises. Nothing but public relations. 
Thousands and thousands of dollars being spent. 
 
And I guess I shouldn’t say thousands. That’s million because 
there’s department sin this government who spend 1 and 2 and 
$3 million on communications. That is the kind of money you 
spend on PR. And you’re trying to tell the people that the PR is 
somehow going to make them survive. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, PR is not what’s going to make the farmers 
survive. You’re hoping that it’s going to make you survive 
through another election. But what the farmer needs today is 
some concrete action. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said you spent $128,000 to send some of your 
colleagues, some of your back-benchers and a couple of 
ministers, out on a farm input cost committee to find out what 
farmers are really complaining about, and what they think their 
problems are. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you didn’t have to spend $128,000 to send 
some of your colleagues out on a committee. All you had to do 
was listen to what farmers were saying, right directly to you. 
Listen to what we were saying. 
 
Farmers knew what the problem was four years ago. The input 
costs were the problem. You were told that over and over again. 
You didn’t need a committee to tell you that the input costs 
were a problem. 
 
What the farmers needed was some help in input costs. They 
wanted someone to take a look at why chemical costs were so 
high. They wanted someone to take a look why fertilizer is so 
high; why a person has to spend $25 an acre on fertilizer when 
you’ve got $3-a-bushel wheat. 
 
Why do you have to pay 250-some dollars for a pail of 
Hoe-Grass to spray your crop, at $3-a-bushel wheat? This is 
what the farmers were asking you to look at, Mr. Premier. They 
didn’t need another committee out there. They knew what the 
problem was, and you knew what the problem was. You just 
didn’t want to deal with it. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1942 
 
 

What you wanted to do was stall it long enough so you can get 
by another election, where you wouldn’t have to take any action 
on it because if you did, if you took action on chemical prices, 
you would have to take action against the chemical companies. 
And those are your friends. Those are the ones that you’re more 
interested in protecting, not the farmer. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, if you want farmers on your side, and you 
want them to elect you again, it’s not going to be with 
committees and with promises and no action. Nor will that 
advertising that you’re putting out going to elect you. The 
advertising is not going to elect you either. But the farmers are 
wondering how long they’re going to be able to survive with 
more loans, and nobody really fighting to try and make them 
survive. We don’t need less farmers in this province, the way 
you have suggested when you were an economist or a professor 
at the University of Saskatchewan. What we need is more 
farmers, not less farmers. 
 
And I think if you went into rural Saskatchewan and talked to 
even the bankers out there – and I’ve talked to some of them – 
they are saying, the small communities in Saskatchewan need 
more farmers, not less farmers. If the small towns are going to 
survive, is some of those banks are going to survive, and if the 
implement dealers and the small-business men are going to 
survive, we need more people living in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But you are saying we need less. And I don’t think the farmers 
understand exactly why you’re saying that. They don’t think 
that we need less farmers out there. We should be trying to keep 
more farmers on the farm, and we should be trying to get more 
farmers into farming, but not to get less farmers into 
agriculture. That has been the policy of the conservative 
government for many years now. It’s just that they haven’t been 
able to convince the farmers and to convince the business 
people in the small towns that what we need is less farmers. 
You haven't been able to convince them to do that. But you’re 
certainly working on it. You’ve been working on it for the last 
15 years. 
 
And governments, both federal and provincial, continue to do 
that. And it started working a few years ago. Farmers believed 
some of what you were telling them. And they tried to get 
bigger, and they figured somehow that ‘s going to make them 
survive. Well a lot of them learned that that’ s not true. They 
found out that when they tried to get big, a lot of them went 
bankrupt. And I think it’s going to be a lot more difficult today 
to convince farmers that they should get big. And what you 
should be doing is telling them how they can survive at the size 
that they’re at right now. That’s what you should be saying to 
them, not telling them to get bigger, and not telling the smaller 
farmers to get off the land if they can’t afford the high price of 
chemicals or fertilizers, or the high price of land, or the high 
price of equipment. Don’t tell them that because everything is 
so high that they have to get out of it. You should be looking at 
how we can bring down those input costs and keep all of those 
farmers on the land. 
 
Mr. Minister, some of your colleagues are saying, what do you 
think that committee was all about? Well, Mr. Minister, I didn’t 
go to that committee and I wasn’t part of  

that committee. But I know all of that without having gone to 
that committee. It took your members, sitting on a $128,000 
committee, to learn what the problems in agriculture are. Well, 
I’ll tell you, you people have some expensive tastes when it 
comes to learning what people need or what the problems are 
that farmers are facing. You needed a $128,000 committee to 
go and see what the problems are. There isn’t anyone on this 
side of the House that doesn’t know what the problems are. It’s 
just a matter of dealing with them, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the former minister . . . No, pardon me. It’s not the former 
minister of Agriculture. It almost sounded like him. It’s the 
member for Saskatoon. And he says, you’ve got all the answers. 
Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that everybody has all the 
answers, or anybody has all the answers. But I think if we work 
together with the farmers, with the business people, with the 
farm organizations, we could come up with some of the 
solutions. But you don’t believe in listening to the farm 
organizations, or sitting down with all of those people involved 
and coming up with a solution to the problems. 
 
You put out committee after committee, study after study. You 
waste hundreds of thousands of dollars, and not for the benefit 
of the farmers but for the benefit of those people that sit on 
those committees. That’s the only ones that really benefited on 
that committee. 
 
You’re saying that you’re going to be bringing down a report 
some time. Well they went on that committee early this spring, 
and they spent all that money listening to the problems of the 
farmers. But are the farmers going to see any benefits from that 
this year? Those farmers, the taxpayers of this province, the 
farmers, the business men, the workers – they’re paying the 
taxes for those committees. They are paying those taxes. But 
are the farmers going to see any benefits from that? Not in this 
year they won’t, and by next year there will be an election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe. I wouldn’t assume that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — As some members say, maybe; we won’t 
assume it. Well, I think they’re certainly right. We can’t assume 
that there will be an election this year. But it’s going to be a 
while before you come out with some positive steps to try and 
help the farmers. 
 
They certainly won’t benefit this year any more. Because they 
haven't seen the fertilizer go down, nor the chemicals going 
down. You haven’t come up with any programs to assist that. 
 
And you’ll say that $25 is supposed to do all that. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’ve never taken a loan from the bank or from a 
government or anybody else, that really brought down the cost 
of any of my inputs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you ever pay one off? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well one of the members, the member for 
Moosomin, sits there and he says, did you ever pay one off? 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve done a lot of things in my life. I’ve  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1943 
 

been in business and I’ve been in agriculture and I don’t think I 
have any creditors after me. Never have, and I don’t think I 
will. But I’m not so sure about the member for Moosomin. And 
I won’t bother asking whether he has paid any off or not. I’m 
really not interested. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you have in your policy or in your program 
anything in there that would limit farm size, or would increase 
farm size? Are you looking at or contemplating what you 
suggested at one time before, and that’s to eliminate a certain 
percentage of the farmers? And that would mean the small ones. 
And that would probably mean that you are looking at larger 
and larger farms. 
 
Mr. Minister, what really is your policy? Because I don’t think 
anybody at this point knows what your policy really is. At one 
time you said that you wanted to get rid of a lot of farmers, you 
wanted to get rid of a lot of farmers. Now you’re the Premier of 
this province and we don’t hear you saying that you want to get 
rid of the farmers any more. But what you are doing is coming 
up with a loan, like you did this year, and you're saying to the 
farmers that don’t really need the loan: you can get it quite 
easily, no problem, just fill out the form; no security required, 
nothing. 
 
But yet you're saying to the farmers that have some debts, that 
are in trouble, the ones that need something to help them 
survive, you’re saying to them: look, you owe the bank money, 
or you owe the government some money; you can’t get it; so 
that means you are going to have to go under. Sorry, we can’t 
help you. That’s it; you're finished. So that means some of these 
farmers are gone. 
 
(2100) 
 
Is this the direction that you’re heading in, Mr. Minister, where 
you want to eliminate all the small farmers and any of those that 
are in trouble without providing that assistance to them. 
Because those farmers didn’t get the help this year. They were 
refused it because they owed money. They didn’t get lower 
chemical prices; they didn’t get lower fertilizer prices. Those 
farmers are not likely to survive. 
 
One can only assume, Mr. Minister, that what you are saying is 
that you’re still convinced of your former statement years ago, 
when you were the economist and a professor at the university, 
that we need to eliminate a good portion of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and we should be going to large farms only . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the member from Moosomin sure is trying 
to get my goat, but I’ll tell you, he can’t. There’s no way he can 
do it. He says if I was in another country and said that, that they 
would put a sword through me. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I know that that is the way that this 
government thinks and the members of this House think. I know 
that is the way they would like to govern. That’s the way they’d 
like to govern, and we’ve seen a very good example of that this 
evening when we saw what they tried to do when we were 
giving the Minister of Agriculture a hard time, the Premier of 
this province. They sent those  

guys that would normally carry swords in other countries over 
to this side to try and do something to us. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we’re not afraid of swords here. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Let’s have order, please, because we’re 
getting off the track again. I’d like the member to stick to the 
Agriculture estimates and members on both sides of the House 
to keep it down, and let’s continue with that, okay. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Very well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll get back to 
Agriculture estimates and not refer to what some of the 
members opposite are saying. But we know how they think and 
how they operate. They’ve showed us that quite well. We know 
how they think and what they think of farmers. They’ve made 
that quite clear. They’ve made that very clear, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I said before – and I asked you a question and I 
should have given you the opportunity to answer that, until the 
member for Moosomin interrupted. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it still your belief that what we need in this 
country is larger, more efficient farmers, as you called them – 
you called the larger ones more efficient. Is that still your belief 
that this is what’s required in this province, rather than more of 
the smaller farmers in rural Saskatchewan that could keep the 
towns going, pay the taxes, keep the implement companies 
going, keep the banks going, and we would have a stronger 
economy in total? Which one do you really believe is to the 
advantage of this province—the large farmer or more of the 
smaller ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems like each 
member that gets up asks the same question, and so I’ll have to 
go over the same answer each time they get up. If they’d listen 
to each other when they ask the question and listen to the 
response, they wouldn’t have to go through the same thing 
again. 
 
I’ll point out that when we look at the results of the agricultural 
programs in the late 1970s and early 1980s, they resulted in us, 
in the province of Saskatchewan, losing 9,600 farmers, and the 
population in agriculture declined. And that’s why the NDP was 
totally rejected in rural Saskatchewan in 1982 and they lost 
every seat but four – every one but four – and they lost it 
because they wouldn’t help people that had high interest rate 
payments, 22 per cent, and they lost it because they wouldn’t 
have any tax breaks on farm fuel or anything else. 
 
And as a result, we see their programs that they’re rekindling 
here tonight and yesterday – the land bank, which they say, 
there’s only one problem with the land bank, it didn’t have 
enough land – and this is the new NDP policy. And I believe 
it’s important just to remind the hon. member that this is his 
solution and the reason that the NDP lost the election and are so 
unpopular in rural Saskatchewan today. 
 
The former minister of Agriculture for the NDP, Mr. Edgar 
Kaeding, president of the Saltcoats NDP’s solution, and his 
members, resolved that the NDP government institute a land 
transfer mechanism whereby a beginning farmer  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1944 
 
 

could obtain a land base by means of a long-term guaranteed 
lease. Kaeding said the resolution stems from a problem with 
the old land bank program set up by the NDP when they were in 
power. He said it was an excellent program, except not enough 
land was available for distribution and that the land had to be 
leased for five years before it could be purchased. 
 
So the NDP’s solution in the 1970s and 1980s was not 
protection; it was the land bank. And now a new resolution by 
the NDP and former minister of Agriculture says, the land bank 
is great, only it needs to have more land, which means the 
government would have to buy more land. Now that’s the 
solution and I’m glad it’s clear, because you lost every rural 
seat in Saskatchewan in a general election because the land 
bank was the issue and people rejected it. But you 
philosophically believe that that’s the thing to do and you’ve 
got a new resolution on the books. 
 
The second thing is that you have had resolutions in the NDP 
party saying that you will limit farm size – limit farm size. So 
we’ve got two very important strategies in the NDP platform. 
One is to limit farm size, and you’re on record that you want to 
limit the size of the farm so if somebody wants to buy another 
quarter, if he’s got a section or a section and a half, no, you’re 
going to limit farm size; keep them all to a quarter section. And 
the land bank policy. So now the government will own the land, 
or if you want to expand, you can’t, because the NDP would 
make sure that they’re going to limit farm size. 
 
Now that’s your solution. Well, as a result of that, you lost the 
favour of rural Saskatchewan, and you’re still promoting those 
same policies because you believe in them. In your 
philosophical heart, that’s the case. 
 
Well then the hon. member goes on to say – and I think this is 
important – the hon. member goes on to say that he believes in 
free enterprise. He calls himself a socialist and now he believes 
in free enterprise. Well he can’t have it both ways . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s the classic answer from the NDP 
today. They have no direction; they have no policy. And he 
says, he’s a socialist and he believes in free enterprise and that’s 
called democratic socialism. So it’s free enterprise and social. 
Well you can’t have both. I mean, I can get you a textbook 
definition or a dictionary and describe free enterprise and 
describe socialism; and the member from Pelly says, well he 
believes in both. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to read you – because the Leader of 
the Opposition says that every year at the NDP convention he 
has a renewed mandate to live up to the Regina Manifesto of 
1933, which describes the party platform. Well here’s what 
those that say that they’re in favour of free enterprise believe. 
This is the Bible, if you will, the manifesto behind the NDP and 
democratic socialism. It says, and I quote: 
 

We aim to replace the . . . capitalist system . . . by a social 
order from which the domination .  . exploitation of one class 
by another (class) will be eliminated, in which economic 
planning will supersede . . . private enterprise and 
competition . . . 

And he says he believes in private enterprise – and the very 
foundation of his party and his resolutions every year saying 
that, we will design a system that will eradicate capitalism and 
free enterprise and competition. No wonder the NDP has . . . 
people wonder where it’s doing. They say that they support the 
Regina Manifesto and that’s their roots; and the very roots say 
they got to eradicate capitalism, competition, and free 
enterprise. 
 
And it goes on to say, Mr. Chairman – this is an interesting 
comment about the philosophy: 
 

No (socialist democratic) government will rest content until it 
has eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
program of socialized planning . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is a little 
embarrassed because none of the free enterprisers are going to 
support him. And he says now that he’s both a free enterpriser 
and a socialist. And the leader of the NDP party goes back and 
says he has a renewed mandate to live up to the Regina 
Manifesto, every year; and the Regina Manifesto says quite 
clearly that the objective is to eradicate free enterprise and 
competition and capitalism, and replace it with complete social 
planning. Well, Mr. Chairman, you can’t have it both ways. 
 
The NDP didn’t know what they were doing in 1982. They 
don’t know what they’re doing today. They have no plan for 
agriculture. All they can do is say, me too, me too, me too, 
when we initiate programs. 
 
Well I guess I can point out – and the hon. member raised the 
point with respect to farms. I’ll repeat, because the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg asked the same question; the 
member from Quill Lakes raised the same question; and the 
member from Pelly raised the same question. But they don’t 
listen to each other, and they don’t listen to the response – 
99.62 per cent of all the applications for the $25 an acre has 
been allocated and received. Less than one-half of 1 per cent – 
0.38 per cent of the applications didn’t receive it; 99.62 per cent 
of all the people in Saskatchewan that applied for it received the 
money. 
 
Who got left out? I mean, nobody got left out. And I’ll say it to 
every member that asks the question . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . You haven’t asked yet . . . Well the member from 
Athabasca says he hasn’t asked. Well I’ll provide him with the 
same information. 
 
Similarly with respect to bankruptcies. The province of 
Manitoba has a 50 per cent rate of bankruptcies over 
Saskatchewan’s – 50 per cent more. They didn’t have the 
drought and the grasshoppers, and under an NDP socialist, 
Regina Manifesto, government that wants to institute land bank, 
limit farm size; has a bankruptcy rate that is 50 per cent higher 
than the province of Saskatchewan, and we’ve been through the 
difficult times. 
 
So in terms of assistance, 99.62 per cent of the people who 
applied for it received it. Our bankruptcy rate is  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1945 
 

essentially a fraction of what it is in Manitoba. 
 
And concrete programs. The member from Quill Lakes asked 
what programs have we initiated. What programs have we 
initiated that put money into people’s pockets? He says we 
didn’t do anything; it’s just talk. Well I had to outline them for 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and from Quill 
Lakes, so I’ll do it the same for the member from Pelly. He 
didn’t want to listen but we’ll provide it. 
 
We’ve got a livestock cash advance which provides zero per 
cent interest rates. We’ve got a livestock tax credit, 1986 which 
provides cash in the pocket because of tax breaks. We’ve got a 
feeder association loan guarantee which provides money 
directly into farmers’ pockets. We’ve got a feeder-to-finish 
market insurance for the first time in Saskatchewan – direct 
cash; the cow-calf-to-finish market insurance program. We have 
agricultural credit loan programs – 8 per cent money for 15 
years which is cash in people’s pockets. 
 
We have changes to the Crown land agricultural sales policy 
which means now, Mr. Chairman, we sell land to farmers rather 
than the government buying it for land bank – exactly the 
opposite – and we’ve set records during some difficult times, 
record in land sales to farmers. 
 
Cattle movement assistance for 1984-1985; the prairie livestock 
drought assistance program; the livestock drought assistance 
program. 
 
And then we have direct assistance – the farmers oil royalty 
refund which now allows farmers to pick up farm fuel at 
20-some cents a litre; the farm purchase program at 8 per cent 
money; counselling assistance programs for farmers; The Farm 
Security Act that you didn’t initiate and we brought in; natural 
gas distribution system that cuts the cost for farmers, directly in 
their pocket; individual line service for rural Saskatchewan 
people all over the province; burying power lines to make it 
more safe and more efficient; irrigation assistance in 1984-85; 
the production loan program — $1 billion out, at $25 an acre, at 
6 per cent money; grasshopper control – R.M.s receiving $8.5 
million; special disaster assistance; crop insurance adjustments. 
 
And those are the things that we’ve done recently and that 
doesn’t mention a brand-new agricultural college in the 
neighbourhood of 79 to $80 million. 
 
Now you put those packages together, Mr. Chairman, and for 
the member from Pelly who didn’t listen when I went through it 
before, I’ll outline the benefits. 
 
If you’re an average farmer with a section and a half, and you 
have 500 acres of pastures and 125 head of cattle, these are the 
benefits you could receive. This is cash in your pocket – net 
cash. And if anybody wants . . . I’ll have to do it every night, if 
you can’t listen to it the first time. 
 
The prairie livestock drought assistance was $48 a head, which 
is $6,000; at $60 a cow, it was 7,500. Moving cattle was 
$1,000; the cash advance was $3,562. The  

production loan program was another $1,500. The oil royalty 
refund was $650. The cow-calf-to-finish was $6,231. The farm 
purchase program was $6,000. The loan program was $8,000. 
The livestock tax investment credit, $2,000. And the natural gas 
program saved him $2,325. 
 
That’s a net benefit for the average-sized farmer in 
Saskatchewan of $41,718 — $41,718 just in this last year for an 
average person to receive the kinds of programs we put 
forward. And you didn’t even come up with a dime when 
interest rates were 22 per cent. And you have the audacity to 
stand in this House and say: what am I going to do for 
agriculture? 
 
(2115) 
 
On top of that, Mr. Chairman, we’ll go back and we’ll look at 
the response that we received from the federal government. 
Taking the tax off farm fuel; higher priced domestic wheat; 
freight rates frozen; elevator tariffs. Those first two are worth 
$250 million. A large western grains stabilization package; 6 
per cent money with the Farm Credit Corporation; new 
bankruptcy legislation; drought payments; flood payments; 
removal of capital gains tax, $50 million; action on beef 
imports; the crop insurance payment of $640 million – that in 
itself is a combination of $1.1 billion. 
 
And the deficiency payment of $1 billion, and approximately 7 
to $800 million with respect to the western grains stabilization 
program, you’re talking $2.50 to $3 a bushel increases with 
respect to programs that have been initiated the last 18 months. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have been through these programs with every 
single, solitary member of the NDP that asked the same 
question. I go back and say politically, philosophically, they’re 
in favour of the land bank and limiting farm size. That’s what 
they do. If you want the list of programs, Mr. Chairman, I’ll list 
the programs from now until the 1st of September. I’ll list them, 
and these are the things that put cash in peoples’ pockets. On 
average, $41,000 a farmer – on average – if you were in these 
programs and took advantage of them. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, when we put those kinds of programs 
forward, concrete programs, and the NDP obviously didn’t have 
any ideas in 1982, and have no new ideas now, I can only say, 
Mr. Chairman, I can repeat the programs. I can list them. If they 
want to get into the political philosophy, I can go through the 
entire Regina Manifesto that outlines their feelings on free 
enterprise and competition, and I’d be glad to do it. If they want 
to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I was listening with interest to 
the Premier talking about the Regina Manifesto, and I’m glad 
you went through some of these details, and you were talking 
about how the socialist philosophy was to eradicate free 
enterprise. Well, you get back to about that same time period, 
Mr. Chairman, and your forerunners, the former Anderson 
government, and the PC government was in place Mr. Premier. 
And I think I’d far  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1946 
 
 

sooner take the history and the roots of our party that date back 
to the Regina Manifesto, than the roots that date back to your 
party. I kind of think I much, much prefer the roots that our 
party grew out of than compared to what the first Anderson 
government did. 
 
Let me give you one example, Mr. Premier. I know very well a 
gentlemen here in the city now – he’s living in Regina – the 
Anderson government paid him 50 cents a tire for gathering up 
used tires. And guess what they used them for, Mr. Premier? 
That’s where your roots came from he got paid so much a pole 
for putting up posters for the KKK. This is story he told me. 
Then they gathered together and they took these tires and they’d 
burn a cross. That’s where your roots come from, MR. Premier. 
That’s the former Conservative Party that . . . that’s history that 
you guys should know. That is history you guys should know. 
 
When he wrote his Grade 12 exams . . . And I’ll tell you what 
his name is, it’s Emil Lautermilch – 75-year-old gentlemen here 
in the city. When he wrote his Grade 12 exams in Gravelbourg, 
do you know what they did? Do you know what they did, Mr. 
Chairman? He went to the convent and the nuns were disrobed 
and the crosses were taken down, amongst the former PC Party. 
 
Your Premier talked about the Regina Manifesto and our roots. 
I want to give you a little history on your roots and on the roots 
of your party. And I want to tell you, I’m not proud of the 
history of the Ku Klux Klan in Woodrow and where they burnt 
the crosses. I’m not proud of that history, but I know the details 
of it. And I know how the Conservatives operated then. I know 
how they instilled fear into the hearts of farmers then, and I 
know the threats they made then. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe that the speaker should get 
back on the topic of the estimates . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I believe that the speaker should get back on estimates, and 
we will certainly make more progress if we do that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I want to respond very explicitly to the 
Premier’s statement about the Regina Manifesto and reading 
expressly into the record that we were going to eradicate free 
enterprise. Well, I want to tell you, I’m proud of the Regina 
Manifesto and the roots of our party. 
 
Are you proud – are you proud of the KKKs? Are you proud of 
your forefathers and your party that took the crosses down in 
the Catholic church, in the Catholic schools? Are you proud of 
that? 
 
You talked about the Regina Manifesto . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I believe once again, 
as I said before, that I would ask the speaker to get on to the 
topic of estimates and I believe we will make more progress in 
the House if we talk about estimates and Agriculture, which is 
what we’re here for tonight. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, I kind of think that the public that’s 
listening tonight will know how fair the rule is, and if you want 
us to have one set of rules for us, and another set for the 
Premier when he answers the questions, I’m  

wondering if you would comment on the Premier commenting 
on the Regina Manifesto. I would please like to know if that 
was in order. 
 
I listened in our office down the hall; I listened to him talk 
about the Regina Manifesto. I walked in here; I sat in here for 
five more minutes, which is 15 minutes, when he went on and 
on about the Regina Manifesto. Can I have two minutes to 
respond? That’s the question to the Chair? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I don’t intend to get into a debate on that 
particular topic. My interest is that the debate on the estimates 
of Agriculture proceed tonight, and I believe that that is what I 
am trying to accomplish in the Chair here tonight. Therefore, 
once more, I ask the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to 
please carry on with estimates of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Farmers, farmers in Woodrow, farmers in 
Woodrow in – I’ll abide by your ruling – but farmers in 
Woodrow in 1930 – it was during the Anderson government – 
were paid 50 cents a tire for collecting tires for the KKK to burn 
crosses. That’s your history, and I am abiding by the ruling as 
to the agricultural estimates. In those days things were tough, 
and some guys, because they got paid 50 cents, gathered up old 
tires to burn crosses. 
 
Today, things aren’t quite that tough, but I want to tell you, Mr. 
Premier, if you want to get out and flout falsehoods and stories, 
I can read from Dale Eisler’s report in the Leader-Post, and 
different stories that the media have taken a stance on how 
much of it we can believe. You talk about how many acres I 
and the member from Shaunavon farm. Those were exaggerated 
by 400 per cent . Four hundred per cent exaggeration, and the 
people are supposed to believe you when we get into the details 
of the estimates. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you have one set of rules for you, that abide by 
what you can talk, and another set for the opposition, I think 
that that is very, very interesting, and we have opened up the 
debate tonight on the political history of our various parties, and 
he’s challenging me. He’s challenging me to stand up and say 
what that was all about. Well, I want to say, I’m proud of our 
roots. I’m proud of where we took this country, and where we 
started on the depressed condition of farmers. 
 
But I’m not very proud what the Tories did, what the Tories did 
when they burned crosses in front of my neighbours. I’m not 
proud of that. I’m not proud of the fact that when my uncle and 
my forefathers went to write their exams during those days and 
the nuns were disrobed and the crosses were taken out. But 
that’s your history, and those are your roots, and that’s as far as 
I’ll carry that one. 
 
But I think that you are trying very hard to look for an issue and 
to seek to evade the issue that is really at stake, the issues that 
are really at stake in this, the issue is that . . . you want to know 
what the issue is? Well let me tell you what the issue is. We 
should have had an election this spring, and we would then 
have had the people of Saskatchewan deciding whether they 
want more of these kinds of policies or not. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1947 
 

You’re stretching every rule of the book trying to govern when 
you haven’t got a mandate to do so. You’re trying to implement 
programs, yet you haven’t got a mandate. You appoint 
committees, you appoint committees after the time has expired 
to do another study. You studied and dithered all through your 
term of office, and I want to tell you, the farm community is 
more depressed now than it ever was. 
 
I will concede to my colleagues who have some questions that 
they want to deal with specifically on some farm in the North. 
Are you ready on that one? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have a 
couple of questions, Mr. Minister, and it’s regarding the 
irrigation system that you were going to put into the 
government far at Ile-a-la-Crosse. I wonder if you could just 
give us an update on that irrigation program on your 
government farm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have specifics on 
that irrigation program. We will be glad to dig it up for you and 
provide it. Or if you could give me just a little bit more detail on 
what specifically you’re after, maybe it will help us identify it. 
The costs of the pulps, or what? What are you looking for? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It was an irrigation project on the 
government farm that was going in in Ile-a-la-Crosse. I see they 
had the equipment moved in there, I believe, last summer or the 
summer before. And I just wanted to find out where that system 
was at this time, and I wanted to find out how much money was 
involved in that project. If you don’t have that information, if 
you want to provide me with that information in writing, then 
that would be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I would be glad to provide the 
information. I don’t have it with me, but we’ll get it and we’ll 
send it across. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Your officials are aware of the project, are 
they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They’re not aware of the details that they 
would need to give you an accurate response. So rather than 
give you something less than the total picture, we’ll go back 
and dig it up, and we’ll find out exactly what it is. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just a couple of specific issues on the farmers’ 
taxing that I think you’re overlooking. You’re trying to add up 
all the programs and saying that the wheat is going to be worth 
so much if you put it all into it, but how should the farmers 
consider the scrapping the property improvement grants, for 
example? You know, $675 a farmer, small-business men, and 
the renters, and so on. You know, you took $80 million out of 
rural Saskatchewan with that program. 
 
Your flat tax costs $100 million, you know. There’s a $180 
million there on the negative side of the ledger that I think . . . 
What do you feel, should the farmer borrow that additional 
money too? Is it 6 per cent or what? You know, why keep 
hitting farmers with those kind of deals that, again, expressly 
relate to . . . 
 

A farmer that lost $675 and farms a section of land is hit pretty 
hard on his taxes. Half his taxes, you’ve taken away on him, 
and that he’s made to pay twice as much because he doesn’t get 
that property improvement grant. The farmer with 4,000 acres, 
$600 is peanuts, you know; it’s 10 per cent. So your programs 
were geared and designed expressly . . . 
 
On that one with the property improvement grant, I think the 
only way you can direct any universal program, that everybody 
gets it, but to direct a program that affects the small farmers, it’s 
got to be in a form of a rebate so you can give him more in case 
he’d have a scale property tax. 
 
I’d like to see a property tax saying that on the first section it’s 
maybe 20 mills and after the next quarter 40, and the next 
quarter 50, and so on. That would maybe do it, to help the guy 
out and to stabilize and give him a chance on his farm. I can’t 
see why you can’t understand that kind of concept on delivering 
programs to farmers to encourage more people into farming. I 
really wonder why you wouldn’t consider that. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
said $660. I mean, he’s double counting because the year before 
we took the home quarter tax we paid. That’s the first time that 
that was ever done to help farmers. You never do that. And we 
did it in a short-term period . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
but you didn’t. No, you didn’t. Mr. Chairman, it’s on average, 
it’s about $330 is what your property improvement grant would 
be worth for farmers, and there’s a limit on that – okay? — 
$330. 
 
Now there are many things that we have done that would more 
than compensate the fact that there is $330 per farm – or say 
average $300 per farm – that is not there. I mean just the rural 
gas distribution system alone, and the cost savings on energy, is 
more than that alone. The package that I just read to the 
member from Pelly is $41,718 per farmer, and on average, 
when you take the summary of the agriculture booklet that the 
member from Athabasca is looking at, it’s $36,000 per farmer, 
and you’re asking about a rebate mechanism that was $330. 
 
Now many people have said to us, we want to see interest rate 
protection, cash in our pockets, and the various kinds of things 
that can reduce the farm costs like fuel, like interest rates, like 
chemicals, natural gas, individual line service, and all of these 
things. I mean just the public utilities programs are $1.5 billion 
in rural gas, telephone line provision, individual line service, 
and burying power lines – major projects. So we have said we 
will reduce the grants. And the rebate mechanism, where we 
hire lots of people, you would collect your taxes and then 
you’re rebated and collected and rebated – which is rather a 
poor way to administer money – and say we will give it to you 
directly. And our programs, directly, on average is $36,000 a 
farmer. 
 
So in the comparison people are telling me around the province 
they don’t like the grants. They don’t like grants  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1948 
 
 

and rebates. If you can give me the cash right up front and show 
me what’s going on, if you can cut my costs so I know that fuel 
is going to be lower, if I can cut the chemical prices or the 
fertilizer, or if I can get my energy cheaper, like in a rural gas – 
they said that makes more sense. Don’t get into a whole bunch 
of hiring many, many people to have grants and rebates and 
sending cheques back and forth to each other. So when we 
looked at the kinds of programs that we’ve initiated, they are 
those that go directly into the farmers’ pocket and obviously 
make a difference. 
 
Now with respect to the flat tax, flat tax is to make sure that 
people, who don’t pay any income tax at all, pay their fair 
share. And we got 90-some per cent of all the people that didn’t 
pay any tax at all, now pay their fair share, and the reduction 
level, we get them all so that we can make sure that we can 
have everybody contributing to the tax system. And I believe 
you think that’s fair and so do I. So the flat tax is to get those 
people that didn’t pay, and there are thousands of people and 
thousands in Canada that didn’t pay any tax at all, but in 
Saskatchewan the wealthy, that dodged all the tax, now have to 
pay some tax, and that’s why we initiated the 1 per cent flat tax. 
At the same time we took 1 per cent off the income tax. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The Premier is giving too much words. You 
should shorten your answers a little bit, please. Why didn’t you 
apply this same principle to your fuel tax as you said to the 
property tax? 
 
You know, you talked about us and questioned the opposition 
before because we have one set of standards for one thing and 
another for another, and you accused us of that. But what do 
you do in the fuel tax? You say to the farmer, get a rebate, 
collect a rebate. Now if you give everybody the same amount of 
rebate, I’d say you’re half fair, but here you develop a fuel tax 
rebate program, and you say to the little farmer, tough luck, the 
first half of the fuel you use isn’t going to qualify for a rebate. 
You use half your fuel up, pay the full price, and then on the 
second half you get a rebate. You know, you made a deductible 
instead of giving the small farmer a break, and giving him a 
little more rebate than the guy that can afford to buy a million 
gallons at a time, you say to the guy, the first 1,500 litres don’t 
qualify. You’ve got to save your bills till you get beyond that 
point, and then when you’ve got a big bill, we’ll give you some 
rebates. You know, you talk about two standards. I’m just 
trying to emphasize a program and the point that all your 
programs are geared for the wealthy. 
 
Even the fuel rebate is a better advantage for the guy that uses 
thousands of gallons because the first 1,500 litres is peanuts, but 
some farmers that farm three-quarters of land don’t get a rebate 
on the first half of the fuel they use. That’s not fair. Not fair at 
all. 
 
And in one point he says, oh we can’t give you the property tax. 
We can’t give you the property tax because guys don’t like 
applying for a rebate. They don’t ‘like applying for a rebate on 
their property tax, and yet you do it on the fuel. 
 
Why didn’t you do like we suggested and take 32 cents off at 
the pump, right at the bulk station. Why didn’t you take  

it off right at the source? Why does a farmer have to pay for it 
and then afterwards he gets a rebate? You know, you’re double 
talk. You’ve got one story – you’ve got one story for the 
opposition and another set of rules for yourself, just like we 
operate in this House. 
 
If our member say something and get off track, oh boy, we’ve 
got to get to order. You can talk about anything under the sun 
and get away with it, and the same thing with your program. 
You can have any kind of standard that suits your fancy and it’s 
great. We don’t like rebates for property tax, but we like them 
for fuel. In fuel we don’t give rebates to the little farmer. 
Because the farmer only has a small market garden, uses 1,500 
litres a year, he doesn’t get a rebate, and he’s the one that needs 
it the worst. He’s the one that needs it the worst. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, the point is loud and clear and well understood 
by farmers, that you’ve got a different set of friends out there 
that carry the big purses, and they’re the ones that get through 
to you and they’re the ones that tell you, don’t bother with an 
$80 million property improvement grant. That $80 million is 
wasted. You don’t need to spend that on property improvement 
grants. Don’t give them the $80 million; don’t give the farmers 
the $675 on their home quarter rebate. 
 
You know, I really got worried. When I heard through the 
rumour mill that you’re taking off the property improvement 
grant, I started getting worried and I thought, oh, oh, they’re 
going to really beat us because they’re not only going to take 
off tax on the home quarter; they’re going to take off tax on the 
home quarter; they’re going to take all the school tax off it and 
transfer the property tax, you know, away from property to pay 
education. And I thought, well now there they’ve got one that 
they’re really out-socializing the socialists. And what do they 
do? They took them both off. I couldn’t believe it. I didn’t think 
you’d be that dumb. That was a bigger mistake than your car 
tax. It was a bigger one because the farmers are madder about 
that. You decided to repeal the used vehicle tax. You decided to 
take that off. You’re not getting it back to the farmers. 
 
But I want to tell you, you did more harm, by taking off your 
PIG (property improvement grant) grants and scrapping those 
property improvement grants. You did more harm scrapping 
those than you did with your used vehicles tax, because those 
taxes had a way, those rebates had a way of making their way 
into farm hearts. 
 
And I’m glad you agree with me. You give me the signal that 
you said, yes, I’m right, that the NDP with that commitment are 
turning the tide around. They’re turning it around with the small 
farmer saying, we can’t afford these Tories and their deficit any 
longer. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you send over the amount of trips you took 
around the province and outside of the province, and the value 
of those trips, and who flew with you, and how much your staff 
did. The flying expense of your major people. Send us that 
over. 
 
And I’d like to know, I’d like to know the price of these little 
booklets. You know, you did some pretty fancy literature out in 
the country with your mug shot on the lot of them. And a lot of 
that stuff’s going out, and every time  



 
June 12, 1986 

1949 
 

they look at this they say, gee, I wish that guy would have 
called an election. But the more stuff you send out, the more 
times they say, hey, this guy’s the guy that should have called 
the election. That’s the guy that should have called the . . .You 
should have had the courage. 
 
One of your relatives told me the other night that it’s just a 
matter of ego—if he just wouldn’t be quite so proud he might 
have called it. And I think he’s right. I wish you would up and 
call it. 
 
But send us the information over on that, and then the other . . . 
The other piece of information that I think is worthwhile, is 
what was the total . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s a 
good one. What’s the total advertising costs for the Department 
of Agriculture? Did you hear that question? The advertising 
costs in total for the Department of Agriculture. 
 
You must have those numbers because we’ve been asking them 
of all the other departments. If we can get those information’s I 
think we’re pretty well ready to go line by line. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly will 
provide all of that information that the hon. member wants with 
. . . just as quickly as we can dig it up. The cost of producing 
the small information booklet on the programs was $21,500, or 
about 20 cents each. So the cost of producing and distributing 
105,000 copies of the Saskatchewan agricultural assistance 
brochure was $21,500, or about 20 cents apiece. 
 
As I quoted in the legislature before, the editor of the Reader’s 
Digest says: 
 

I want to thank you for the information on the booklet about 
agriculture. I’ve read many government documents in 
condensed and uncondensed, and I find this one impressive in 
respect of the information that it gives and of the way the 
information is organized. 

 
And this is Alexander Farrell who is the editor of Reader’s 
Digest. 
 
So if people in the publishing business can call it generally 
pretty fair and one of the best he’s seen, I think it’s reasonable. 
And farmers like it because they can look up any of the 
programs that they want. 
 
But I’ll get you the information on that. And I’ll get you the 
information with respect to my travel in Saskatchewan and the 
places that I’ve gone and the meetings I attend, and outside as 
well. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have one more quick question that . . the next 
MLA for Rosthern wanted some information. 
 
He’s quite concerned about the deep cuts in staffing and 
funding for the dairy herd improvement and the provincial rate 
of production programs. This apparently is a big issue in his 
area and I was wondering if you could tell me . . .I’ve got 
Estimates here for ‘84-85, ‘85-86, and ‘86-87, and I see you’re 
slashing the amounts there. And is there a reason why you’re 
cutting back on the deep cuts  

in staffing and funding for the dairy herd improvement program 
and the provincial rate of production programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we are amalgamating the 
programs with the federal government and ROP (rate of 
production) programs, and we’re putting together what we 
believe will be a better package. So it’s a combination of moves 
with the federal government and ourselves to do an even better 
job. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I can’t see how you can do a better job 
with less people. There’s some concern in the Rosthern 
constituency and Edgar Epp raised this with me, that he feels 
that the cuts in staffing . . . There’s enough problem with milk 
quotas and dairy herd improvement programs already, that that 
area couldn’t afford any more cuts in staffing there. Can you 
just give me a quicker summary that I could send to him on 
what your federal . . . the combination of that program is going 
to be about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It’s the industry itself that wants to take 
over the whole program. And the head of the organizations have 
been recommending that we move this way in co-operation with 
the federal government and with ROP testing and everything 
else – that we put together a better package under more control 
of the industry. And it’s at their request that they were doing 
this. 
 
So the suggestions are coming in saying, we can do a lot better 
job; let the industry control it more. And they’re initiating these 
moves and are in support of them. So I can give you the names 
and addresses of individuals who have suggested that we make 
the moves in this direction. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I want to 
raise a few points here, before we get into estimates in more 
detail, with regards to the farming units in Cumberland House, 
Green Lake and Ile-a-la-Crosse. My understanding, when those 
farms were set up, Mr. Minister, was to provide training to local 
community folk in those four communities so that they could 
gradually learn the ropes in terms of being farmers, getting to 
know more about agriculture, etc. 
 
The farming units in question have now been in the records 
approximately since 1940. To this point in time, Mr. Minister, 
there’s some confusion in the minds of many of the people at 
the community level. For one thing, the training in some areas 
has been provided; some jobs have been provided. But the 
question of getting local people involved into mixed farming on 
their own, that hasn’t come about. The farming units in question 
are still under government control, Mr. Minister. 
 
(2145) 
 
And to this point in time, I was talking to a good number of 
people in Cumberland House who did try their hand at mixed 
farming, raising hogs, cattle, and some poultry, and did manage 
to get their hands into some capital to buy some machinery. But 
all in all, with the way the economy is going, they’ve had to 
fold up. They’ve ended up paying huge debts with regards to 
the assets they had, debts to Revenue Canada for things that 
they ought not to have been charged for. And I want to know, 
Mr. Minister: what is the policy today with regards to those 
farms in  



 
June 12, 1986 

1950 
 
 

question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the operation of the 
northern farms is continuing. We are still using virtually all 
local people. We may have one or two that are not, from time to 
time. In 1985-86 the budget was $1.419 million; ‘86-87 the 
budget is $1.739 million – an increase of $319,000 for northern 
farms operations, up 22.5 per cent. And all of that is directed at 
involving local people and in training and in introducing and 
improving agriculture and doing something for local people to 
get into agriculture in that area. 
 
So in terms of the money, in terms of the commitment, in terms 
of the enthusiasm for the operation of northern farms, it’s there. 
So there’s no question about the commitment and we’re quite 
prepared to see that we can do as much as possible, or more. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the current 
policy of your administration with regards to those farms, what 
is the objective now? The objective, as I understand . . . Further 
objectives that I understood were to provide food to the 
communities in the northern administration district, particularly 
the communities that have those training farms, like Green 
Lake, Cumberland House, as an example. 
 
Can they get, you know, any fee for poultry or hogs from those 
farms whenever they need? That was one of the . . . I can’t put it 
into the right perspective in terms of my English. You know, 
they were supposed to provide food for the communities 
directly affected at a lower rate than those provided for in the 
South. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can indicate to me, you 
know, what is the policy with that respect and what is your 
future plans for those farms. 
 
And the next question I want to ask: is the Central farm in 
Green Lake and the Silver farm in Green Lake, the Cumberland 
House farm in Green Lake – are they in the red or are they 
making money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The farms haven’t broke even on a 
cash-flow basis, particularly with respect to the development of 
the livestock industry, but it’s getting better. And there we see 
significant improvement. And with respect to the products that 
are produced, they are sold on the market, the local market, for 
the entire public to consume. So it’s marketed the way that any 
other farm does, to get the cash. 
 
And the cash flow relates to your second question: are they 
making some money? Well obviously if they market the goods 
on the market, then they can measure whether they’re doing it 
efficiently, effectively, and learn and improve so that indeed, 
we can be in the black in terms of operating the farms on a 
commercial basis. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just as an example, Mr. Minister. You know, you 
had quite a few concerns expressed to me by well over a dozen 
elderly people in Cumberland House that had worked those 
farms for a good number of years. When a new manager came 
in, a whole flock of new people got hired. The people I’m 
referring to, like Solomon Goulet, for example, has sons that 
work in that farm, or worked with him in his endeavours trying 
to get  

himself involved in agriculture and in mixed farming, etc. What 
happened is that rather than allowing the sons of those people 
that worked there for years and years, new people were brought 
in. I wonder if that could be checked into, because those young 
people would like to follow in their fathers’ footsteps and get 
more knowledge and get more involved in agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 
should know, the whole organization is unionized. And you 
can’t bring in new people. And the union membership does not 
go from father to son, and father and son down the line. So 
there is no change that can be allowed with new management. 
It’s organized; it’s locked in. And that’s the way it is. So you 
can’t transfer it from employee down to his son or daughter or 
somebody else, under the union rules. So it’s a union shop and 
they set the pace. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Approximately three to four years ago, seminars 
were held, Mr. Minister, to decide the fate of those farms, 
whether sections ought to be turned over to people interested in 
farming. I wonder, Mr. Minister, what your policy is in terms of 
the future: in terms, you know, turning over sections of land and 
assisting the local people with livestock, perhaps hogs, poultry, 
etc. and working capital. Have you got any plans in that 
respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
see all of that land in private hands; homesteads developed so 
that people could purchase the land as reasonable as possible 
and start farms, livestock operations, and various combinations 
of things. I do not consider it as a state farm. I certainly don’t 
consider it as something that would not be for sale. I won’t 
throw it into an area called land bank or anything else. I would 
like to see it turned over to the private sector. And when we can 
see viable operations develop there with the various kinds of 
technology and varieties and new kinds of techniques – animals 
and breeds and what not – by all means, I would like to see it go 
to the individuals there, essentially a homestead system, and 
start it so the private sector owns it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just one final supplementary, Mr. Minister. I get 
very worried when you start talking about the private sector. 
When you talk about the private sector, the only thing that 
comes to mind is the capitalist people like Peter Pocklington, 
the Weyerhaeusers. I will agree with you, if the private sector 
you referred to are the people at the community level of 
Cumberland House, Green Lake, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. Give 
them the option, give them the opportunity to develop those 
farms, but don’t sell those farms to people from Washington, 
D.C., or Alberta. I caution you that, Mr. Minister. 
 
One final comment: those farms, the people at the community 
level, the local government bodies of the various interest 
groups, regard those farms as an asset. They are an asset to 
those communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the private sector 
means that individual families, private families, can own land – 
own land. And homesteading is exactly what we did when we 
started this. It was all started before you ever even heard the 
word CCF or there was socialism  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1951 
 

in Canada. 
 
The homestead Act was set up so private people, families in the 
area, could own the farm, own the land. That’s what it means. I 
mean, perhaps if people would do their homework with respect 
to philosophy and understanding definitions, the private sector 
means family businesses. That’s what it means. That’s where I 
support the private sector. If you’d do your homework and say 
you support families, local families, local farmers owning 
property and land, as opposed to the government owning the 
land, maybe you wouldn’t be sitting on that side of the House – 
you’d be sitting over here. 
 
I mean, private property and free enterprise is family 
operations, private operations. So yes, I support local people, 
your local neighbours, privately owning homesteads – families, 
free enterprise, private families owning the farm and owning 
the land. That’s precisely the way we started Saskatchewan, and 
I like to see all northern Saskatchewan have the same 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Yew: — One final comment, Mr. Minister. In terms of the 
private sector, you know, I stated my position. You know, I’m 
deadly afraid of Washington or the States coming in buying 
land and owning land, and having nothing but signs that say, 
“No trespassing.” We’ve got signs over there that say . . . In the 
North, where my friends and my family used to trap, used to 
hunt, there’s nothing but “No trespassing” signs or game 
preserve signs, or what have you. 
 
And the reason I’m raising that question with regards to your 
philosophy, Mr. Minister, today, to this very point in time in 
your fifth year of office I still read notes . . . I still read papers 
that state, “Northern Saskatchewan still treated poorly”. 
 
That is a letter written by a councillor. 
 
And here again I have another letter that was written by the 
mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, which, in part, said: 
 

The minister responsible for northern and native affairs and 
the rest of his cowardly government will never be able to 
recognize the conditions of northern people, especially 
northern native people. 
 
What they will recognize, however, is the need for more rape 
and exploitation of northern resources with out any proper 
restitution to us. 

 
You know, that’s written from a mayor. That was made public. 
It was a public letter. 
 
Then I get headlines claiming, “Welfare claimed killing Buffalo 
Narrows natives”. All kinds of real bad publicity since you took 
office, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, I’m very, very concerned about the high unemployment, 
the high welfare dependency rates in the North. Your 
government . . . The minister back there, initially that was 
responsible for northern affairs, said, well, we’ll have an 
economic development strategy; we’ll put it in place. 
 

But to this point in time we still have high unemployment, high 
welfare dependency rates, and high incarceration of native 
people. I just basically wanted to point that out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s fair enough, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Across northern Canada, NDP, PC, Social Credit, Liberal – it 
doesn’t matter what administration you have, in the northern 
communities you have higher unemployment: the same as 
Manitoba, same as here. And it’s more difficult. It’s a 
combination of things like we’re doing: tourism, wild rice, 
mining, economic development, the whole question, and it’s a 
balance. 
 
So we are making progress as all Canadians are making 
progress. And we’re concerned about it, and we’re working as 
hard as we can and we will continue to direct our efforts to help 
people in farming, in tourism, in mining, in economic 
development and tourism. Any kind of package that will – 
forestry – a combination. A new technical school for example in 
Prince Albert is designed to train people with respect to all the 
possibilities in northern Saskatchewan, and that’s going to be 
very important. So we have made some significant moves. 
There are still serious problems, I agree with you and we will 
stick with it and do everything possible. Any ideas we get from 
other jurisdictions or other places in Canada that have similar 
problems, we’ll work together to work them out. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I, at one time, wrote to you in 
respect to a particular group in the agricultural field, and that is 
in respect to the vegetable growers who had considerable 
difficulty last year with a considerable amount of frost affecting 
their production. In examining the $25 an acre that is paid out to 
the grain producer, that can be a fairly substantial amount, 
depending upon the acres. But if you take the vegetable 
growers, it’s intensive and a very small amount of land is in 
production; however, the overhead and the capital expenditure 
is very, very significant. And I know as a fact that you had 
indicated in answering my request to take a look at this, that the 
deputy minister was in fact meeting with the vegetable growers. 
My information indicated that you were looking at – partly on 
my representation and the representation of the vegetable 
growers – you were looking at $250 an acre to help those 
vegetable growers. And I was wondering if the Premier could 
give a report as to the disposition of that and whether you have 
in fact put in place a program for the vegetable growers? 
 
(2200) 
 
I may say just in adding, Mr. Premier, that in addition to that, in 
Manitoba they do have it covered apparently by crop insurance, 
and I know that representations have been made to your 
government to include vegetable crops under crop insurance. 
And so on those two aspects I would like to have you give an 
update please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the item with respect to 
providing assistance to potato growers that suffered some frost 
damage, and particularly before they recognized it was in the 
field and they harvested it and put it in the bins and they find 
out, is before treasury  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1952 
 
 

board. We’re looking at a package that is $250 an acre at a fixed 
rate of interest – 6 per cent money, because the $25 an acre is at 
6 per cent money. The potato farmer obviously has higher costs 
per acre, and they may range from $800 to $1,200 an acre, 
compared to dry land grain farming. So we believe that it’s 
something reasonable. 
 
And yes, we would like to get them into crop insurance so that 
we could have a system that is understood and automatic for all 
agricultural producers that they can count on. They pay their 
premiums, it’s actuarially sound, and all the rest of it. So 
hopefully we can get them into crop insurance for next year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I appreciate the progress that’s being 
made. I do hope that treasury board will in fact make an early 
decision because there are a number of vegetable growers that 
certainly need some assistance because of the consequences of 
early frost and a great loss of their crop. 
 
There’s one other area that I want to ask you, and certainly in 
respect particularly to farmers. In respect to farmers, Mr. 
Premier, we’re really quite offended by the fact that you had a 
tax on used vehicles. And you indicated after the Regina North 
East by-election you came to the realization that it was basically 
a very unfair tax. And you indicated at that time that it would be 
charged no further on used vehicles – that you would drop this 
unfair tax. 
 
I have found that a large number of people that really had to pay 
it were the farmers, the hard-pressed farmers. Because in our 
country the weather was considerably damp last year and a lot 
of grain had to be dried, and so a lot of farmers got stuck with 6 
or 7, 4800 on the used vehicle tax – on second-hand vehicles, 
trucks, and they were rather perturbed at the way in which you 
did it. They wondered where you were – they wondered where 
you were when the tax was imposed. I mean you had to, as 
Premier, realize that the tax was being imposed. And if you 
could realize that it was unfair six months after you imposed it, 
they’re wondering why you weren’t able to understand that this 
tax was basically unfair when you put it into effect. 
 
So what they basically are asking is that in view of the farming 
economy and how tightly the economics is for the farmers, 
many of them have written to you for reconsideration of the fact 
of whether or not you would, in fact, refund them this here 
unfair tax that you depleted from them. And I would really 
think in respect to the farmers it was particularly a burden of 
600 or $700, and therefore I ask you on behalf of those and the 
many, many that wrote to me, and I know wrote to you, because 
many of the letters were copied to you. I ask you whether, in 
view of the decree of your own making that it was unfair tax, 
would you consider rebating any of this money to the farmers 
who were required to pay it as a result of buying trucks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hon. 
member’s question. We had a tax for a short while on used 
vehicles and we took it off. And we were satisfied ourselves 
that it was an unpopular tax, and as a result we moved as 
quickly as we could and we removed  

it. 
 
There was some benefit, obviously, as the hon. member knows, 
some benefit to the people that bought new vehicles and new 
trucks. They got significant benefit. I’m sure the hon. member 
wouldn’t want us to take back that benefit when they traded in 
their used vehicles. 
 
So I can say we looked at the tax; we had it on for a few months 
and we took it off. As he knows – and I’ll raise this because it 
leads to the next statement – every other province in Canada has 
a sales tax on used vehicles that has a sales tax at all. Okay. 
 
Now the reason I raised that to the hon. member is that when 
his leader, the Leader of the Opposition, was asked about his 
succession duties and gift tax, when he was asked about that, if 
the hon. member will recall, he said – and I’ll give him the 
quotes from the radio show – he says, well we put succession 
duties and this death tax on because every other province had it 
on too. Well that was his response about a month ago when he 
was talking about it. And he never gave back 10 cents and it 
was $28 million collected. Now his excuse was, well every 
other province had it. Well, I looked at other provinces that had 
taxes on vehicles, and I aid, well, we could be consistent, and so 
forth. But in Saskatchewan it was not right, and I stopped. And 
obviously the seven years of succession duties was not right, 
and finally it was stopped. 
 
So we can saw it off. You had one on and you took it off 
because people said it was unfair. The excuse that your leader 
used is that every other province had it. Well, that may not 
wash. So we took it off and you took it off. You never paid a 
cent back; we never paid a cent back. Many taxes have been 
changed over time. Very few, when you make modifications, 
are given back because once you get into that, as you know, in 
succession duties and other things that you’re into a whole 
pay-back schedule that is extremely complicated and 
confounded. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final submission here, Mr. Premier. My 
colleague from Pelly asked you specifically what your sort of 
overall objective in respect to agriculture in Saskatchewan is, 
that is, your objective as to whether you are intending to put in 
place specific programs which will maintain the family farm, 
rather than the continuation of the increase in size. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that more and more older farmers are 
going out, and I now some younger farmers are taking place. 
But there’s no doubt, I don’t think, that there has been an 
increasing consolidation and an increase in the size of farms. 
This will have a very dramatic effect upon rural Saskatchewan 
if it continues because, as you know, it would decrease the base 
and the operation of many of the smaller communities. 
 
I ask you this question in all sincerity because I think the people 
of Saskatchewan really want to know. I have a statement here 
that you, yourself, and I quote it made. And it says; 
 

Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 
per cent of the farmers, society may not wish to support 
higher food prices or producer  

  



 
June 12, 1986 

1953 
 

security so that the non-productive 80 per cent of the farm 
population can live in the country at a profit. 

 
Now that’s a statement that you made in . . . by Dr. Devine, 
Agricultural Economics Professor, winter of 1977, the edition 
of the Saskatchewan Business Review. There was a clear 
statement by yourself indicating that 80 per cent of the farmers 
in this province were not economic – that they were being 
supported. 
 
I wonder what your position is? Do you have an overall 
economic strategy, or will you allow further and further 
consolidation of farms? Or do you have a concern that the 
number of farms will eventually be decreased very 
substantially? And are you, in fact, in agreement with the 
statement that you made when you were economic professor at 
the University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my objective, as 
I’m sure the hon. member knows, with all the livestock 
programs, and the new emphasis on livestock and 
diversification, is to allow as many people into agriculture as 
possible. And I will say that the objective is to maintain a viable 
rural Saskatchewan with as many farms as possible, and to 
encourage operations that have livestock, that have grain, that 
have mixed, that have the combinations, to diversify and 
strengthen. 
 
I would just point out to the hon. member, and it’s . . . The 
consolidation rate under the NDP’s administration was twice as 
fast and as rapid as under our administration – twice as fast. 
And the purchase of land and the size and the growth of land, it 
increased . . . for example, from 1976 to 1981, the size of a farm 
increased by 64 acres – 64 acres. In ’81 to ’85 it was half that – 
32. 
 
So the consolidation process and the growth and the size of 
farms, and in the loss of farms, was much more rapid during 
any four years of the NDP administration than it has been from 
’81 to ’85. 
 
Now what I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, is our programs, our 
programs have been extremely important in diversifying 
agriculture, and allow them to be strengthening and to keep 
people in rural Saskatchewan. For example, the 8 per cent 
money versus the programs that were there before, which 
obviously was that the government should own the land and so 
forth. So my objective – he wants an overall objective – my 
overall objective, my hon. friend, is to see as many viable 
agricultural units as possible in livestock, in grain, in 
combinations thereof that we can have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I believe you’ll see it trending down, and to 
your administration it was trending up. It’s now trending down 
so that there’s definitely a levelling off in farm size, and you’re 
going to see more and more agricultural units doing very well in 
their neighbourhood of a section to a section and a half of land 
because of a combination of livestock and grain and processing 
and so forth. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I really think, Mr. Premier, it’s getting 
late, and you seem to be having difficulty in sorting out your 
facts. So I won’t carry on much longer, but let it be recorded 
that you said it. You said this statement: realizing that most of 
our food is produced by less than 20  

per cent of the farmers, society may not wish to support higher 
food prices or producer security, so that the non-productive 80 
per cent of farm population can live in the country at a profit. 
Conclusively, you indicated that 80 per cent of our farmers 
were non-productive. 
 
I want to indicate the lack of logic to your statement. You start 
comparing statistics. I’ll tell you that the Tory record in this 
province doesn’t have very much of a record. They’re only 
around once every 50 years, as you know, 1929-35, and then 
they were extinct. And then 50 years later they resurfaced. So 
it’s rather difficult in this province to really have much 
comparison. 
 
But the other thing I would point out, Mr. Premier, that during 
the last, from ’80 to the present, I don’t think that agriculture 
has had a worse time. It’s as bad nearly as the Great 
Depression. I mean that’s every indication of the statistics and 
the research. I read you the statistics, and obviously during the 
period when there’s a basic depression in agriculture, and that’s 
the condition that the Farm Credit Corporation indicates, and 
that’s the position that other research has done . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
And we’ve the member from Lloydminster chirping again. He 
doesn’t enter into the debate, but he wants to chirp. And if he 
wants to get on the floor and speak, then fine, he can do it. But 
otherwise, Mr. Chairman, if you would appreciate, I’ll get on 
with the discussion if you want to keep that minister – member 
rather, not minister – member from Cut Knife - Lloydminster 
quiet. He’s not in his own seat. He never has been this evening. 
He has continuously tried to disrupt the proceedings. And I’m 
sure that we would have been finished had the minister of Cut 
Knife-Lloyd and some of the other members would not have 
been so rude during the course of these proceedings. 
 
(2215) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Premier, that certainly the economic 
condition in agriculture is not particularly great at this time 
because of the decrease in the price of commodities and the 
ever increase in the cost of input to the farmer. And of course 
they’re competing in the world market against the United 
States, which has brought in an agricultural Bill to certainly 
assist the farmers to about an equivalent of $6 a bushel wheat. 
And the European market has done the same. And we have not 
moved rapidly to protect our farmers here. 
 
So all I want to say, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, is that certainly 
you can’t compare during the ’82 to ’86 whether there is much 
consolidation of farms, because they aren’t buying. What the 
farmers are doing now is trying to exist, to continue. During the 
‘70s, I’m telling you, there was great prosperity in the farming 
community. There’s no doubt about it. There was very, very 
much. And it’s very very difficult to, in a time of great 
prosperity when there’s a huge amount of money infusion into 
agriculture as was in the ‘70s, to really have much effect on the 
direction that farming will go and the consolidation. 
 
And so I want to point out that your figures do not make a lot of 
sense. As indeed some of your previous comments  
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1954 
 
 

that you ranted and raved this evening. But I again say that I 
take it since you haven’t denied the authorship of this here 
statement, nor the contents of that statement, that you stand by 
it. And accordingly the agricultural people can take a look at it 
and will publish this statement and say that that represents the 
Tory party’s position in so far as agriculture is concerned. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, regarding item 6. You campaigned 
and you talked with much fanfare, and you’ve been chiding us 
tonight about words. Well, I think in this item, under the item, 
as far as the irrigation branch, some words are in order. 
 
I listened with interest to an economist on a broadcast this past 
week, talking about the value of getting involved in irrigation, 
and what it does for Saskatchewan and how much it costs and 
what the returns are. 
 
And do you feel that you’re changing your thrust because of the 
lack of really beefing it up and getting involved? I would have 
expected, I would have expected more than, more than that out 
of an – at least 10 per cent increase in a year would have 
indicated that you keep up with increased costs, let alone 
levelled off. The power rates went up more than that to the 
farmers. I think this doesn’t reflect on what farmers are 
spending on irrigation, but it sure reflects on how much you’re 
putting into it in grants. Are the applications coming in? And 
what is the reason why there is so little growth in irrigation 
when you expected so much from it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that subvote that the 
hon. member is talking about is just for extension people. So I 
mean, that’s . . .Our overall budget in agriculture is up 100 per 
cent from last year to this year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well just let me finish. Last year over this year . . . this year 
over last year, the budget in agriculture is up over 100 per cent. 
 
With respect to irrigation-specific programs, it’s up in the 
neighbourhood of almost 50 per cent. If you turn to page 24, 
item number 2, it was $5 million last year; it’s up to $7.2 
million this year – so, 100 per cent increase in the overall 
expenditures in Agriculture in our budget, and about a 50 per 
cent increase with respect to irrigation programs. 
 
And third, that does not include an ERDA (Economic and 
Regional Development Agreement) agreement that was signed 
by the federal minister and myself worth several hundred 
million dollars on long-run irrigation projects and development 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I sent one specific question over to you that I 
didn’t want to mention the individual’s name, but he was asking 
me about it this week. Are you planning on granting these 
people along the Wood River some water rights, now that 
you’ve decided not to build a dam there for SPC? Is there a 
reason why their applications are being  

held up as far as getting water? Have you a specific reason there 
because his application has been in a long time? He was assured 
that it would be approved and he bought both a line-type 
irrigation and a pivot. And he’s expecting about $15,000 – I 
remembered that number – in grants for his pivot, and nothing 
has been forthcoming. 
 
Is there some reason for that delay, or is it being stalled? Or will 
you consider that the year he purchased it in, that that’s the year 
– that’s how much the grant was available – will he still get that 
when the water rights come through, or where is he at? Because 
things are fairly tight back on the farm, and they wouldn’t have 
minded doing some irrigation, and you’ve even discouraged 
him along that line. 
 
I believe he didn’t get paid. I believe he didn’t get paid on his 
line irrigation. Is that what you call it? The straight line – wheel 
roll – that’s the word I’m looking for. Thank you. 
 
But he didn’t get paid his grant on his wheel roll either, but it 
was much smaller, lesser – less involved than the one that he’s 
really concerned about. So if I could put that plug in for him to 
you directly, I wish you would look into that one and drop me a 
note back. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Items 7 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 18 
 
Mr. Engel: — Those staff members were transferred to 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs in that, and Agriculture 
Implements Board is now going to operate out of that area. 
 
If a farmer has a problem related to warranty on – that he used 
to deal with the Agricultural Implements Board – does that now 
have to go through the Department of Consumer Affairs, or is 
the Department of Agriculture still going to have people that get 
involved in how much parts they should have on hand and the 
kind of warranty and that type of thing they should be getting 
on their equipment? Where do they go for that? And has that 
been advertised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the whole unit was 
transferred intact to Consumer Affairs, so that’s where they go 
to get their problems resolved. 
 
Item 18 agreed to. 
 
Items 19 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Capital Expenditure – Vote 2 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 2 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1986 

1955 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Agriculture Development fund – Vote 61 
 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 61 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agriculture 

Vote 146 
 
Item 1 – Statutory. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 
Items 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agricultural Division 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 50 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 
Investments 

Agricultural Division 
Agriculture – Vote 62 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I would just like to say that I appreciate 
the Chair’s co-operation and the members of the staff of the 
legislature, and certainly my officials who have had the 
information available to all members of the House. They have 
worked hard to prepare for the estimates, and I just want to say 
publicly that I appreciate their effort, and the budget in 
Agriculture was significant, and is significant, and the work of 
these officials has helped. So I just want to express my 
appreciation to them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry that some of the debate 
that the Premier instigated deteriorated to the level it did. I 
don’t think I can remember being in the House where we had 
farmers called “union goons”, and getting involved in 
mud-slinging and name-calling like you instigated. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. Premier, if you want to follow and emulate Tommy 
Douglas, you’re going to have to clean up your act a little bit 
and, I’d say, before you switch feet, you do a little more serious 
thinking. 

To the staff, I would say that they’ve done an excellent job, and 
it was interesting working with them, and I appreciate the 
information. I’m looking forward to the other information that 
you promised me. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 147 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 147 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That then does conclude the estimates for 
this evening. And I believe the estimates were very interesting 
and informative, and I thank all members for participating. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 
 
 


	Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure
	Agriculture
	Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure
	Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments
	Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure
	Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and Investments
	Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments


