


















































June 13, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 13, 1986 
 
 

1957 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of my colleague, the member for Wilkie, this morning I 
would like to introduce 13 grade 9 students from the Landis 
School in Landis, Saskatchewan. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
George Hindley; chaperons, Joyce Laval and Bernie Cey. It will 
be my pleasure to join with these people shortly after 10:30 to 
discuss the goings on in the Assembly and how it works, and I 
would ask all members in the Chamber to join with me in 
welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the House, 
on behalf of my seat mate, the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade, a group of 33 grade 7 students from 
Elizabeth School in Kindersley. They’re accompanied here 
today by their teacher, Dave Burkell, their chaperon, Nancy 
Anderson, and their bus driver, Jim Baker. I would just like all 
members to join with me in welcoming the group from 
Kindersley here to the legislature today. 
 
I know that they have been in Regina and seeing some of the 
sights of our capital city. I hope they’re enjoyed that. I hope you 
will enjoy and find the proceedings here today both educational 
and interesting, and I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature, 27 grade 5 and 6 students from Abbey, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They are seated in the west gallery, and they are accompanied 
by their teachers, Bev Burgess, Brenda Fahselt, and chaperons 
Bernice Braaten, Dianne Jorgensen, Colleen Smith, Beth 
Nobbs, and Sandra Watson. We had some pictures taken this 
morning. This class is particularly special to me because my 
niece, Dana, is in the class. And we had a little tour of the 
Premier’s office and we saw the cabinet room where all the 
important decisions are made – or sometimes made in 
Saskatchewan. And I would encourage all members to welcome 
them to the legislature. I hope that they have a safe trip home 
and have had an enjoyable stay here in the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me this morning to introduce to you, and through to the rest of 
the members of the Assembly, 50 grade 2 and 3 students from 
Lindale Elementary School in Moose Jaw. 
 

This is the second group of Lindale students that we’ve had in 
this week. And as I mentioned earlier in the week, Lindale, 
although it is located in the city of Moose Jaw, is all rural kids 
from the riding of Thunder Creek, and is my former Alma 
Mater in my primary grades. Their teachers today are Mrs. Erna 
Adamache and Mrs. Marlene McBain. I would like to say to the 
teachers, I appreciate that you’ve continued on the long 
tradition which has occurred in Lindale school of bringing 
students down to the legislature. I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings today and learn something about government in 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan history. I would like all 
members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Commercial Bingo Inquiry 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Mr. Premier, more than a 
year ago your government appointed an inquiry to study the 
operations of commercial bingos, saying at that time that there 
was an urgent need for action. But yesterday when your 
minister released the report, all that she announced was a study 
to study your study. 
 
This stalling tactic, Mr. Premier, effectively prevents any action 
for at least a year on what, in your own words, was a very 
urgent problem. 
 
Can you explain your reluctance to get on with the job when 
your own board of inquiry says in its final report, and I quote: 
“The time, therefore, for policy and administrative action is 
now, in order to ensure that (the) benefits of gaming activity to 
society exceed the costs.” Why can’t you have legislative 
changes before this Assembly in the next few days so that you 
can get on with the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the report 
finished and completed where many people in the public have 
put together their ideas, and they’ve made recommendations to 
the Government of Saskatchewan. Not all their 
recommendations are accepted by this administration, and 
people around the province of Saskatchewan are saying they 
don’t agree with all the recommendations, as well. 
 
So in the next few weeks we are going to have the opportunity 
for people to give us their best views and their sincere views on 
the recommendations of the report. And we are prepared to 
move on the report, but we don’t agree with all of it, and we 
want to make sure that the public is comfortable with the kinds 
of things that we’re going to do in the future with respect to the 
whole question of gaming and bingos. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, you have had the report for over six months. Not 
having called an election, you’re now trying to find another way 
to stall providing any action to it. The minister, in her tabling of 
the report, argued that she  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1958 
 
 

needs more public input, as you have just said. 
 
Can you confirm, Mr. Premier, that the board of inquiry 
received 513 written submissions, held public hearings in 11 
Saskatchewan communities, sent extensive questionnaires to 
every commercial bingo hall operator in the province, sent 
extensive questionnaires to every major, non-commercial bingo 
hall operation in the province, and sent extensive questionnaires 
to every bingo licence holder in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Premier, who did you miss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not that we missed 
anybody, but the recommendations coming forward by the 
report are not necessarily endorsed by everybody in 
Saskatchewan, and we want the people of Saskatchewan to see 
the recommendations of the report. I believe that that would be 
fair. And they are already calling and saying they agree with 
this recommendation; they don’t agree with that one. And we 
feel the same. Some of those recommendations are right on the 
money; others are not, as far as I am concerned. And we want 
the public and those that have made contributions to the report 
to be able to look at it in the near future – a matter of weeks – 
look at it, give us their best opinion of it, and then we will be in 
a position to make a response. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, your inquiry held public hearings around the province 
and received submission from almost everyone who was 
concerned and involved. Can you report to the House how 
much this massive report has cost the taxpayers – this report on 
which you’re not prepared to take any action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let there be no mistake, just 
so everybody in Saskatchewan knows that we will take 
appropriate action. So let there be no mistake about that. 
 
I don’t have the costs on my desk with respect to the report, but 
we are going to make sure that all the diverse opinions with 
respect to the bingo operations are well heard so people have 
every opportunity to express their views in the next few weeks. 
We will be making a decision, as we always have, and we will, 
and the member can rest assured that that will be the case. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you’re in your fifth year of your term of government. 
Like on so many other things, you’re still talking bout taking 
action. 
 
Mr. Premier, the report which you did not give information on 
has cost Saskatchewan taxpayers tens of thousands of dollars. It 
took nearly a year to complete. You have sat on it for over six 
months. It received input from most people, if not everybody 
who was concerned, and yet you and your bureaucrats have 
rejected almost all of those recommendations before you even 
go into your so-called consolation. 
 
The board of inquiry . . . In light of the fact, Mr. Premier, that 
the board of inquiry made 36 recommendations, and the 
response which you released, or your minister  

released yesterday, rejects all but 11 of them – rejects them out 
of hand and only agrees with some of those on a conditional 
basis – how can you claim that you want public input when you 
have rejected already so many of those recommendations which 
were based on widespread public input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make it very clear that 
the member opposite laughed and pooh-poohed the whole 
inquiry into bingo when we started it, and they howled and 
howled and laughed and said the whole thing wasn’t necessary 
at all. That was their opinion – wasn’t necessary. The NDP 
opposition, they laughed at the report when we initiated it. And 
now they’re coming back and saying, oh well, it’s such an 
important report, why aren’t you going to act on it 
immediately? 
 
Well you can’t have it both ways. Its the same thing that they 
were doing last night in Agriculture estimates. One says he’s 
socialist, and one says . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, in light of your clarity of 
purpose, by sitting on this report for six months and then 
releasing late in the session, after it’s too late to take action – 
thus making it clear that you have carefully staged the matter to 
avoid taking action – will you not admit, Mr. Premier, that your 
reason for stalling on this report is the simple fact that you’re 
afraid to come down hard on the commercial bingo hall 
operators? Isn’t that the reason why you so carefully staged this 
matter to avoid taking any action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
knows that bingos can raise an important amount of money for 
people in Saskatchewan. We want to make sure at the same 
time that they are operated fairly and for the right purposes, and 
there can be broad range of reasons that you can hold a bingo 
and an awful lot of different kinds of people involved in that. 
We want to make sure that the public is confident that it is 
going to the right kind of people, the money stays in the 
communities, that local people can involve fund raising through 
bingos to help their local facilities and so forth. So we want to 
make sure that it’s fair, but that it’s available for the public to 
use. 
 
Now there are several recommendations how you make an 
impact on that. And that’s why we are saying that we want to 
have not only the people of Saskatchewan look at the 
recommendations, but ask them to tell us whether they think the 
recommendations were in the ballpark. We’ve also stated that 
we didn’t agree with all the recommendations; some we do and 
some we don’t. And we will be quite prepared to make the final 
decisions when we know that the community is comfortable 
with the decisions that are made. 
 
Now you didn’t even think we should have an inquiry. I mean, 
you laughed at it to start with, and you thought it was really 
something that we would even call an inquiry. Now you’re 
saying it’s the biggest thing that ever hit the province, and it’s 
just a crying shame because we haven’t had the final decisions 
made. Well you can’t have it both ways. If it wasn’t important 
then, then why is it so  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1959 
 

important now? I mean, you might as well get your story 
straight. I mean, the people of Saskatchewan saw you laugh to 
start with, and now you’re trying to look very serious. I mean, 
your credibility is dropping a little bit. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Premier. I might say by 
way of passing, you ought to recognize a drop in credibility 
when you see one. 
 
Mr. Premier, I find your claim hard to believe when you see the 
final report. The report states that last November, even before 
the board of inquiry had completed its work, it sent a letter to 
the minister urging action on a number of urgent issue. Among 
them was a concern that bingo hall operators were consistently 
breaking the rule that they shouldn’t take more than 20 per cent. 
The letter said in part, and I quote: 
 

It appears to the Inquiry that by allowing charges of 20 to 25 
per cent for expenses, hundreds of thousands of dollars have 
gone to hall operators which should have been going to the 
sponsoring charities. 

 
In light of that statement from the board of inquiry, how can 
you possibly justify another year’s delay before taking any 
action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member is not being 
fair. I didn’t say a year’s delay, I said in a matter of weeks we 
will get the recommendations of this report responded to by the 
general public. And that’s precisely what we’re trying to do. 
And at the outset, he didn’t even think it was important that we 
examine it, and now he says that he can’t wait a few weeks as 
we get the final recommendations reviewed by people who 
made their submission. 
 
So we want to make sure that the public is comfortable with the 
final policies that we set forward, and that’s precisely what 
we’re doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Final question, Mr. Speaker, on this 
subject. Mr. Premier, the board of inquiry states, and I quote: 
 

Large scale bingo halls have definitely harmed small 
community halls and traditional church bingos. 

 
And the board’s report goes on to make a number of 
recommendations to try to save those smaller bingos, such as 
limits on prizes and a ban on accumulating jackpots. But your 
department has rejected each of those recommendations. 
 
Can the Premier tell me why your government has no concern 
for the viability of small community bingo operations or for the 
struggling bingo operations run in church halls around the 
province? Why are you only interested, it seems, in protecting 
the large commercial operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, it’s a little bit 
ironic, the member from Regina Centre standing there and 
saying that there are such terrible things going on  

with the commercial bingo halls. It was the NDP administration 
that licensed them. The first people to license commercial bingo 
halls was the NDP administration. Then when we were going to 
have an inquiry into the activities of commercial bingo halls, 
they laughed at it and pooh-poohed it, and they said that it 
wasn’t even worth it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after we have examined it, they are standing 
up and saying, oh, in sheer panic, that we have to do something 
by Tuesday at 4 or else the sky is going to fall in. Well you 
started it; you laughed at the whole project when we were going 
to examine it, and now you’re in a panic saying, oh, for 
Heaven’s sake, you have to make your decision by some 
particular date. 
 
Well you can’t have it both ways, boys. You started this 
operation; you laughed at the whole outfit. I decided to have an 
inquiry and an investigation, and that’s where the public has 
some input. And finally the public in Saskatchewan is going to 
have their full say on how bingos operate, and it’s about time. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Just one short supplementary, Mr. Premier, 
and it regards sports clubs and their use of bingo halls as 
avenues to raise funding. The minister said in a radio interview 
that they may be eliminated as qualified aspirants in raising 
funding through sports clubs. I heard it this morning; I had a 
couple of calls. I would like you to clarify that statement, and 
will sports clubs be eliminated as aspirants for the use of these 
facilities to raise funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. 
member is not accurate. I believe, if you read the report, you’ll 
see in there that we rejected the fact that we couldn’t have 
sports groups operate bingos. I doubt very much if the minister 
said on the radio that she would do this because I know, herself, 
that she didn’t believe in it, and I don’t, so I would be glad to 
correct or get the transcripts of the radio. 
 
The confirmed is that we rejected that report because we believe 
that athletic groups should be able to operate bingos and raise 
money. It’s a very popular way for them to raise money. So 
let’s make that very clear; that’s the position that we’ve taken. 
 

Sanctions on South Africa 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a new question 
on a different subject to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the question 
deals with the Mulroney government’s decision yesterday to 
impose new economic and diplomatic sanctions on South 
Africa. And among the moves is a decision by the federal 
government to no longer purchase South African products. 
 
And my questions to the Premier are these: does the 
Government of Saskatchewan support the Mulroney 
government’s decision, and if so, will you move to ban the 
purchase of all South African products by all Saskatchewan 
government agencies, including the purchase of South African 
wines by the Saskatchewan Liquor Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Very briefly, Mr. Speaker, yes, I  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1960 
 
 

support the moves by the Prime Minister and his recent 
announcements with respect to incremental and increasing 
sanctions against South America . . . South Africa, pardon me. 
 
Secondly, the minister will be making a brief ministerial 
statement with respect to South African wines right after 
question period. But in essence he will be saying that we 
haven’t been re-ordering them, and they will be taken off the 
shelves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. The 
Mulroney government is also urging Canadian companies not to 
invest in South African or to do business with the South African 
regime. Can you, Mr. Premier, or can one of your ministers 
inform the Assembly of approximately how much 
Saskatchewan goods has been sold to South African in the past 
year, and will you undertake to curtail, to the extent that the 
Government of Saskatchewan can curtail, the sale of goods 
from Saskatchewan to south Africa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I can certainly get that information 
for the hon. member. I expect that it would be very small – 
items that we would export into south Africa – and I expect it 
probably has been declining because of the increased 
difficulties over there. I don’t have the figures with me but 
we’ll dig them up. But I suspect it’s very small, and probably 
declining. 
 

Impact of Land-fill Site on Regina Water Supply 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, my 
question deals with concerns that have been recently raised bout 
the Regina land-fill site and its impact on Regina’s water 
supply. 
 
Can the minister inform the Assembly and the people of Regina 
what tests his department does in and around the land-fill site to 
make certain that the toxic materials discarded there are not 
polluting underground water used by the city of Regina 
residents, and can he inform us how frequently those tests are 
taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to first point out 
that there is no danger to the water supply to the city of Regina 
from the land-fill. The member should be aware that there has 
been ongoing studies in that land-fill for some years because of 
the problems of leaching into the aquifer. There is a study 
presently under way again dealing with the land-fill and the 
leaching into the aquifer. 
 
The water is tested regularly, not by my department but by the 
city and the Health department. But the water obviously is 
tested daily for the city of Regina, and I can assure you and the 
people of Regina that there is no need for concern for the water 
supply in the city. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, I think 
there are quite a number of people who are very concerned, and 
I think it’s only fair that they be assured. You did not indicate, 
Mr. Minister, whether your department does any of the testing. 
Can you inform . . . 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, he did. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, he said tests were made. Mr. 
Minister, can you tell the Assembly and the concerned citizens 
when the last test was made by your department, and were there 
any traces of contamination in the test results? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member had 
been listening, I had indicated to him in my previous answer 
that we weren't doing the testing; the city was doing the testing. 
Those tests are sent to the lab here in Regina. Those tests are 
done daily. And there is no – I want to repeat – no concern for 
the supply of water to the city of Regina. I don’t have to remind 
the member opposite who was in government when the city of 
Regina was not informed about PCBs in and near their water 
supply for a number of years. But I can assure you that the 
situation at the land-fill in the city of Regina is being studied 
and has been for some time. The water is tested very regularly 
and there is no concern now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, does your department or do the officials of your 
department feel that there is a potential for the land-fill site to 
eventually pollute Regina’s water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned, as is the 
city of Regina, and there has been a concern for some time with 
that land-fill site. And that is one of the reasons, of course, that 
the city of Regina has been undertaking a study to find a new 
land-fill site. That decision on behalf of the city of Regina has 
not been made. That is, the city has not made the decision of 
where to put a new land-fill site, but that was one of the results 
of that concern is to find a new land-fill site. 
 
As I have indicated to the member, there are ongoing studies on 
that land-fill site, and for the third time I want to assure him and 
the people of Regina that there’s no concern with the water. 
 

Power Line from Uranium City 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think twice in the last 
week I was asked the question relative to the electrical rates on 
the northern grid that would follow from the building of the 
transmission line from Uranium City to Wollaston Post and the 
branches out from that to about eight communities in the North. 
 
And the answer in a general way, Mr. Speaker, is that 
residential hook-ups will be at the grid rate, or the same as we 
pay in the South immediately upon hook-up. And that will be 
for an unlimited amount of electricity. 
 
As it is now in those communities, not only do they pay the 
diesel rate, but the more they consume, the higher the rate is. 
And that’s simply because of the limited nature of diesel units 
to deliver electricity. And you can appreciate the more that is 
consumed, the more costly it is if you have to bring more diesel 
units on stream. So it will be at the grid rate for an unlimited 
amount of electricity for residential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the commercial side, or the government  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1961 
 

side, that rate has yet to be firmly established. There is 
negotiation going on now with the federal government 
Department of Indian Affairs and SPC. And that rate is likely to 
be at least approaching the diesel rate for some period until the 
capital cost of the transmission line is recovered. 
 
But the short answer – I know the member from Athabasca is 
interested in this answer, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s why he 
asked the question, and that’s why I’ve come in to provide him 
with this information. The short answer is that the grid rate will 
apply to residential application immediately upon being hooked 
up to the grid. Commercial and government rates are yet to be 
negotiated, but will probably approach diesel rates for some 
period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you stated in 
March that lower rates would, and I quote: 
 

. . . spur additional business opportunities which until now 
have been hampered by limited supplies of electricity and 
higher utility bills. 

 
Now this was your statement. However, if large industrial or 
commercial power users are going to have to pay higher rates 
until the cost of the line is fully recovered, how will this spur 
additional business interests in this region? And you have just 
indicated that commercial users will be staying on the old diesel 
rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my friend, the 
member from Athabasca, obviously couldn’t hear clearly what I 
was saying because the member from Shaunavon was shouting 
in his ear. I expect that’s the reason. 
 
What I said, Mr. Speaker . . . What I said at the announcement, 
as you quoted, is probably quite accurate. And what I said today 
doesn’t in any way alter the reality of what’s going on as it 
relates to rates in the North. Commercial expansion will come 
because commercial activities were limited, because the more 
power they use under the diesel rate, the higher the rate became. 
Now the rate will be flat for unlimited consumption. Okay? So 
it has the effect of bringing the rate down, number one. 
 
Number two, you said – you said – that the rate would be higher 
under the new system for commercial rates; I didn’t. What I 
said was that it would probably approach, at least approach, 
current diesel rats. And that is to say the current minimum 
diesel rate, not the escalated one for consumption. So the net 
effect is that the rate are immediately cheaper, both for 
residential and commercial use, but significantly less for 
residential. 
 
It will be only for some specified period that the rates would be 
at the diesel rate for commercial. Once capital cost is covered, it 
will go to the grid rate, which is, in some instances, as much as 
a 75 per cent saving. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Removal of South African Wines and Spirits 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House  

today, in my capacity as minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board, to inform you of the Government 
of Saskatchewan’s decision to remove South African wines and 
spirits from the shelves of liquor outlets in the province. I have 
also instructed the Saskatchewan Liquor Board to remove these 
products from their procurement and retail lists altogether. 
 
These actions are being taken in response to several new 
developments, Mr. Speaker: first, the mounting violence and 
political oppression in South Africa; second, the recent 
conclusion of the Commonwealth Group of Eminent Persons on 
South Africa that there is no genuine intention on the part of the 
South African government to dismantle apartheid, so that steady 
economic pressure in the form of sanctions is now the most 
effective recourse; and third, yesterday’s announcement of four 
new sanctions on South Africa imposed by the federal 
government, one of which solicits provincial co-operation and 
parallel action in ending government procurement South 
African products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has consistently supported the 
“gradualist” approach to Canadian economic sanctions on South 
Africa that the federal government articulated on July 6 and 
September 19, 1985. We continue to support this policy with 
this initiative today. 
 
We are also firmly committee to co-operating with all persons 
and parties in exploring new avenues through which truly 
effective pressure can be brought to bear on South Africa to 
change its abhorrent policy of apartheid. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the tragedy which is 
unfolding in South Africa may well be the worst international 
tragedy in this century. We have, Mr. Speaker, a government of 
4 million people, if my memory is accurate, suppressing the 
rights of 20 million people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tragedy has come to this point because 
right-wing governments around the world have turned a blind 
eye to the most blatant abuse of civil liberties in centuries 
occurring in that country. The abuse of civil liberties has been 
winked at by the Margaret Thatchers and the President Reagans 
for long enough that this problem is now assuming huge 
proportions. 
 
Mr. Minister, when called before the bar of history, the hands of 
right-wing governments out of South Africa are going to be as 
bloody as the hands of those who actually sit in Pretoria. The 
governments around the world could have prevented this, but 
chose not to because they like the conservative politics of that 
government. 
 
Conservative governments around the world share the blame for 
the god-awful bloodshed that is almost certain to occur in South 
Africa, and this government is as guilty as any in terms of its 
inaction. It was nine months ago that I, I assume as a member of 
the Regina chamber of commerce, got a letter from Joe Clark 
urging that businesses in Canada not do business with South 
Africa. 
 
Since that time I have attend two rallies in front of liquor board 
stores in Regina, with other people, trying to bring to the 
attention of this government its moral  



 
June 13, 1986 

1962 
 
 

responsibility. Finally, long after all other governments in 
Canada have ceased buying South African wines, this 
government finally acts. 
 
I say to members opposite, your hands are as bloody as any. 
They’re bloody because of your inaction and your blindness to 
a tragedy which is unfolding before our very eyes. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Briefly, in response to the ministerial 
statement, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that our trading 
partners – the U.S., South Africa, and many others around the 
world – I believe we’re finding difficulty in exporting Canadian 
goods into these markets. And I find it very questionable 
whether stopping the import of South African goods into 
Saskatchewan will in fact alter that situation. 
 
I think the member from Regina Centre somewhat overstated 
the position in South Africa. I believe many Canadians and 
many Americans and many Brits who support at least trading 
with that country do so in good . . . certainly in the best interests 
of their countries. And I believe that what we’ve done here in 
Saskatchewan today, without researching it to a far greater 
degree, was done strictly in response to Mulroney’s decision in 
Ottawa. And I think that Saskatchewan should have maybe 
taken a little more time in assessing the situation and possibly 
continue to trade with South Africa. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 – An Act respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 58 – An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan and Providing for the Payment of Minimum Monthly 

Pension 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting The Saskatchewan Pension Plan and Providing for 
the Payment of a Minimum Monthly Pension. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 – An Act respecting the Establishment of 
Ambulance Districts and Boards, the Licensing of 

Ambulance Operators and Emergency Medical Personnel 
and the Provision of Ambulance Services in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of an 
Act respecting the Establishment of Ambulance Districts and 
Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance Operators and Emergency 
Medical Personnel and the Provision of Ambulance Services in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 – An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits to 
or on behalf of Certain Senior Citizens 

 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, 
An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits to or on behalf of 
certain Senior Citizens. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Before orders of the day I would like 
permission of the Assembly to introduce some students that 
have just arrived in the Assembly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you and to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of 48 students, grade 4, 
from Columbia School in Yorkton. They are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I have a soft spot in my heart for Columbia School because my 
children went to Columbia School as well. We would hope that 
you enjoy the proceedings in the legislature this morning and 
that you will find it educational and very interesting. I will meet 
with you at approximately 11:30 in the members’ dining room 
for refreshments and pictures. I’ll try to answer any questions 
that you may have to ask at that time. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome these students here 
in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could ask 
that we convert items numbered 392 through 405, inclusive, to 
motions for return, debatable. 
 
Agreed. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $292,309,960 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: - 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1963 
 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, 
the sum of $292,309,960 be granted out of the Consolidated 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $71,915,580 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 
of $71,915,580 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $78,460 be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
1987. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 
of $78,460 be granted out of the Special Projects Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move that the resolutions be read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and resolutions read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 
resolution be now read a second time and agreed to. 
 
By leave of the Assembly, the said resolution were read a 
second time and agreed to. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 61, An Act Granting to Her Majesty  

Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year Ending on March 31, 1987, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move the Bill 
be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 – An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before I move second reading of Bill No. 50, I’d like to 
comment briefly on Bill No. 14, introduced by the member 
from Quill Lakes. This Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Bill No. 14 is not before the 
Assembly at this time. If the member is moving Bill No. 50, 
restrict your remarks to Bill 50. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
attempt to do that. 
 
Bill No. 50, I think, as everyone in the Assembly knows, is an 
amendment to The Education and Health Tax Act that will do 
away with the collection with what has come to be known as 
the tax on used vehicles. There have been other attempts in this 
House to move such a Bill. This Bill No. 50 is necessitated 
because other attempts have not succeeded. They would have in 
fact removed the tax on telephones and long distance phone 
calls. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is intended to fall into line with 
announcements made by the Premier in December of last year, 
and it will re-establish the situation that has been a 
long-standing tradition of tax collection on vehicles in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And with those few brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move second reading of Bill No. 50. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the 
House will obviously be supporting this Bill. It does what we 
have called upon the government to do again and again and 
again. It does what the member for Regina South, the former 
minister of Revenue, Supply and Services said was bad policy. I 
would invite the existing minister, the current minister, to read 
what the former minister said in committee about our 
suggestions along this line. He characterized them with 
adjectives which suggested that we were lacking in mental 
acumen. 
 
It’s very interesting to know that if we were suffering from that, 
we have been joined, I take it, by all members opposite who are 
now adopting the policy which we urged so strongly on the 
minister. 
 
We have had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to make our speech 
on this Bill on a number of occasions throughout this session, 
and accordingly I am going to spare the House the repetition of 
all of the things I have said on  



 
June 13, 1986 

1964 
 
 

previous occasions. Suffice it to say that we are glad that the 
government is introducing this Bill. We think it is the way to 
tax vehicles which the public wants and the public has come to 
accept. We are sorry that the government was unwilling to 
accept this last December. We are glad that they are now 
adopting the position that we attempted to put forward on that 
occasion, and we will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll also be supporting the 
Bill. I find it very interesting, and I suppose the Leader of the 
Opposition must have tongue in cheek when he talks about tax 
reductions. I would certainly pursue the idea that this 
government look at other reductions with respect to that 
particular tax. I think it’s long overdue that the legislation be 
presented in the House so that people, in fact, realize that they 
are no longer paying tax on used vehicles. It’s unfortunate that 
those who did pay the tax will not be compensated. But at least 
this is a step in the right direction. And I realize that in the last 
election campaign there were many promises that reflected on 
this particular tax, and I would hope in the next election 
campaign the same promises will surface and possibly some of 
those promises will be kept. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would just 
like to put a word in on this and have it recorded that our 
government have actually listened to the people of the province 
and it was not to the members opposite. It’s surprising how the 
members opposite seem to want to take credit for the credit that 
we should actually – my Premier, my leader – should have for 
listening to the people. And I’d just like to say that in listening 
to the people, and the Premier took the action, and I, too, am 
proud to support the Bill on behalf of the people and the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
a few comments in closing debate in second reading on this 
Bill, and I’d like to respond to some of the comments made. 
 
The leader of the WCC has indicated that he would hope that a 
number of tax reductions would be put in place. I won’t run 
through the whole litany today, but certainly there have been a 
number of tax reductions in this province since we took over as 
government – gas tax, clothing tax, tax on power bills, some 
things that we’ve talked about in the last couple of days in 
agricultural estimates to provide an opportunity for people to 
reduce their income tax, venture capital legislation allowing 
people in the trade union movement an opportunity to deduct up 
to 40 per cent from their taxable income. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The subject before the Assembly is Bill No. 
50, and I would ask the member to keep his remarks to that Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 
do that. I was trying to respond to the questions that were raised 
and certainly I would agree with the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster’s comments that this action is an action to 
respond to the wishes of the people. 
 
What we found with this tax is widely known, that of all  

the provinces in Canada that have a tax on vehicles, they 
collected in the manner which we are changing from. In terms 
of tax review and tax fairness and equity, we looked around the 
country, and we said, if everyone else is doing it this way, 
possibly it’s the more fair way; possibly we should try it. 
 
In an attempt to inject a little equity into the tax system, Mr. 
Speaker, we made the change. It’s fair to say that the people of 
the province prefer to pay the tax on vehicles in a way that they 
were accustomed to, and so we acceded to their request and we 
have made the change back. 
 
I think it’s particularly interesting that the members of the NDP 
opposition often raise items such as refunding the tax, which 
would place the entire taxation system in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada in jeopardy because it would set a very dangerous 
precedent for any tax changes. For example, when you take the 
tax off clothing one day, should you refund to a guy who 
bought a suit the day before? Very, very dangerous precedent. 
Certainly when they were in government they never did 
anything to repeal taxes or lower taxes. And certainly on the 
succession duty tax, which collected considerable amount of 
money from people in the province, when they finally did bow 
to pressure to do away with that, they did not rebate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their comments that they have promoted and put 
this forward, I would just encourage the general public and any 
member of this House to review what they have put forward. 
And what they have in fact put forward is a Bill to repeal the 
tax on long distance calls made from pay phones. That would in 
fact necessitate SaskTel to change their 4,500 pay telephones 
across the province and would have people making long 
distance calls from pay phones, putting pennies into the 
telephones. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few brief remarks, I will close 
debate on Bill 50. Thank you, sir. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1100) 
 
Bill No. 56 – An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 

Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper 

Mill in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it give me pleasure today 
to rise to move second reading of a Bill respecting the Sale of 
Assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper 
Mill in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us who come to this legislature to serve our 
various areas of the province come here with various levels of 
expectation about how we can effect some change and do some 
good for the area which we represent. 
 
I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that with this transaction that 
will be taking place that will bring about the building of a 
paper-mill in this province and integrating that  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1965 
 

paper-mill with a pulp-mill and so on, and the good that will 
come to the forest industry, to the forested belt of the province 
which I represent, and the good that will come to the people 
involved in the forest industry that I also represent here – this is 
one of those days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is one of those days, Mr. Speaker, when I can say very 
clearly that I’m really proud to represent that area of the 
province, and that this is an excellent day for Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan’s forest industry and the people involved with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to effect the sales of 
certain assets belonging to prince Albert Pulp Company and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products corporation to Weyerhaeuser 
Canada Ltd. A condition of this sale is that the province 
guarantee debt to the extent of one-third of new capital 
investment to a maximum of $83.4 million. In addition to 
purchasing these assets, such purchase to be covered by an 
income debenture in favour of the province, Weyerhaeuser 
Canada commits to build an uncoated, free sheet paper-mill 
adjacent to the existing pulp-mill. 
 
The face value of the income debenture at the time of closure of 
the sale of the assets will be $248 million to be repaid with 
interest from the future earnings of the integrated operations. 
The expected repayment period is over the next 20 years. 
 
The facilities belonging to PAPCO which will be part of the 
sale agreement include the bleach draft pulp-mill in Prince 
Albert and its related assets; the shares of Woodland Enterprises 
Ltd. and of Prairie Industrial Chemicals Inc., and the assets of 
the chemical plant in Saskatoon, better known as Saskatoon 
Chemicals. The assets to be purchased from Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation are those assets related to the Big 
River, or Bodmin, sawmill. 
 
The pulp-mill, chemical plant, and sawmill have produced 
aggregate losses of approximately $44 million over the past five 
years due to depressed pulp prices and tight markets caused by 
competition from low-cost producers in third world countries. 
Without some type of product diversification, Prince Albert 
Pulp company is projected to remain a mediocre investment, at 
best. The sale to Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. will mean an 
expansion of Saskatchewan’s forest industries through 
modernizing of the pulp-mill, construction of a state-of-the-art 
paper-mill, and more effective resource management, 
harvesting, and reforestation 
 
First, immediately after the assets have been transferred to 
Weyerhaeuser, they plan to spend $24 million to expand and 
modernize the wood room. The pulp-mill was designed to 
handle mainly softwoods, Mr. Speaker, not hardwoods such as 
aspen which are in plentiful supply in the province’s forests. 
This modernization of the mill will allow for faster and more 
efficient debarking and chipping of hardwood, which will then 
result in a better utilization of the forests. As well, a new energy 
conservation program and other in-plant technical 
improvements will immediately be instituted. 
 
Second, the new, uncoated free sheet – commonly  

referred to as fine paper – the new, uncoated free sheet 
paper-mill will be constructed adjacent to the existing pulp-mill 
and will be fully integrated with the pulp-mill. In other words, 
because of the type of paper to be produced and the proximity 
of the paper-mill to the pulp-mill, the pulp-mill will have a 
captive market for about 60 per cent of its production. Fine 
paper consists of approximately 85 per cent kraft pulp, or the 
kind of pulp currently produced at Prince Albert. 
 
The new paper-mill will be as big as two football fields and will 
have a capacity of some 200,000 tonnes of fine paper a year on 
its uncoated free sheet paper machine. That is about one-sixth 
of the entire fine paper production in Canada, Mr. Speaker. This 
new, modern paper-mill will be the second largest fine 
paper-mill in production capacity in Canada, and a majority of 
the paper will be sold into the United States market. 
 
The cost of the new paper-mill, including the previously 
mentioned pulp-mill improvements and energy conservation 
programs, is anticipated to be $250 million. This mill will be 
financed by a one-third cash investment by Weyerhaeuser, $83 
million; one-third through debt guaranteed by Weyerhaeuser 
company, $83 million; and one-third by Weyerhaeuser, debt 
guaranteed by the province, $83 million. 
 
Third, the forests in general will benefit from this project. The 
extensive stands of aspen hardwood in the forests surrounding 
Prince Albert and to the north have historically been 
underutilized, deferring to softwood harvesting. Much of this 
prolific hardwood has always been considered too small for 
lumber and unsuitable for other applications. Modernization of 
the pulp-mill and construction of a fine paper-mill will open a 
new market for this Saskatchewan resource which used to go to 
waste. 
 
Weyerhaeuser is recognized as one of the leaders in the wood 
industry for its care and management of the forests which it 
uses. By using both softwoods and hardwoods, and by 
reforesting to ensure that the resources are continued, they will 
play an important role in the province’s integrated forest 
management policies. 
 
Construction of the paper-mill is expected to commence in the 
fall of 1986, with the new operations in production in 1989. 
Normal pulp-mill operations are expected to continue 
throughout the expansion phase. There will be 215 net new 
permanent, full-time jobs in the two mills and expanded 
woodlands. As well, there will be about 700 man-years of 
construction work created with about 500 jobs available at the 
height of the construction period. 
 
Spin-off activity created by this project will be a real benefit to 
Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. It is expected that an 
additional 430 indirect, full-time jobs will be created in forest 
communities, with more than 340 indirect man-years of 
employment during construction and 2,000 man-years of 
Canadian manufacturing employment associated with supplying 
equipment, materials, and services. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add some information 
on Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd.It is an  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1966 
 
 

integrated forest products company with operations in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario. The company has 1,700 
employees and manufactures commodity and speciality pulp 
and wood products. Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. is a subsidiary 
of Weyerhaeuser Company which has been in forest-related 
industries since 1900. The company has a network of hundreds 
of facilities throughout the U.S., plus a staff of 38,000 in 16 
countries. The company also has a long and successful history 
of forest regeneration and environmental research. 
 
For Saskatchewan this sale means efficient utilization of the 
province’s forests, diversified products leading to expanded 
markets, sales of products through an established professional 
market network, and an assured future for our forests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it give me great pleasure to move second reading 
of a Bill respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company Ltd. And Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 
and the Establishment of a Paper Mill in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member may 
wish to introduce some students, in which case I would like to 
defer to him. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, a group 
of grade 6, 7, and 8 students. They total 14. They are from the 
good, north part of our province. They are from the Fulda 
Elementary School in Fulda, Saskatchewan, very near to 
Humboldt and Pilger and Middle Lake and that area. It is in the 
Kinistino constituency. I do understand that this group is 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Jan Ramler, I believe; 
chaperons, Mr. Fleischhaker and Mr. Hebig, as well as Mr. And 
Mrs. Langenhoff. 
 
I would wish the students and their chaperons and teachers a 
very good trip here to the legislature. I am most certain that you 
will find your trip here most enjoyable, informative. I do trust 
that you will have a safe trip home, as well. And I will be very 
pleased to meet with you for pictures at 12 o’clock. As well, we 
will be having some drinks and a small, little question and 
answer period. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming these people from Fulda Elementary School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would also like to extend my greetings 
to the students and the people from Fulda. I have had many 
years association with that area of the province when I was the 
member for Humboldt, and I certainly would like to extend all 
of the students a welcome and wish them an enjoyable and an 
educational visit to Regina and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to enter the debate 
on Bill 56, The Pulp and Paper Mills Act. I will not make 
extensive remarks today, simply state briefly our reaction to the 
Bill, and then adjourn so that I may have an opportunity to 
study more fully the remarks of the minister. 
 
May I say at the outset that our party, as I’m sure all the people 
of Saskatchewan, welcome the construction of a paper-mill in 
Saskatchewan. We particularly welcome any forest 
development which allows us to use our aspen resource more 
effectively. It has long been recognized that this is a valuable 
resource. Attempts have been made in the past to use aspen 
effectively, and some have been successful. 
 
MacMillan Bloedel at Hudson Bay uses the aspen resource with 
a good deal of success. There were extensive examinations of 
the possibility of an aspen-based mill, or usually as aspen-based 
line for producing hardwood pulp at Prince Albert, this done by 
Parsons and Whittemore, and a good deal done more recently, 
in the early 80s, by Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. 
 
And I welcome the development of the manufacture of pulp 
using aspen, which I understand is now going on at the mill and 
has been going on for some time. As I say, everybody knew that 
once that started there would be wrinkles, would be bugs to be 
dealt with. And I suspect that they have experienced some of 
those, and I expect they’re overcoming them because no one 
has ever suggested that the people at Prince Albert Pulp 
company were not competent in the field of pulp production. 
And that was true when the mill was operated by Parsons and 
Whittemore; and it was true when it was operated more fully by 
the Government of Saskatchewan; and it will be true if the 
ownership changes and Weyerhaeuser Canada becomes the 
effective owner. 
 
So I am happy to see a way to use our aspen more effectively 
and certainly happy to see the proposal for the construction of a 
fine paper-mill. 
 
We will want to examine the financial transaction with some 
care. There are some aspects of it which aren’t fully known but 
which deserve examination. The Bill before us deals essentially 
with the finances of the paper-mill. But he, the minister, in 
introducing the Bill, quite properly dealt with the finances of 
the whole project since they are difficult to deal with separately, 
more particularly because the finances of the pulp-mill purchase 
depend upon the success of the paper-mill. 
 
We will particularly want to ask some questions and gain some 
further information with respect to the financing of the sale of 
the existing mill to Weyerhaeuser Canada. The transaction, as I 
understand it, is that Weyerhaeuser will put nothing down, will 
make no down payment, and will instead give a promissory 
note, called a debenture, with an interest rate which has so far 
not been disclosed. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1967 
 

(1115) 
 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, I find it surprising that we are 
talking about selling a public asset worth of the order of $250 
million, and the government since March has said, yes, we’re 
going to take a promissory note – we’ll call it a debenture, but 
that’s what it is – and it’s going to have a rate of interest, but we 
won’t tell you what the rate of interest is. 
 
And that is the situation now for the last three months, and I 
think that that is not satisfactory for the public. And we will 
clearly be pressing for the financial details of what the rate of 
interest is and what the repayment arrangements are. I gather, 
from listening to the minister, that the repayment arrangements 
are to depend upon the profitability of the combined enterprise, 
and under those circumstances one will need to know some of 
the charges against the gross income of the enterprise which 
will be permitted, otherwise one cannot make any estimate as to 
what the profitability will be. And without some estimate of 
what the profitability will be, we will have no idea whether the 
public will ever get their $250 million. 
 
And those are legitimate questions – legitimate questions which 
need to be addressed in the House, and are properly addressed 
in this House, for indeed that’s what we’re elected for. And 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, we will be examining into this 
transaction, which is unusual . . . Nobody suggests it’s usual to 
sell a pulp-mill on a “no down payment” note by the purchaser 
for the entire balance, and the note payable out of profits. That 
is a highly unusual sale. One would seek long and hard to find 
any other pulp-mill in Canada that’s been sold on those terms. 
 
This doesn’t mean it’s necessarily bad for the people of 
Saskatchewan; it does mean that it’s highly unusual and needs 
to be looked into with care by this House and by all who were 
elected to this House and whose obligation it is to see that the 
public domain, the things owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan, are disposed of on proper terms if, in fact, 
they’re disposed of. 
 
We will also want, Mr. Speaker, to ask a number of questions 
about forest use, about the protections which are there for the 
access to the forest by native Northerners who must look to 
those forests for their future livelihood. Many of them, as 
existing traditional resource bases of trapping and hunting and 
fishing, are unable to support the increased and growing 
population of the North. 
 
And all of those need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker, as does the 
role seen by the government and Weyerhaeuser of small 
contractors in harvesting pulp and other wood products for the 
combined operation. We’ll want to ask questions about whether 
or not any policy is stated in the documents concerning 
pesticides and spraying and forest management generally. We 
will want to find out what commitments Weyerhaeuser is 
undertaking. 
 
More particularly we will want to know, Mr. Speaker, whether 
or not Weyerhaeuser is firmly committed to building the paper 
plant if they purchase the pulp-mill, and we will want to know 
what their commitments are with respect to reforestation. 
Certainly nobody should  

suggest that any publicly owned paper-mill in this province 
should be sold to a private operator, private owner, without firm 
commitments on reforestation. 
 
And I think all of us are getting concerned about whether or not 
we, in the last good number of decades, have been vigilant 
enough with respect to reforestation. And that will need to be 
addressed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m 
getting some assistance from some members opposite, but I will 
attempt to direct my attention to the Bill before us. 
 
There is a further area of concern, and that deals with the 
Bodmin sawmill. The Bodmin sawmill serves two purposes. 
One, it harvests, it provides a market for saw timber, and 
thereby uses a resource. But secondly, it provides an economic 
base for the town of Big River. And we will want to know what 
the commitment of Weyerhaeuser is with respect to that latter 
aspect. There have been many arguments which would suggest 
that in pure commercial terms that sawmill would be better 
located in or about the pulp-mill in Prince Albert, in the general 
Prince Albert area. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, when trees are harvested in that area 
north of Big River and the Dore Lake-Smoothstone area 
generally, saw timber is taken out. A sort has to be made as to 
which part of the tree goes to Big River or Bodmin as saw 
timber and which part of the tree goes to Prince Albert as 
pulpwood. And this is perhaps not the most economical way or 
organize things from a strict financial point of view, and 
therefore there may be an argument, and I’ve heard them many 
times, for having the sawmill at Prince Albert. 
 
If we did that, the town of Big River would be without a 
financial base. And I will want to know, Mr. Speaker, what 
undertakings Weyerhaeuser is willing to undertake or give with 
respect to the continued operation of the Bodmin sawmill in 
that location. That is important since the economics may dictate 
something else. 
 
These arguments have been marginal, we know that, because 
many of us have gone through them. But when looked at from 
the point of view of public policy, there was nothing marginal 
about it. We needed an economic base for the Big 
River-Bodmin area, and the mill, when it burned some years 
ago, was rebuilt in that area because, while the economics 
might have been doubtful – nothing more than, Mr. Speaker – 
when considered with public policy, the decision was clear. 
 
We will want to know just what the situation is now where . . . 
because obviously this will be the first time that that sawmill 
has been owned privately for many years. It has been publicly 
owned since . . . well certainly since 1950, and maybe many 
years prior to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Smith: — I would ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a 
school. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you,  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1968 
 
 

and through you, a group of 24 students from the St. Margaret 
Elementary School in Moose Jaw, grade 4 students. They are a 
French immersion school in Moose Jaw. Their teacher was 
unable to get down here today, but Vi Hamel is their host today. 
I think the children have enjoyed themselves in the legislature 
so far. I’ve met with them and had pictures, and I ask all 
students to give them a warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to raise only one 
more point and then beg leave to adjourn the debate. And that 
point deals with the permanent job creation aspects of the 
proposed project. I’m surprised somewhat to hear the figures 
quoted by the minister and will seek an opportunity to have the 
minister explain where the additional jobs are likely to be found 
on a permanent basis from the combined projects of 
modernizing the paper-mill, the pulp-mill, the now 20-year-old 
pulp-mill, and the construction of the new fine paper-mill. 
 
With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I will seek an opportunity 
to review more fully the remarks of the minister, and beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Folk that Bill No. 55 – An Act to 
amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill which 
I adjourned the other day, as was indicated in the explanatory 
notes, transfers from the Prince Albert Pulp Company to 
Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. certain properties which are in the 
Meewasin Valley Authority area. We see this as part of the 
major Weyerhaeuser package which the government has 
introduced and has spoken about, and my colleague, the 
member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition, has 
just spoken on another Bill related to that. I want to indicate, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are no major comments I want to make 
in second reading, but there are some questions which I will 
want to ask in the committee. 
 
I have spoken to people in Saskatoon involved with the 
Authority, and at this point I’m prepared to let the Bill proceed. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine that Bill No. 54 – An Act to 
amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act be now read a 
second time. 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I don’t have a lot of comments to make 
on Bill 54, the Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would be remiss if I didn’t make a short 
comment. 
 
The Bill, basically in the relevant section, section 2 of the Bill, 
indicates that people will now be able to bet on horse races 
occurring throughout the country, or in fact outside of the 
province. So we could be betting on the Belmont, or on other 
horse races that occur across Canada, or in fact anywhere else. I 
believe this is an amendment which will legalize what has been 
happening here for the last number of years. I don’t think that 
this will allow something new to take place but will legalize 
what has been taking place for some time, as I understand it. 
 
Members of our caucus obviously are not going to be making a 
big fuss or stalling the Bill or anything like that, but I only want 
to make one point and that is that the growth area in the 
province, the one area of growth in this province under the 
Conservative government, under Premier Devine, has been in 
the area of gambling. And I’ll tell you, people in this province 
are a little upset with the fact that what we have here is a 
government that rather than having . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well we’re talking about amendments to an Act that will 
allow more gambling in the province, that’s what we’re talking 
about. It says right in the Bill. If any of the member 
back-benchers who don’t want to hear this would want to read 
the Bill, what it does is expand gambling in the province. You’ll 
now be able to bet on horse races that are occurring outside of 
the province. That’s what it’s talking about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . (inaudible) . . . read it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I’ve read it; it’s not very long if the 
member from Saskatoon would take the time – it’s less than one 
page – or have someone read it to him. It’s a very short Bill. 
And all it does is expand the betting in the province from horse 
races that occurred in the province to any horse races happening 
around the world – that’s what it says. 
 
And when it comes to this kind of gambling, what I’m saying is 
the one growth area in this province has been in that area, that is 
gambling. And the problem with that is, Mr. Speaker, the 
majority of people who spend their money on gambling are 
those who are least able to afford it. 
 
I have here an article from the Star-Phoenix dated the 30th day 
of May, 1986, and it’s called, “Gambling is leading growth 
industry,” referring to the gambling in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I want to get a few quotes out of here that 
indicate some statistics that have occurred under the Devine 
government. 
 
(1130) 
 
It starts out by saying, “Gambling is now the fastest growing 
industry in Saskatchewan.” Not potash, or not grain farming or 
beef production, as the Premier would like to have us believe, 
but gambling on horse racing and  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1969 
 

bingos and that sort of thing. I know, Mr. Speaker, and others 
will be concerned about this, because trying to operate a 
province that is $2 billion in the hole by gambling and 
encouraging gambling doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense. And 
it clearly indicates that in the 12-month period ending March 
31, 1981, the total spending on bingos, raffles, casinos, 
Nevadas, was a bit less than 17 million; and during the last 12 
months, that has increased to $150 million. I say that is a 
tragedy – almost a tenfold increase in gambling in four years 
under this government. 
 
Now I say to you that this is an unusual position for the Premier 
of this province, Premier Devine, to be taking, that he would 
have increased by almost tenfold the amount of gambling in the 
province. And I say to you that there are some real concerns 
about who controls the gambling in this province. And the 
reports that we have been getting in this legislature indicate 
clearly that people are concerned about who controls the 
gambling in this province. 
 
And I want to say to the Minister of Finance, who laughs from 
his seat about this issue of increasing gambling, and Bill 54 
which extends the gambling even further, I say that if we would 
concentrate on economic development the way it has happened 
under previous CCF and Liberal and NDP governments, rather 
than trying to sell off the majority of the province to 
out-of-the-province industries and increase gambling, that we 
may have more luck with: one, increasing employment in the 
province which has increased by a great deal under this 
government. We may be able to get some people off of welfare 
who are there through no fault of their own. 
 
But I say to you, passing Bills like Bill 54 that will increase 
gambling even more than the tenfold that has increased in the 
last four years from 17 million to 150 million – I want to 
reiterate that; the amount spent on gambling in Saskatchewan in 
1981 was 17 million, and in the last 12 months it was 150 
million – that that is not the way to solve our economic 
problems. 
 
I find it hard to believe that you can try to operate a province 
through gambling and try to make the books balance, because I 
think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs is saying how good this is, how great it is for 
the economy to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask for the members to 
hold your voices down, and there’s an awful lot of visiting 
going in the back rows. It’s very difficult to hear in the 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
going to leave it at that. I just wanted to make the point that if 
this is the solution to the economic problems facing 
Saskatchewan — the $2 billion deficit, the 60,000 people on 
welfare, the more than 60,000 people unemployed, the farmers 
going bankrupt – then I say to you that this is a government that 
should finally screw up its courage to call an election. It’s 
almost going on to five years since we’ve had one. Alberta’s 
had two elections since we’ve . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The election issue is a  

long way off of the Bill that’s before us, and I would ask the 
member to stay with the Bill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just say that I think it is high 
time that rather than sitting here passing Bills like this Bill 54, 
that we would now dissolve the Assembly and let the people 
decide who they want – increasing the gambling in this 
province or having truly real economic development and 
growth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would like to speak on the Bill if I may, 
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to make sure that the matter was on 
the record . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker;: — Order, please. Is the minister closing debate? 
It was moved by the Premier . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m just speaking on the Bill and indicating 
the rather unfortunate hypocrisy that has been evidenced today. 
The hon. member opposite, just having spoken on the Bill, talks 
about the increase in gambling. Of course the Bill doesn’t do 
that. The provision was already in place; this simply allows for 
taxation. 
 
But secondly, I think all members were shocked to hear a New 
Democratic member stand up and talk about increasing 
gambling when their party has been financed as a result of 
gambling over the last couple of years, when they have 
instituted new lotteries dealing with the budget. Every year . . . 
they now have an annual lottery. Obviously if you want an 
example of a lottery established to pick on the unfortunate and 
those that can’t care for themselves or those who can’t think for 
themselves, it is the NDP lottery dealing with the budget that 
has now become an annual affair. 
 
The NDP established a lottery in Regina Rosemont, again to 
take money from the unfortunate. They have established other 
avenues of bingos, and what not, to take money from the 
unfortunate and the less advantaged. And I think that the public 
would be very much interested, Mr. Speaker, in having the 
record corrected that the hon. member misinterpreted the Bill. 
The Bill does not do as he set out. 
 
And secondly, I think we were all somewhat shocked to find 
that the New Democratic Party that is taking party financing to 
new heights in terms of gambling and lotteries, should get up 
and criticize any initiatives which would increase revenue for 
the people of Saskatchewan as opposed to a political party. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Subvotes to Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask for leave of 
the Assembly to move a motion which is a usual motion since 
1981 in this House, to refer several subvotes from the blue book 
to the Standing Committee on Estimates. These are the subvotes 
that are under the jurisdiction of the Board of Internal 
Economy, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1970 
 
 

usual subvotes, as I’ve indicated, that have been done since, I 
believe, 1981. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to move 
that motion now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
opposition House Leader, the member from Shaunavon: 
 

That the estimates and supplementary estimates for the 
Legislative, being subvotes 1 to 3, 5 to 7, 17, and 20 
through 25, of vote 21 be withdrawn from the committee of 
finance and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Estimates. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t mind seconding, but 
I think in the tradition of the Assembly if the minister would get 
one of his colleagues, a minister, possibly the Minister of 
Finance to second it, we would have no problem with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have no problem doing that. The only 
reason the member from Shaunavon’s name was on there, Mr. 
Speaker, was because I had discussed it with him and he had 
agreed to second it just as a matter of a few moments ago. But I 
would … certainly I’m sure that the Minister of Finance would 
second it. I will change it to that point and say, seconded by the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 46 
 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I have three officials with me, Mr. 
Chairman: Mr. Merv Ross, assistant general manager of crop 
insurance; Jim Walters, manager, administration; and Jack 
Drew, who is the deputy minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, maybe to start – and I failed to 
do this with your agriculture estimates yesterday – could you 
give me who – and I see the member from Moose Jaw rural, 
what’s it called, Thunder Creek, beside you as a legislative 
secretary – is he the legislative secretary with specific 
responsibilities for crop insurance? How many legislative 
secretaries do you have, as far as Agriculture and crop 
insurance are concerned? I wonder if you could define that – 
spell that out for us at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, there’s a legislative secretary to the 
Minister of Agriculture and there are two of those, and one is 
the member from Arm River, Mr. Muirhead, and the other is the 
member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Swenson. I have a Premier’s 
legislative secretary to my executive office, and that’s Mr. 
Sherwin Petersen. 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you. Besides their legislative secretary’s 
remuneration – and you’re handing me the list on travel – could 
you indicate their travel expenses as well. You’re sending some 
information over on you and your top officials’ travel expenses 
in Saskatchewan and out of the province. Could you also do 
that for your legislative secretaries that relate to Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ll get that information, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m just trying to confirm whether some of it comes 
out of Agriculture and some comes out of crop insurance, and 
some might come out of Executive Council, but I’ll get that 
information so that we have it. It might all come out of 
Executive Council, but I’m just confirming that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If I recall properly or correctly, I think travel 
outside of just ordinary responsibility for the minister in the 
province came out of Executive Council in my case. Now I’m 
not sure if that’s still the same or not. But if you can put that 
together for us, I’d appreciate that. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now besides the legislative secretaries, how many personal 
staff do you have that would be called EAs or executive 
assistants that relate to the crop insurance corporation? Can you 
give me how many you have and who their names are and their 
qualifications for the job and the salaries paid to your aide with 
responsibilities for crop insurance. Can you send that across as 
well? 
 
And I suppose, while you’re doing that, if you could do a 
comparison between the salaries. Last year we noted that crop 
insurance paid the largest increase of any executive assistant. 
And I’m wondering if you could compare their salaries and the 
salary increases they got or are about to get for the year under 
review. Then we can do that in . . . We can expedite that if you 
can send that across. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ll send the salaries across – last 
year’s and this year’s. But there are four individuals associated 
with crop insurance: Gerry Williams, who is a ministerial 
assistant; Debbie McNabb, who’s a ministerial assistant; Louise 
Yates, who was a ministerial assistant C; and Helen Heinrich, 
who is a ministerial assistant A. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Those would be the same staff people as the 
former minister had. I believe I remember the names. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ll recall that after the former minister in 
charge of Sask Crop Insurance left cabinet, that we also had a 
change shortly after. In fact I believe it was in January when the 
general manager of crop insurance corporate, Wayne Funk, was 
removed from that position, as was the former chairman of the 
board of the crop insurance. Can you . . . 
 
According to a Leader-Post story I have here of January 15, 
1986, the Leader-Post detailed some of that information for us, 
where the member from Arm River said that one of the men 
was removed from office because he couldn’t get along with the 
former minister, and the other was removed because he objected 
to the constant interference from a special assistant, I believe 
the one,  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1971 
 

Williams, that was named earlier. 
 
Is it customary to let a former minister, after he has been 
removed from cabinet, to fire senior public servants of a 
department? Is that a standard procedure or . . . Just so I wanted 
to know who the legislative secretaries are and if the member 
for Arm River is still responsible for crop insurance there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to 
appointments and new chairmen, I make those final decisions. 
We have a new chairman of the crop insurance board, and we 
change members and chairmen from time to time. That’s not 
unreasonable. 
 
With respect to Mr. Funk, he took a brand-new position in 
Economic Development and Trade, and he’s certainly qualified 
to do that. And he’s happy in that position. And there’s really 
nothing more that I can add to either one of them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The Leader-Post story . . . and I’m not sure that 
I would doubt their word. One would have to measure it up to 
yours, Mr. Minister. But if I can just read – I’m reading from a 
column that was entitled “Conflict with ex-minister blamed for 
board shake-up.” 
 

This week, Funk was transferred to a position in the 
investment services branch of the Department of Economic 
Development and Trade. The move comes after Heenan 
stepped down as chairman of the crop insurance board at the 
end of 1985. 

 
Another quote in the second column then says, Muirhead said,” 
I then found out he had criticized me in public, and that’s a 
no-no. Cabinet approved the change with no problem.” And 
another quote I’d like to read into the record: 
 

Muirhead’s ministerial assistant, Gerry Williams, was in an 
“all-powerful position over the office,” but Muirhead would 
not detail what had been done to call into question his 
handling of the crop insurance corporation. However, some 
sources indicate that there were allegations of improper 
payments of insurance claims that are at the root of the 
dispute. However, one board members says, “The board felt 
at times that Williams was taking steps the board did not 
support. He (Williams) was flaunting his authority and was 
probably the catalyst of the conflict,” one board member 
responded to those allegations. 

 
Now the question I have, that apparently Gerry Williams is still 
on as a special assistant, and, being in this all-powerful position 
over the office, Mr. Williams was apparently in a position to get 
insurance payments made or increased or decreased as thought 
to be politically beneficial to the minister’s office. And if a staff 
member, like the former general manager, which I believe 
would have been above reproach, like you say, and took on a 
very qualified position – if a staff member tried to overrule it, 
according to the quotes here, that’s a non-no – that’s a no-no. 
 
Now I’m wondering; I’m prepared to let bygones be  

bygones if you can give me an assurance that the board and the 
management will run crop insurance claims, and not this one 
Gerry Williams that, by the way, got the largest increase of any 
of your EAs in the entire mass of staff that you have, trying to 
keep you looking good. He got the highest increase. I’m just 
talking from memory now, and I’ll apologize in advance if I’m 
wrong, but I believe it was 16 per cent last year – I believe that 
it was a 16 per cent increase. Maybe it was more; it might have 
been a little bit less. Maybe I can get the member from Arm 
River to give me a little bit of a nod if I’m right or wrong. 
 
But he got a big increase, and you were paying him well for 
taking care of these little no-nos, and it got to such an extent 
that an administrator that I had a great deal of respect for . . . I 
had a great deal of respect. I’ve personally called crop 
insurance, and I liked the staff and what they were doing in 
there. Ron Osika did an excellent job in field services. I want to 
give him a bouquet at this time. For all the problems you have 
when you have a drought and all the questions that are raised, 
you have a field services person there that is in charge of field 
services that was doing a superb job. 
 
But every one in a while you get some interference from these 
political hacks, these EAs that would move in and would try 
and take care of some no-nos and were trying to cover off the 
stories that former ministers in charge . . . I wanted him, Bill 
Heenan, to be removed because as far as I was concerned he 
wanted to run the corporation on a daily decision-making basis. 
I didn’t allow him to do it, and that initially caused dissension at 
the board level. And the quotation is given to your former 
minister in charge. 
 
And I’m wondering, are you going to run the crop insurance 
like an insurance corporation that looks at the claim, looks at 
the contract that the farmer has, and solves it accordingly, with 
no political interference? 
 
I believe that by moving in a minister in charge – when crop 
insurance used to be a lone-line expenditure in the Department 
of Agriculture, and over the years crop insurance grew from just 
handling very, very few claims. I would have to be guessing 
again when I’d say how many claims there were prior to 1971 
when we got elected – not claims – how many applicants or 
how many contracts their crop insurance had. 
 
And maybe your officials can give me that number and tell me 
just how many crop insurance applicants there were in ’71; and 
in that 10-year time frame, by 1981, how many contracts we 
had. And we saw a time where crop insurance really grew. 
 
Now as conditions started getting really tough down in the 
south country and it appeared that there would be drought, I’m 
sure you had a record number of contracts last year. You had a 
record number of people that were involved in crop insurance, 
and crop insurance expanded and was dictated mainly because 
of the advantage farmers saw, that this was a good managerial 
decision to guarantee a certain level of income for a certain 
amount of premium. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1972 
 
 

I don’t like the concept that, as a farmer – and I just want to 
take a few minutes to make a general statement of what my 
philosophy is about crop insurance. I don’t like the concept 
where a farmer can use crop insurance as a managerial tool and 
jump in and out on just the years he thinks it’s a dry year. 
 
I think crop insurance should be something that a person that 
jumps in and out every year or every three years or every 10 
years, or whatever arrangement that might be – some of the 
jumps in and out should be penalized more than the present 
system allows. I believe that that is taking advantage of 
someone, like myself, that bought crop insurance since it was 
available and maintained the highest quality coverage I could 
buy ever since I’ve had it. 
 
I am giving an advantage to the guy that just jumps in the year 
he thinks is going to be drought and buys it that one year and 
then doesn’t buy it again after that and laughs when it looks like 
it’s going to rain and looks like it’s going to be a wet year and 
then he decides, I’m not going to buy crop insurance this year. 
Then he waits until another year when it looks like we’re going 
to have a dry year, and then he buys it again. 
 
I don’t think crop insurance should be that kind of vehicle, and 
farmers shouldn’t be encouraged to do that. I think there should 
be a premium advantage for someone that carries it on a regular 
basis. 
 
And when a crop loss is suffered because of no fault of a 
farmer, Mr. Premier, when a farmer suffers a loss and has a 
claim – let’s say one year he had hail and another year they had 
a slight crop loss and the third year they collected the 
maximum, like the full amount. 
 
I know farmers like that in my area that were at 120-plus per 
cent coverage, and then they had a hail storm go through 
Gravelbourg R.M. – in the north I farm, and the Wood River 
R.M. – but in the Gravelbourg R.M. a big wide-swath hail 
storm went through there three years ago, wiped out a bunch of 
guys. They claimed on their crop insurance. The next year they 
claimed a little bit, maybe 3, 4, $500 a quarter, just a little more 
than their premium,. Last year they claimed the maximum. You 
know, they got everything they had coming because their crop 
in most cases in the whole Gravelbourg arm, was three or four 
bushels an acre. 
 
This year, instead of being at 125 per cent coverage, like they 
were three years ago when three acts of God – no fault of their 
farming practices, because they’re the best farmers in the 
country; no fault of their farming practices – they are now down 
to 80 per cent or around that 80 per cent coverage range. When 
you can only insure for 70 per cent, and you get 70 per cent of 
80 per cent, it gets to be pretty low coverage, and these have 
been guys that have been buying insurance year after year. They 
fell that those kind of penalties aren’t fair when it is something 
that they couldn’t control. 
 
I think that if a fellow’s house burns down and he rebuilds it, 
and then lightning strikes and he has another fire, and then a 
third time, and all of a sudden he can only insure his house for 
half its value, doesn’t seem to be a fair deal just because he had 
some misfortunes or a flood came  

along and wiped his house out. So there’s some of those basic 
concerns that I’m worried about. 
 
Now last year you announced that everybody be brought back 
up to 100 per cent coverage, and I don’t think that was quite a 
fair game when it doesn’t affect them again this coming year. 
So I’m wondering what your position is on that when there’s 
accidents. If you can give me a short, little comment, I think I’ll 
stop there so you can respond, and then we’ll go to some of the 
other concerns I have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well maybe I’ll deal with the last one 
first. I think you raise a valid point. In fact, we have it under 
review with the federal government with respect to the disaster 
mechanism that’s in. and what we’re looking at is if you have 
an area – so you’re not isolating one individual – but you have 
an area that’s hit three years or four years or five years in a row, 
which is not their fault, but obviously it wasn’t tied to 
management because as you point out, an act of God, then 
maybe they shouldn't be penalized if they’ve just been hit and 
hit and hit, and it wasn’t just a farmer because of management, 
it was because of an area that got hailed or something. We are 
looking at precisely that. So you raise a valid point, and 
hopefully we can do something about is so that you have the 
areas. 
 
With respect to numbers: in 1971 there’s 7,890 crop insurance 
participants; by 1981 there was 42,850; by 1985-86 there was 
47,000; and then this year, ‘86-87, 50,000-plus crop insurance 
people. So it’s moved from 7,000 to over 50,000 in that 15-year 
period. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Engel: — You will note that the committee that I served 
on when we went around Saskatchewan in 1971, John 
Kowalchuk was the chairman of that committee. It was a good 
committee. There was a cross-section of both opposition and 
the government members that sincerely visited. 
 
We tried to do a job, Mr. Premier, where we convinced the 
people in Rosetown or the Regina plains, where you have a 
good crop area . . . The Yorkton area was another place where 
we met with farmers, and I tried to convince them, and I told 
the farmers there that if we can design a program that will be 
premium-related to the performance or the production 
capabilities, so that somebody at Fox Valley’s premium would 
be related to its productive capacity there, compared to here, 
and it wouldn’t penalize the people in the short crop areas, that 
they would still stay in. 
 
I think today we have a pretty well universal program with 
50,000 of the 65,000 farmers buying the insurance. I think it’s 
good news. And to all the farmers . . . like I mentioned last 
night, I appeared before quite a few farmers last summer when 
they were talking about drought and their concerns. And even at 
political meetings I’ve been to around the province, as an 
agricultural spokesman I get to quite a few rural constituencies 
that I normally wouldn’t get to. 
 
And my statement when I talked about crop insurance is that I’d 
like to see crop insurance as a universal program;  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1973 
 

that the people in Canora, for example, or Preeceville, wouldn’t 
think that we’ve got a drought insurance program, that crop 
insurance is just for the drought area; that it’s just as applicable 
for them and just as good for the, that they would stay in. 
 
And so, consequently, I was concerned. I was concerned that 
the drought package doesn’t give the insurance corporation the 
impression that it is just specifically a program that’s going to 
help the farmers in the south-west because of the good 
representation they had from the members of the south-west and 
the media coverage they got and so on, of their disastrous 
conditions they had. 
 
We could throw a bad light on crop insurance and tell the 
farmers in the sure crop areas where they’re getting plenty of 
moisture and ample moisture conditions. They could decide, 
well I’m not going to pay $6,000 a year premium just so Engel 
gets coverage down in Gravelbourg. And I think that we were 
successful in staving that attack off. 
 
And if I have any criticism at all, Mr. Minister, is that the 
changes that were announced last June; and the changes that 
were announced, I would have far sooner seen it announced and 
implemented as a provincial package with federal contributions, 
as a drought package that wouldn’t have tinkered with crop 
insurance. Because when you tinker with crop insurance in 
between, you upset people that didn’t get involved – just like 
with your air reel announcement. 
 
The farmers . . . if you would have announced the air reel thing 
in June when you announced the 5-bushel coverage, then the 
farmers could have decided, well I’ll spend that 4,500 bucks 
and get an air reel on my combine and get $8 an acre extra. But 
when it’s announced kind of slyly or secretly after fall, it upset 
and frustrated a lot of people saying, look, I don’t like being 
involved in a game when the rules are changed in mid-stream. 
 
And I made this statement to you in question period in the past 
and in Agriculture estimates last year. Let’s plan it in January –
February and make your announcement in February how 
they’re going to be for the year, so that farmers don’t get some 
surprises through the middle of their contract, because that, I 
think, disturbed them. And if you’ll agree with me on that 
response there, I think we can move on to some of the specific 
questions I have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — All right, Mr. Chairman, while the 
percentage is very high in crop insurance – 50,000 out of 
65-odd-thousand participants – we do find that where you tend 
to have relatively good crops on a consistent basis, like in the 
north-west part of the province, that you have the lowest 
percentage participation in crop insurance. The south-west, on 
the other hand, is the highest percentage, and it reflects just the 
general conditions from time to time. 
 
If you look at the North Battleford area, they’ve had excellent 
agriculture conditions on a comparative sense. And to that 
extent it is often difficult to have as much enthusiasm to have 
them join the program in an area that consistently has good 
rainfall, no grasshoppers to speak of, and some risk of frost but 
. . . so forth. 

With respect to the changes in crop insurance, really the 
drought program was separate from crop insurance. The 
drought payments went out on analysis of areas with crop 
insurance data and we used all that information, but the drought 
payments and the federal payments and so forth were separate. 
 
With respect to your observation about changing crop 
insurance. Wherever possible, I would agree, when you make 
modifications, make them as early as you can. Make them in 
January or February. When we’re into a really bad drought 
situation that we obviously didn’t forecast – say, last spring 
when I was in Assiniboia, as an example, and people were 
saying that crop insurance needs to be modified so we can 
salvage. 
 
Now then you sort of have a choice. You say, well I should 
have thought of that in January. We’ve never changed that. But 
if the farmers are saying, if you let me go and salvage it and 
leave a strip and I can still get crop insurance, at least I have 
feed or I have some grain and so forth. And that’s where it’s a 
choice. You look at it and say, should you make that change to 
allow them to salvage the crop in crop insurance and still pay 
them, or shouldn’t you. 
 
Well it just seemed to make a lot of common sense to farmers, 
and it made some sense to me, and I said, go – let’s salvage. 
And we’re going to keep that provision because it allows people 
an alternative where they don’t just have to watch the crop go 
into the ground just so they can collect crop insurance. But they 
can save what they can; leave a strip, and you can monitor. 
 
So where there’s changes that are appropriate to crop insurance, 
I think it can be improved for ever. We’ll just keep making 
those changes. Wherever possible, I would agree with you, 
make them as early as possible in, say, January, February, so 
everybody knows what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With the changes you 
implemented last year, I think the thing that frustrated my 
neighbours as much as me possible, was the amount of 
adjustments and adjusters and the whole process that went on 
last year. Then finally at the end you’d have an adjuster come 
by and measure the bins like they would have done in a normal 
year and make the pay-out there. 
 
I believe that that kind of an operation must have caused 
frustrations galore for the management and the people involved 
in crop insurance. And I’m not going to get you to comment on 
that aspect. But I think a comment that would be worthwhile – 
and I appreciate the numbers on the participants in crop 
insurance – but from ’81 on, the growth rate was reasonably 
gradual; ’82 or ’83 on, especially. There weren't that many 
more contract holders. But the claims paid out in those two 
years increased significantly, and I’ll admit to that. 
 
But can you tell you me about what it cost to administer the 
program last year and what your anticipated costs are this year. 
Can you give me the last two years, plus this year’s anticipated 
total administrative costs? I’m sorry I don’t have my Public 
Accounts reference. I could look some of that up. But if your 
officials have that for me . . . 
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1974 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Last year the 
administration costs were 11.25 million. This year we are 
budgeting 8.5 million for ‘86-87. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And the year before? Have you got that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The year before was 11.25. Three years 
ago I don’t, but maybe they can dig it up. 
 
I could point out for the hon. member that if you look at any 
kind of ratio of administrative expenses to the total premiums – 
I mean to put it in perspective – administration to the total, 
Saskatchewan is doing very well. For Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance the ratio is 6 per cent on administration. In Alberta 
it’s 11 per cent, and in Manitoba it’s 13 per cent. So our 
administration, as a fraction of total premiums, is the lowest in 
the prairie provinces. 
 
I’ll get you that third year. In 1984 it was 6.25 million; ’85 was 
11.25, and ’86 we’re budgeting 8.5 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can you give me the numbers for ’84 when it 
was 6.25 million, what the total pay-out was and the total 
pay-out when it was 11 million. Can you give me those two 
numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve got the numbers 
backward on the 1984-85. It wasn’t 6.8, it was 8.6 million; and 
then 11.25 and then 8.5 forecasted. And the three pay-outs 
ending March 31st; in ’84 it was 105 million; ’85 was 260 
million; and of March 31st of this year, ’86, it was 375 million – 
105, 260, and 375. And the other figures, I gave you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — It cost a shade over 8.50 million to pay out 
260,000, and for 11 million you paid out 375 million. Is that 
right? 
 
The $11.25 million made a pay-out of $375 million and the $8.5 
million made a pay-out of 260 million. I take it those are the 
way the numbers match up because I believe that the payable 
was just over the 100 million the year before when it was a 
reasonably good crop. 
 
Okay, now the other question that I raised some concerns, and I 
just touched on: how many form letters went out, or to how 
many contract holders did a form letter go out indicating that 
they would be paid on air reels? Can you tell me about how 
many farmers were involved that anticipated some money on air 
reels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — There was a form letter that went out to 
the general public saying that we might consider -–no 
commitment – might consider air reels, and there were two or 
three people who received a letter saying that we would look at 
their expenditures with respect to air reels, prior to us making 
the decision that we couldn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Two or three? You’re sure that that is the case? 
Then I’ve got all of them. Then the farmers sent them all to me 
because I’m sure that I’ve got three on file. And you mean that 
every one that got a letter stating that we are going to be paying 
you out, the first letter that came . . . We should have brought 
those copies along. I thought they were out by the hundreds. 
Are you telling  

me that there’s only two or three who got an approval letter 
saying, we’re going to be paying you $8 on X number of acres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, that’s right, Mr. Chairman. There 
were two or three that got a personal letter from me that said 
that we would examine their expenditures. The rest was a form 
letter that went out to farmers from all over that said that we are 
giving consideration to looking at paying expenditures on air 
reels, but no commitment, no applications, nothing. We’re 
giving that serious consideration, but there’s two or three that 
went out under my signature saying, we’ll look at your 
expenditures in terms of making a payment. Subsequent to that, 
I made the final decision along with the crop insurance board, 
that we couldn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The ones that I . . . I just checked with my 
colleague from Shaunavon and he got as many as I did. The 
ones we’re talking about is the form letter that went out saying, 
I understand you used an air reel. The farmer somehow 
indicated to the crop insurance board that he did use an air reel 
on so many acres, and he got a signed form and put his 
declaration with a witness form that he sent back. 
 
Those that thought they had a commitment . . . One of the 
farmers even took his to the credit union and got an advance on 
it, that felt that that looked to any banker or anybody seeing the 
letter, that looked like money in the bank because there was a 
commitment there that a payment was going to be made as soon 
as the official numbers are in. The form letter came along, they 
signed it, sent it back. I’m wondering how many were in that 
category. How many hundreds were involved in there? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there was a form letter 
that went out and asked for the following information: 
hospitalization numbers . . . Well, one, did you use air reels; 
hospitalization numbers; and the acreage and so forth. And 
about 100 of those were sent out to people as they wrote in and 
said, I hear you’re going to consider air reels. And we said, yes, 
we’re going to consider it. So we wrote them back, sent them 
this form letter, asked for their hospitalization to get their place 
of residence; if they used the air reel; and how many acres they 
had – about 100 of those. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think the whole air reel deal turned out to be a 
bad excuse for a decision to try and play politics. I imagine you 
were pressured from some political friends – I could name them 
– that manufacture or distribute or sell air reels. And some of 
them may be even on the board – that promoted this idea that 
might sell more air reels. 
 
I think farm management practices should be a reward, farm 
management practices that produce a better crop, and I think 
this is where personal coverage comes in. If the one wants to 
buy it that fertilizer and has some farm management practices, 
uses equipment that possibly can garner in the most possible 
wheat, that would be a reward in itself. 
 
The farmers that have been raising it with me, and I  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1975 
 

haven’t discussed it with enough people that are your officials 
in your department personally to have a strong felling one way 
or the other. But just take a minute to discuss that 5-bushel 
option – and I’m not sure where you’re standing this year or if 
that’s in place again or not – but one suggestion that has come 
from a number of public meetings that I’ve been to is either the 
wheat pool committee meetings that I’ve attended, or SARM 
district meetings that I’ve been down OT, a number of them – 
including farmers from the ranching community where there’s a 
lot of ranchers, or 50 per cent of them are cattle people involved 
– indicate that the 5-bushel coverage set an unfair precedent 
between somebody that baled his and somebody that didn’t. 
 
And I know that it was designed to salvage some feed. It 
possibly even helped maintain a hay price that was necessary 
and was good last year when we had the shortage of feed in our 
south country. But if you’d want to implement the 5-bushel 
coverage on a long-term basis and part of the corporation, I’d 
like to recommend that you take to your board and consider at 
the board level that the 5-bushel applies if a premium is paid 
out, and that a person who got 8 bushels an acre would have 3 
bushels more coverage, and a person with 10 would have 5 
bushels more, and so on, rather than somebody that got 5 
bushels an acre got 100 per cent coverage and the guy with 6 
bushels an acre got 1-bushel coverage paid out. 
 
And that frustrated some farmers. One farmer told me that on 
1,000 acres, the board . . . and I’d like to talk to officials on the 
board on that one particular claim. But a guy the other night 
was trying to tell me the story that on 1,000 acres he had about 
190 bushels too much grain to stay under the 5-bushel, and that 
threw him over, and consequently it cost him so many 
thousands and thousands of dollars. 
 
Now I don’t know how that works because in my own case the 
land that was below 5 bushels an acre, you’d get full coverage, 
and that which was over, you didn’t, and so it averaged out a 
little bit. And somehow they worked that aspect of it out, and I 
think it didn’t quite work like that. But there are farmers out 
there that think that because they got 190 or 200 bushels that 
they didn’t dump into a coulee, for some reason that threw them 
over the 5-bushel total and they didn’t get that extra coverage. 
 
I’d like you to explain how that’s going to work this year 
because there was a lot of frustrated farmers over that one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, a couple of 
observations with respect to both the changes which the hon. 
member said we have some problems with. One was the salvage 
one and one is the 5-bushel change, from 1.9 to 5. 
 
On the salvage my officials here have estimated that 
Saskatchewan farmers saved and salvaged $200 million worth 
of crop as a result of that one change we made in Assiniboia — 
$200 million – which is pretty significant in terms of feed 
and/or grain or both and the combination. 
 
By taking it from 1.9 up to 5, we had some problems with 
respect to the cut-off right at 5 itself. So what we’re doing this 
year is a modification of that. We’re having the cut-off  

feathered, if you will, or staggered, from 1.9 up to 4.7. 
Anything below 1.9, none of it counts at all. Then it goes up in 
20 per cent increments at about half a bushel a piece. So as you 
go from there up to 4.7 bushels, you’ll get to 100 per cent. So it 
goes in 20 per cent increments. So the next half bushel, 
approximately, is 20 per cent, 40 per cent, 60 per cent, 80 per 
cent, and then 100 per cent. Anything over 4.7 is obviously 
going to count. 
 
So rather than just – as you pointed out – rather than just have 
that 5-bushel – you’re either over or you’re in – we feather it up 
so people don’t feel like if they are within 190 bushels, they’re 
going to get one thing or another. They can watch it go up 
increments. From below 1.9, it doesn’t matter, but there’s still 
some incentive to make sure that we can watch it as it goes up 
to where it cuts off, and it'’ a little fairer, and it seems to be well 
received by farmers. So that’s the way we are going to operate 
this one. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That’s much improved from last year, because 
the thing that . . . Farmers that were watching and had time to 
measure their grain and know exactly where they’re at, the 
minute they were harvesting some marginal land and the minute 
they got to – on 1,000 acres – the minute they got close to 5,000 
bushels, they baled the rest. They then got 100 per cent 
coverage and plus were able to sell their bales, and that made 
quite a difference in their income rather than just combing and 
taking the rest of the grain. 
 
So they were arguing that if you were watching and controlled 
the amount of wheat you were taking home . . . Like one guy 
said, spreading it in a coulee was cheaper than taking it home 
because one you measured it, it threw that over, and on 1,000 
acres at 5 bushels and $4 a bushel, that makes $20,000 
difference, if you take it literally and not use the example I said, 
that half of that 1,000 acres is adjusted at 2 bushels an acre 
where you’re going to get full coverage on that 400 acres and 
another 600 you measured. So by feathering it in, as you call it, 
might be one solution. 
 
The other solution would have been to put that amount at the 
top and if you collect insurance, you get 5 bushels plus you 
subtract whatever wheat you had there, and that wouldn’t 
penalize you. That wouldn’t penalize you for gathering in a 
bushel of wheat. 
 
And I think I’ve been taught, and my neighbours and most 
farmers out that way, that when it’s short, I’d sooner have some 
wheat in my bin and collect a little extra insurance because I 
might need that for seed two and three years down the road. 
And they have it that way. So I think that that solves that. 
 
I have a colleague that wants to ask some questions about some 
of his constituents, so I’ll let him go to it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier 
and Minister of Agriculture, in your proposed move of the crop 
insurance headquarters to Melville, a large number of 
employees, who work in the crop insurance, have expressed a 
lot of concern about what’s going to happen to those employees 
– and I understand there’s about 75 per cent of them – who are 
not going to  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1976 
 
 

be able to move. You will be aware of all the problems; some 
are married and the husbands are working, and some of those 
have been there for 17 years and more; therefore, they have 
provided a substantial amount of service. 
 
Assurances have been provided in the House by yourself and by 
the minister in charge of the Public Service Commission that 
steps will be taken to assure that these employees who cannot 
move are looked after by finding alternative employment. Can 
you tell me what kind of assurances have been provided so that 
they can be assured that they will not be left stranded, as some 
of them still think that they will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I gave the individuals in 
crop insurance, the employees, my personal assurance, along 
with a person letter to each of them, saying that we would 
provide equivalent employment here, under all reasonable 
circumstances, in the city of Regina, if your spouse was 
working here or family or for any other legitimate reasons. 
 
So I not only said it here and said it in public, I wrote them each 
a personal letter and said that we will do everything, and I will 
do everything personally, to make sure that they can find 
equivalent employment here in the city if it’s difficult for them 
to move as a result of family problems, or children in school. Or 
whatever it may be. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, what steps have now been 
taken? Have some of the employees indicated that they will not 
be able to move? And how much success – and I’m sure you 
personally have not been involved – but how much success 
have your officials had? Or the Public Service Commission, 
how much success has it had in assuring placements for these 
people in equivalent positions, without loss of pay, and where 
they can carry over their benefits which they have accumulated, 
which means pension plan and other kinds of benefits, sick 
leave, and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The crop insurance employees are not 
directly under the Public Service Commission. And right now 
we’re putting together the crop insurance people with the Public 
Service Commission people to look at all the opportunities and 
possibilities under the public service to make people . . . or 
allow them to slide into the Public Service Commission. 
 
So that mechanism is now in place and we’re into those 
negotiations. And when we have that package together, then 
we’ll be able to have the mechanism to deal with the transfer 
from the crop insurance to those that want to stay in the public 
service but have to be under the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you’re still negotiating, Mr. Minister. 
You cannot, I guess, give a firm assurance that everything will 
be in place at this point in time. Is that what you’re saying, 
you’re still negotiating? And if you are, what stage is the 
negotiation at? 
 
And I’m asking this question quite sincerely, because anybody 
with a family out there who works for this agency or any other 
and is confronted all of a sudden out  

of the blue saying, well you’re going to have to move – and 
some of the earlier statements there seemed to be coming 
around were, you either move or you resign or you get fired – 
caused them to be concerned, and I’m sure that was never the 
intention of people involved, but that’s the impression they got. 
 
What stage are your negotiations at? How assured are you that 
you’re going to succeed so that you can very soon indicate to 
these people that they need not worry? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll make it very clear. I 
have no doubt at all that we will succeed because I’ve said 
that’s what we’re going to do. All the officials are doing . . . It’s 
not negotiations, it’s just finding the best mechanism that 
works. So it’s not something that’s negotiable. It’s not 
negotiable. When I’ve sent them a personal letter and said that 
you will have equivalent employment here, that’s the way it’s 
going to be. So all we’re working on is how we do that. So I 
don’t want there to be any doubt for any employee. There’s 
nothing up for negotiation with respect to – it may happen or it 
may not happen. I said it will happen and they will do it. It’s 
just to get the best mechanism to make it work as smoothly as 
possible. There’s no question of whether it will or won’t. It will 
happen and I’ll certainly be quite prepared to back up my letter. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Premier. The 
reason I used negotiations is because in your earlier remarks 
you used the word “negotiation,” so that I hope that that’s clear. 
 
I don’t doubt your word, but I would like, if you don’t mind – 
and it’s nothing secret about it because you’ve mailed it out to 
everybody – if you would undertake to send me a copy of the 
letter which you’ve sent to the employees so that I may have it. 
Would you undertake to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Of course, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask just one 
question on this issue that my friend and colleague from Regina 
North West was asking on another issue. 
 
But, what is the cost of that move? Have you got a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — East. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Regina North East, sorry. Can you tell 
me how much that is going to cost on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the only costs will 
be those associated with moving the individuals that go. And 
we have a pretty generous moving package, but I don’t know 
how many are going yet, so I can’t really say. After that, the 
costs could very well be less because of both the various kinds 
of market conditions that may exist in terms of housing and 
some other things in the community of Melville. 
 
So the cost is of moving the individuals that are going to move; 
it is pretty generous. But I can’t tell you because I  
  



 
June 13, 1986 

1977 
 

don’t know how many are moving yet. But we’ll certainly give 
you every package. It’ll be public knowledge in terms of the 
moving package and what it is. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The question of the grasshopper spraying 
on the road allowances, the program you announced last year – 
can you tell me how much . . . what the uptake was on that 
program and how much it cost to implement and carry out that 
program last year? As I understand it, it went over relatively 
well in some areas and in other areas not so well. But can you 
give me the global figure -–and I don’t want it by R.M. or 
anything – but the total amount of money that was spent on that 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s in our Agriculture estimates. But I 
believe – and we can confirm it and certainly give it to you — 
$3 million, give or take. And we’ve allocated 8.5 this year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I guess that’s the point. It’s a little 
confusing to farmers out there who are listening to the Alberta 
government announcing a program where they’re going to pick 
up half of all the costs of grasshopper spray for all the province, 
and they are announcing a $3 million program. And you’re 
announcing you’re going to pay for the roadsides, and it’s going 
to cost 8 million. And somehow these numbers aren’t very 
accurate because in Alberta there are a good number of acres 
that will have to be sprayed. 
 
And what I’m trying to figure out is how a program to spray the 
roadsides could cost $8 million, when in Alberta they’re 
announcing half of all the chemicals for 3 million. And what are 
you basing that $8 million cost on – how many R.M.s and . . . 
And here, I understand, it’s under Agriculture that this would be 
asked, and I’m not doing this in a confrontational way, but I 
want to . . . I’m just curious about how that’s working. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, it wasn’t 8.5, I was wrong. It was 
7.2 for this year. There are several reasons that it’s larger than 
Alberta’s. One is that we’ve got a bigger area that is under 
grasshopper infestation. Two, we expect to have a big uptake, 
particularly south of No. 1 Highway, right across the province 
in terms of the R.M.s paying for it. The R.M.s just submit the 
bills, and when you get your bill and what they paid for it on all 
the road allowances, and if you do a complete R.M., it’s a fair 
amount of money. So we’ve budgeted 7.2; most of it will be 
where the grasshoppers are, and certainly south of No. 1 
Highway. 
 
The Alberta grasshoppers are not as bad and they have allocated 
their budget, you know $3 million, and I guess they’ll have to 
see how that goes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other final area that I just wanted to 
touch on and here it’s associated, I guess, with crop insurance, 
because the impact of the outbreak could mean that we’ll have 
to pay more in crop insurance. But can you give us a status 
report on the leaf and stem rust that we’re haring a lot about – 
the influx of rust that is coming up from the Gulf states and now 
seems to be more prevalent and widespread in the province than 
it has been for a number of years. 
 

Can you give us a little report on what we’re finding out there? 
Is it mostly in winter wheat where the varieties are not as 
resistant to rust, or is it in the spring wheat as well, and how 
many acres are we looking at being affected and to what 
degree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the rust spore counts are 
up and are relatively high compared to more normal years, but 
we really don’t have an estimate of any potential damage on 
any of the crops, and it’s just a little bit too early, as I am 
advised by my officials, to know whether or not it’s really 
going to do damage and if some crops might be more 
susceptible. It evidently is a little bit more prevalent in the 
south-east part of the province, at least the spore count is up 
higher, but we’ll continue to monitor and watch it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I understand it, mostly the east side of 
the province and, I suppose, particularly in the south-east where 
the heavy rains around Parkman and Willmar and in that area 
where the humidity will be much higher because that’s 
conducive to rust growth – but on the issue of winter wheat, can 
you tell us whether or not the strains that we’re now growing in 
the province – I suppose predominately North Star and other 
varieties – are they more susceptible to stem rust, which I think 
is the more serious type of rust, than some of our rust-resistant 
spring wheats that we now have developed here and are using? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the winter wheat is 
generally more susceptible to the rust, and there’s really not 
much you can do about it. If you’ve planted the winter wheat 
and that variety, or winter wheat generally, you’re going to 
have to put up with rust because, to date, there’s nothing that 
you can do to really have an impact on it if it’s not a 
rust-resistant variety. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 161 
 
Item 1 – Statutory. 
 
Vote 161 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 46 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

  



 
June 13, 1986 

1978 
 
 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
Vote 161 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 161 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 
officials and just point out that, as the hon. members have 
mentioned, that the crop insurance payments have been 
substantial, and people have had to work very hard to get them 
out, and I think the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
congratulated some of the crop insurance members. I think the 
whole province likely should say thank you to a very good staff 
that has worked hours and hours to get the payments out as 
quickly as possible, with tremendous increases, and under a lot 
of pressure. So I want to thank all the officials. Their 
productivity has been excellent, and we’re proud of them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’ll echo that. It’s the sentiment I said earlier in 
my remarks. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 12:53 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 41 – An Act respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax Credits 
Bill No. 42 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 30 – An Act respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit 
Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Livestock Investment Tax 
Credit Act 
Bill No. 61 – An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 
of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending on 
March 31, 1987 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 12:55 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS

