


















































April 21, 1986  Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 21, 1986 
 

753 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I was asking the minister 
about some numbers on the hospital beds that were closed in 
Saskatoon in the past year, from April 1st of ’85 to ’86. I 
wonder if the minister had a chance to get those numbers for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
congratulate my staff who worked very diligently and also the 
hospitals who provided the information over the past couple of 
hours, three hours. And I’d like to read this for the information 
of the members present. We didn’t just do it for this year; we 
went back to 1982. and I want to indicate to you when I indicate 
1982, that was March, 1982. So any figures for 1982 would be 
figures indicating when the members opposite were 
government. 
 
The total bed closures for Saskatoon, the total bed closures for 
Saskatoon in 1982 — let me again indicate to you this was 
entirely under the previous administration; these figures are at 
the end of March — for Saskatoon were . . . Do you want to 
shout from your seats or do you want to hear the information? 
This is for 1981-82. The figure for Saskatoon bed closures were 
223; the figure for 1982-83 was 197; the figure for 1983-84 was 
152; the figure for 1984-85 was 112; and the figure for 1985-86 
was 132. So you can see that they have progressively gone 
down. From March 1982, the bed closures to ’86, 
approximately 100 less beds closed over that year. 
 
So let’s look at Regina and Saskatoon combined, and we will 
see that the total for 1982, and that again is March 1982, is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about this year? That’s what we’re 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We will get to there. If you want to shout 
and holler, it’ll take longer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
I know that’s your habit. But if you just bear with us for a 
minute . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They’re always a little 
noisier after supper in here for some reason. Certain members 
are. 
 
In 1982 is 264 — 264 beds closed in Regina and Saskatoon; in 
1983, 254; in 1984, 217; in 1985, 169; and in 1986, 194. 
 
So you can see considerable decline, year after year, in the last 
four years as compared to figures of 223 in Saskatoon 
compared to 132 this year; 264 compared to 194. I hope that 
satisfies the member as the information he wanted to know. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like the minister 
to answer the question that I requested information on. In the 
year past, from April 1st of 1985 to  

April 1st of 1986, University Hospital in Saskatoon, how many 
beds were closed, in which areas, and for how many days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — University Hospital for the year of 1986, 
there were 86 beds closed — 86 beds, Mr. Chairman. There 
were the 6 pediatrics that we talked about, from May 1 to 
March 31, ’85. From June 28 to September 4, ’85, there were 4 
rehab beds, 3 beds in medicine, 14 beds in neuro-surgery and 
ophthalmology, 18 in surgery, 5 in pediatrics, 20 in gynecology, 
and 6 in geriatric. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now that was in the University Hospital 
What was it at City Hospital for that same time period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. For City Hospital there were 46 for 
the total year of 1986, breaking down as follows: medicine, 8; 
urology, 10; gynecology, 10; neuro-surgery, 2; ENT, 5; general 
surgery, 7; orthopedics, 4; for a total of 46. And City Hospital 
indicates they have no closures in the summer. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And, Mr. Minister, for St. Paul’s — what 
are those numbers for St. Paul’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I should point out, for City Hospital those 
closures were between July the 1st and August . . . April 1, ’85 
to March 31, ’86. Now for St. Paul’s, there are no bed closures 
at the present time for 1985-86 fiscal year. For the Christmas 
period of two weeks, there were 92 surgery beds, and I’ve 
explained that that has happened many times . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, let me, let me indicate, if you want to 
shout, fine. Do you continue to care to shout from your seat or 
do you want me to give you the answers? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I will. No, I will give you the answer. 
 
It’s tougher when you shout and your opposition member can’t 
hear, but there were 92 surgery beds at Christmas, which I say 
is nothing unusual. You check back year after year, you will see 
this. I’ve given you the indication why. Many people prefer not 
to go to hospital at Christmas for surgery. Some of the medical 
people prefer to take their families on holiday, and some of the 
nursing staff and support staff have their holidays scheduled 
then also. For the Easter period, a two-week period, there were 
67 surgery beds and 10 medicine beds. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate getting 
that information, although it took a long time to do it. And 
basically what we find is a couple of hundred beds closed when 
the waiting lists are 8,000. And I noted with interest your reason 
for these closures at St. Paul’s. Basically now you’re blaming 
the nurses and the doctors for the closures at the base hospital in 
Saskatoon. And I will be relaying that on to the nurses and the 
doctors because they will be interested in your comments. 
 
And the member from Maple Creek shouts and hollers from her 
seat in her ordinarily, obnoxious way. And I just say that it’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, that you can hardly hear in here for 
the noise coming from the government benches. The ruckus and 
riotous nature of  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

754 
 

these people — this massive, majority, arrogant government —  
when people stand and try to ask questions of the minister, I say 
to you, Mr. Chairman, this is a government out of control. And 
I say that across Canada, across Canada we see the attack on 
medicare that we have seen in Saskatchewan go on and on. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, the people of Canada are 
finally understanding what Conservative governments are all 
about. And I say in the last little while we’ve seen them turfed 
out of Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We’ve seen them turfed out of Manitoba, 
not very long ago. And tonight we saw them turfed out of 
Prince Edward Island. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And just to inform the Assembly, elected 
in 17 and leading in five for 22. The former opposition . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! This is absolutely . . . Order! 
This is absolutely nothing to do with the estimates at hand. And 
let’s get on with it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I say to you that relating 
to health issues, and one of the big issues in that election 
campaign was health issues as it is here in this province, and I 
say when you have health issues . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. This is not related. What is 
going on in that province is not related. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we have had the minister 
talk about other provinces’ health care at least 10 times. And I 
would like to tell you that we have talked about other 
provinces’ health care any number of times. And so I say that 
one of the big issues in the next election here will be the same 
as it was in Prince Edward Island — health issues. That’s what 
the election’s going to be about. 
 
And I’ll say, they ended up with 10 seats in Prince Edward 
Island because they failed the people in Prince Edward Island. 
and when we have an election here, Mr. Chairman . . . and 
that’s one of the reasons I believe you’re getting off the boat 
and out of politics, is because you don’t agree with this 
government on their health care issues either. And I would say 
to you that tonight’s display in Prince Edward Island, based on 
health issues, I might add, show clearly the people of Canada 
are rejecting cut-backs in health. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! We are not talking about the 
election in Prince Edward Island. Let’s get on with the 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I say to the minister 
opposite that when we talk about transfer cuts from the federal 
government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I hear one of 
the member opposite yelling cannabis. And I don’t know 
whether they were smoking it before supper or what, but I say 
to you that yelling from their seats in this  

manner continually . . . And I see the member from Meadow 
Lake laughing in his seat and making noise, and the Minister of 
Health can hardly hear the questions that are being put to him. I 
find a terrible display of unruliness in the Assembly tonight 
that’s being allowed. And I say when you have words like that 
being cast across the Assembly, I find it disgusting and 
repulsive that the minister would allow his members during 
Health estimates to act in this manner. 
 
(1915) 
 
But getting back to the issue of health funding from the federal 
government to the provinces, I say that the elections across the 
country — the elections across the country — whether it’s 
health care in Manitoba, health care in Prince Edward Island, or 
health care in Ontario, these people are being rejected time and 
time again. And I say we should have an election, because what 
I’m hearing is the people of the province want an election. The 
doctors certainly want an election to allow them to vote on the 
actions of the Minister of Health. The nurses . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The former minister of Finance says they’re 
not going to vote NDP. Well we don’t know how people are 
going to vote. That’s why you have elections, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I would say if you could get some control of the members 
opposite who are shouting and yelling from their seats over and 
over again, I would say to you that we can never get any work 
done because of the loudness of the members from the 
government benches. And I just say that a government that has 
this kind of a massive majority and tries to override the 
opposition issue after issue, I say deserves not to be re-elected 
and won’t be re-elected at the next election. 
 
But I would like to ask the minister if he could for us outline in 
the three hospitals in Regina, the base hospitals, one at a time, 
the closed beds over the past year. I think you lumped them 
together, and what I had asked for is a breakdown by area in the 
hospital for Pasqua, Plains, and General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well before I do that, I’d like to correct 
some allegations the member opposite, in his tirade of 
discussion on the Prince Edward Island election — I don’t 
know what that has to do with it at this point in time, and I 
congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, for your ruling. I mean if 
we’re going to discuss health, we have to get on with this . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, the member likes to mislead. I 
heard him distinctly say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
the member from Quill Lakes continues to bellow from his seat. 
He thinks his role in the legislature is to stand there and bellow 
and bray from his seat. 
 
I want to give you some information. I want to correct some 
misinformation that the member opposite alleged to. He said 
there were about 200 bed closures. That’s absolutely wrong, 
misleading. I gave you the figure of 132. I know you couldn’t 
hear it. In 1986, 132. You couldn’t hear that because your 
colleague was bellowing from his seat. And compare that 132 
beds in the total of 1986, and compare that to 223 in 1982. Just 
let’s keep the record straight. For him to get up here in this 
House and  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

755 
 

say 200, is an exaggeration and an untruth. One hundred and 
thirty-two is the figure, and you compare that back to 1982 
when they were in power and the figure was 223. So I just want 
to lay the record straight for you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
members of this House. 
 
The question, I believe, was for Regina; and I think you want to 
know hospital by hospital, year by year. And I’d be pleased to 
give that figure to you. The total for Regina in 1982 was 41; in 
1983 was 57; in 1984 was 65; in 1985 was 57; in 1986 was 62. 
Broken down by hospital: the Regina General Hospital in each 
year, each case is zero; the Plains Health Centre, in 1982, were 
25 beds, and 25 beds in ’83, 25 beds each year through — 25, 
25, 25 every year, the same figure. Okay. 
 
The Pasqua — and you know there was major construction 
going on at the Pasqua, which was a factor in these bed closures 
— for ’82, there were 16; ’83, there were 32; ’84, there were 
40; ’85, there were 32; and ’86, 37. So as I say, you can see the 
peak there in ‘84 when the construction was going on. Those 
are the figures I supplied to the member for the Regina 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I need a clarification on 
Saskatoon. You say a total of 132. When you gave the numbers 
to me hospital by hospital, mine don’t add up to 132. So if you 
could regive them for University, City and St. Paul. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay. I’ll do that, year by year, and I’ll 
go hospital by hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You don’t want to hear ’82? I think I’ll 
give ’82 just for comparison’s sake. In ’82, Saskatoon City 
Hospital, 74; ’86, Saskatoon City Hospital, 46; University 
Hospital, ’82, 89; University Hospital, ’86, 86; St. Paul’s 
Hospital, 1982, 69; St. Paul’s Hospital, 1986, zero. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — St. Paul’s Hospital in ’86 is zero? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well could the minister explain about the 
77 beds that were in all the press at St. Paul’s Hospital? Are you 
misleading the Assembly or are you giving the facts? Because 
in 1986, that time period was the same time as all the 
newspapers were carrying the story, which you agreed with, 
that 77 beds were closed. Now you stand in your place and say 
none were closed in 1986 in that time period at St. Paul’s. Now 
I wonder: can you give me the straight goods here, or are you 
just making them up to try to make yourself look good? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — For St. Paul’s, the figure I was reading 
out to you, those are for significant summer closures, and as I 
said to you, there were no bed closures at this time. There were 
the bed closures for a short period of time at Christmas and 
Easter that we indicated to you previously when I read those out 
to you. But a significant bed closure for St. Paul’s over the 
period ’86, there were zero. So that brings you to the 132 figure. 
But the 77 and 96 were short-time bed closures, which is 
nothing new over the Christmas period of time at St. Paul’s 
Hospital. 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you’re incredible. You’re 
incredible in the fact that you would leave off whatever 
numbers you felt like to make your numbers right. I don’t 
understand how, at St. Paul’s Hospital, you can say that we had 
77 beds closed. It was in the press. The Star-Phoenix carried it 
as a main story, and you get up in the House and announce that 
there was no closures. Then when the opposition takes you to 
task on it, you say, but they were insignificant, we didn’t 
include those closures there. Well who is to believe you? How 
can you believe any of the other numbers when you obviously, 
when caught out, are saying that there were zero beds closed. 
You then say, well they were insignificant — the closures there 
were insignificant. Well I’ll tell you, the 8,000 people on 
waiting lists to get into a bed in Saskatoon don’t think they 
were significant. 
 
And the fact is, if you add these numbers on — and God only 
knows how many other numbers you’ve left off along the way 
— the bed closures in Saskatoon are about 200, because if you 
add 77 to 132, which you conveniently forgot, it’s about 200. 
Now I wonder whether or not your ranting and raving a minute 
ago, and the hooting of your colleagues about the fact that we 
had said 200 and then you say only 132, the fact that you were 
totally wrong, has any impact on you — has any impact at all. 
 
But I think what it points out, Mr. Chairman, is that listening to 
this minister give answers that are accurate, when he does 
bother to give answers, simply confirms what the doctors and 
nurses say about this government — that can you believe what 
they say when you see what they do — 8,000 people on waiting 
lists. 
 
The minister gets up and not only does he not give facts, he 
gives inaccurate facts about what is happening in Saskatoon. He 
says . . . the member for Turtleford yells and hollers and says 
that they’re not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, see, there 
he is, yelling again. I have to raise my voice, Mr. Chairman, to 
get over the hooting and hollering from the member from 
Turtleford. See, he’s loud; he’s boisterous. And I’ll tell you, this 
arrogant mass of majority that we have here, I say to you, Mr. 
Chairman, that it’s difficult to do the business of this Assembly 
because two problems: one, it’s so noisy in here from the 
members of government — you can’t hear — secondly, the 
minister won’t give any facts. He conveniently forget. Can you 
believe it? He conveniently forgot to include the 77 at St. Paul’s 
— forgot. They were insignificant; didn’t have to include those. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, can you give us a list of other insignificant 
closures you conveniently forgot to add on? How many more 
hundreds of beds were closed that you conveniently forgot 
because it didn’t solve your political problem of having beds 
closed in Saskatoon at the same time as you have 8,000 people 
on waiting lists? A situation that I say, Mr. Chairman, led to the 
demise of governments across this country — Tory 
governments, I might add, reconfirmed tonight in Prince 
Edward Island. And I say to you that when you have the 
courage to call the election, Mr. Chairman, when you have the 
courage, and the party opposite . . . 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

756 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. What has an election got to 
do with . . . Whether it’s here in this province or in P.E.I., an 
election has absolutely nothing to do with the estimates that we 
are involved in. Let’s get back on course. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the members 
opposite can try to hide the facts about what health care cuts are 
doing to their political future across Canada, but I say, you can 
run but you can’t hide from the cut-backs that are occurring. 
And we released to the minister — who tried to hide from the 
fact that there was going to be $154 million cut from the 
funding to the province of Saskatchewan — last week we 
proved it to him in a study that was done in a report done by the 
Canadian Hospitals Association. Then he says, well maybe 
there will be cuts, but I’m going to fight them. 
 
Well I tell you, if we have a fight like was put up by Premier 
Devine when he went to Ottawa and got us a cut of 81 cents for 
the price of wheat, when he went down, got a delay in the 
Husky Oil upgrader of a year at a price of $13 million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it’s got a lot to do with health. 
It’s got to do with your ability to negotiate with the federal 
government. 
 
And the minister yells from his seat, shut him down. Now I’ll 
tell you that’s arrogance. I’ll tell you that is an arrogant minister 
who, when a member is asking questions, legitimate health 
questions, will shout from his chair, shut him down. And I’ll 
tell you the role of the chairman . . . And I’m glad we have the 
individual in the Chair we have, because he will not be led 
astray by the minister who, when under attack, will shout from 
his chair in a partisan way, to a colleague in the PC party, shut 
him down. 
 
(1930) 
 
Can you believe it? Can you believe that that is what the 
Minister of Health is saying tonight, from his seat — that when 
members are asking questions about his inability to answer 
questions, to give information that isn’t accurate, do you know 
what he does? Do you know what he does? I’ll tell you what he 
does. He shouts from his seat, shut him down. 
 
I’ll tell you that is a brave minister. With 53 members in the 
government, that they have to resort to tactics like that of 
shouting from his seat, shut him down. 
 
But I wanted to ask you, Mr. Minister, is if you can outline now 
what other beds did you conveniently forget to include in your 
list of beds that were closed in Saskatoon? We now have the 
number up to 200. Were there any at City or University or any 
other ones at St. Paul’s that you considered to be insignificant, 
and if you’d also give me a list of the insignificant ones just so 
we could decide that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest to 
the arrogant approach of the member opposite and the shouting 
from his ranks as he’s talking. 
 
I want to indicate to you that, as I said when I presented this, St. 
Paul’s Hospital had no bed closures at this time. You can check 
Hansard if you want. I said in 1985-86 fiscal year: there was 
the Christmas period of two weeks  

with 92 surgery beds closed down; the Easter period of two 
weeks with 67 surgery beds and 10 medicine beds. If you will 
check back in Hansard, you’ll see that I indicated that when I 
gave the situation at St. Paul’s Hospital. 
 
If he wants to make fun of those figures, and he wants to say 
somebody is hiding something, all that member is doing is 
criticizing the hospital boards of this province, because these 
figures came at 5 o’clock and from 5 to 6 o’clock from the 
hospitals who worked diligently to provide them. 
 
Now it may well be, and I know it’s NDP policy — I remember 
very well when they wanted to close down the Grey Nuns’ 
Hospital. It was run by the nuns and there was fantastic care 
given there. But oh no, the socialists said, we can do things 
better. They took the Grey Nuns’ Hospital away from the nuns 
and they called in Pasqua Hospital. I can tell you that when the 
nuns run the hospitals, there’s exceptional care. 
 
I can tell you also they have a hidden agenda. I understood this 
when I came in as Minister of Health. They wanted to take St. 
Paul’s Hospital away from the nuns. That’s what they wanted to 
do. I can tell you if they should ever have the good graces to get 
back in, in another 30 years, it’s still on their hidden agenda 
because they’re against the nuns. They believe the state should 
run every hospital. I told the nuns when I came in: we do not 
believe in that; we will finance your hospitals; we will build 
onto your hospital because we believe that you give tender 
loving care. And that’s a lot different than the centralist policies 
of the socialists opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So when he stands so sanctimoniously in 
his seat thinking he’s the protector of care, when they would 
attack the Grey Nuns, an institution that brought health care to 
Saskatchewan in the days of the fur trader, that were the major 
health care givers in many areas of this province for years and 
years and still are today. And the socialists attacked them and 
took their hospitals away. They underfunded St. Paul’s. I had to 
put a million dollars in for equipment. And year after year 
we’ve looked at St. Paul’s operating budget. We’re building 
onto St. Paul’s But I can tell you, socialists don’t like nuns and 
they take the hospitals from them. So let that be well 
understood because that is the hidden agenda of the NDP. 
 
I told the member opposite, and you can check Hansard and I’ll 
say it again, that I said, in St. Paul’s there are no beds closed at 
this time. In the Christmas period there were two weeks and 
there were 92 surgery beds. And that’s nothing new. That’s 
gone on year after year. In the Easter period there were two 
weeks with 67 beds and 10 medicine beds. And I stand on my 
figures comparing the summer closures under the NDP of 223 
beds in Saskatoon, 132 of them in 1986. And I will stand on my 
figures that in 1982 under the NDP there were 60 summer bed 
closures at St. Paul’s, and in 1986 under the Devine government 
there were none. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister wants to go back and talk 
about history and what the NDP and, I suppose, the  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

757 
 

CCF and Tommy Douglas did for heath care and how terrible it 
was. But if you’re going back into the treatment of nuns in the 
province, one would only have to go back to 1929 to ’34 to the 
last Conservative government to realize at that time the 
Conservative government of the day took the crosses out of the 
schools and didn’t allow the nuns to wear their forms. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, if you want to talk about a 
government and the way they treated religious groups, if that’s 
your accusation, if that’s what you’re talking about, my 
colleague from Athabasca has gone out to get a little book that 
documents clearly from 1929 to 1934. And I was very glad the 
chairman allowed you to talk about the record and the past 
history, because we have some points that we’re going to raise 
about how Conservative governments dealt with religious 
orders when they were in government last time. And you want 
to talk about a hidden agenda, we’ll talk about it. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, I’m glad you allowed us to get into this 
whole area of how religious orders are treated by different 
governments. I don’t know why you did, but now that we’re 
into it, we’ll have a debate on it. And my colleague, when he 
gets back, I have some quotes that we’re going to read into the 
record about what the previous Conservative government, the 
Anderson government — the only other government of the 
Conservative persuasion we had in the history of the province 
— what their attitude was towards religious orders. And we can 
have a debate. 
 
You’ve put on record your opinion of what went on under 
Tommy Douglas and Allan Blakeney in health and how terrible 
that was. I don’t think anyone is going to believe you, because 
people know what happened in the 1940s and ’50s and ’60s and 
’70s under consecutive CCF and NDP governments in the 
whole health care area. And for you to try to stand in your place 
today and convince the million people in the province that the 
NDP and the CCF were bad for health care, shows how credible 
you are, sir. You’re not credible. The doctors believe you’re not 
credible. The nurses say you’re not credible. 
 
So if you want to stand and get red in the face and talk about 
how NDP and CCF governments, under Tommy Douglas and 
Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney, were bad for health care, 
good luck to you. I don’t think anyone is going to listen to you, 
but carry on, because it only adds to the perception that this 
government has a credibility gap that’s 2 miles long and 
growing every day. Because I’ll tell you, when you attack 
people like Tommy Douglas on the health care issue, and when 
you attack Allan Blakeney and Woodrow Lloyd, the people 
who put medicare in place . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Allan Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. Allan Blakeney was in the 
government and in the cabinet when the medicare was brought 
in, in 1962. He was in, in 1962. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Minister, you have a great deal of explaining to 
do to the people of the province. And when I say, when it 
comes to credibility, you have little, and here again . . . Well the 
members want to yell and holler  

from their place. That’s fine. We can hardly hear the answers to 
the questions or the questions . . . 
 
But this is a book about politics in Saskatchewan. And I would 
just like to quote from it. Mr. Chairman, this is from page 41 of 
this book, A Family History. And on page 41: 
 

In the year of 1929 was also marked by the election of 
the Anderson government in Saskatchewan, an 
anti-French government. That year also marked the death 
of Sir Gouin, prime minister of Quebec, with whom 
Raymond had several interviews. In 1930 when the 
strategies of the Anderson government made it quite 
evident that an all out attack would be launched . . . 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. This is not relevant. There is 
nothing in there that is relevant to the health . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Order. There is nothing in there that the 
member is reading that has any . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Order, order. There is nothing in there that is relevant to health 
and associated in any way with what is taking place in these 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, I 
was pleased that you allowed the minister to talk about the 
history of other political parties on health . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The minister when he was talking 
was relating it to the health to the Pasqua Hospital and as it 
related to that institution. What you’re saying has absolutely 
nothing to do with health in any way, shape, or form. I would 
ask you to get on with the procedure. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I am relating this to health 
issues, and as I understand it, as it related to, as the minister was 
talking about, nuns who work in hospitals. And I just say that 
that time period in our history is not a proud one. It’s not a 
proud one at all. And when you talk about religious orders 
working in hospitals, what was done to religious orders in the 
schools, and I believe in the hospitals at that time, is not a proud 
record. 
 
And I don’t intend to spend a great deal of time about it, 
because I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that it was irrelevant 
when the minister was talking about it and he went on with it. 
And I only thought, to correct the record, that we would have 
some balance. 
 
But where this does relate to the absence of health care is on the 
issue . . . on page 42, where it tells you what the result of the 
poor health care system at that time was. And it says, “In 1934 
at a provincial election the Anderson government was 
completely wiped out.” And I say that’s what will happen here 
as soon as these birds screw up their courage and call an 
election,. Because they’re on the way out; they’re on the way 
out. They have stayed beyond their welcome. 
 
And what they are saying to you, sir, is because of your 
inability to give answers, they want an election on health care. 
And I would ask you now whether or not you think that your 
credibility in giving these answers on the numbers of beds 
closed, after you attempted to give information that wasn’t 
accurate, whether or not you will tell me, in the city of Regina, 
the numbers you gave, do  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

758 
 

they include all of the closures or just part of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Regina shows all of the closures, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in June of ’85 cabinet was 
presented with a brief from the Saskatchewan seniors’ fitness 
association. A number of recommendations were contained 
therein. I’ll read the summary: 
 

We need a strong, dynamic program to encourage 
involvement by seniors in physical activities, to develop 
an ongoing leadership program among seniors to make it 
fun, and to show an activity to be worthwhile in itself to 
the individual. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, what steps have been taken with respect 
to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I remember that being brought to 
cabinet. I think you would be best to ask the Minister of Culture 
and Recreation. He was the minister who addressed that 
program, or that request. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well has a response gone out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You’d have to address that to the Minister 
of Culture and Recreation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to alcohol, I 
know this has received some comment in this House. I want to 
add mine to others who have addressed the subject. I clipped 
out of the newspaper a few weeks ago an article which pointed 
out that while the sale of spirits was down, the sale of beer and 
wine had risen. Is it beer and wine that figure largely in the 
advertising. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this is not some cogent 
evidence that advertising does have an effect, that advertisers 
aren’t simply making gratuitous donations to the media — 
they’re advertising because it does, in fact, increase sales. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I don’t know if you can draw that 
comparison. Certainly we’re discussed the indication. I think 
there is no empirical evidence to show that alcohol is up in 
consumption. Certainly it’s brand name preference, and I don’t 
know if there’s any truth behind, or any substance behind, you 
allegation at all. 
 
I’m proud to see that pure alcohol consumption in 
Saskatchewan has declined, and it’s declined year after year in 
the last four years. Certainly we can go through the whole thing 
of advertising again. We know that advertising was there in the 
printed media for many years. 
 
And certainly we’ve talked for some length in this debate on the 
resolutions and certain are on the estimates. And we’ve seen 
that the federal government have adopted our stance of some of 
the educational aspects of the advertising. And what we see on 
the evidence is, it’s clear that the advertising of beer and wine 
and spirits has produced absolutely no increase in sales or 
consumption of alcohol in this province. 
 
(1945) 

So I don’t know what else the member wants to discuss in this 
regard, but certainly I don’t see where it has been a major factor 
contributing to increased consumption. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well how on earth does the minister arrive 
at that conclusion? It is beer and wine which is advertised on 
televisions, and it is beer and wine sales which are up, while the 
consumption of alcohol overall is down by 11 per cent. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . These figures, I believe, are for the 
year ending 1984. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would give me 
the figures for the year ending 1985, the figures for spirits, beer, 
and wine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t have the figures to ’85. You’d 
have to ask the minister in charge of the Liquor Board when his 
estimates come up. I don’t have those figures to give to you at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you must have figures with 
respect to alcohol consumption from your advisory committee. 
You set up an advisory committee; you must have some figures. 
It’s just not believable that you’ve obtained the report and 
obtained no statistics to go with it. Mr. Minister, give us what 
your advisory committee gave you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly the member again fails to listen. 
I’ve explained the advisory committee to his colleague from 
Regina North East on numerous occasions in this House. And 
that is, I set up a committee to look at youth and drugs and 
alcohol, and that’s what it was designed to. So when you’re 
looking at that, you have no figure to say what the overall 
consumption is. I never asked them to look at that type of 
figure. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then give us the figures for the 
consumption of beer, wine, and spirits by young people, if 
that’s what you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I explained before in this House — 
and obviously you weren’t present — is that we don’t have that 
kind of figure. I don’t know whether you go in to buy liquor or 
not; I assume you probably do from time to time. And I don’t 
know if they ask you your age; I don’t think they do. So how 
would we have any figures to know what age group were 
buying them, especially youth who cannot legally go into the 
stores? It’s somebody pulling it for the youth. So we have no 
indication of that. 
 
Our figures are based on the treatment for youth. And I must 
indicate to you again: my concern is that there are young kids 
out there who are misusing drugs, they’re on cannabis, they’re 
on prescription drugs, overusing those, they’re combining that 
with alcohol. I’m concerned about this. I have people in the 
schools indicating to me that they’re concerned. So we look at 
the number that we have to treat, and we’re trying to come 
forward with some initiatives to improve treatment to these 
young people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it is of considerable comfort to know 
that the minister is concerned about the use of illicit drugs. 
There is virtually nothing, I think, that this government can do 
besides provide treatment. You  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

759 
 

cannot . . . It is now illegal. Its use is restricted by the Criminal 
Code and, I may say, not very successfully. There isn’t anything 
you can do with respect to the consumption of drugs, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
There’s a good deal you could do with respect to the 
consumption of alcohol. So I asked the question about alcohol. 
I’d ask the minister to say with that and not get onto some total 
irrelevancy such as drugs. And I’m not suggesting that cannabis 
and other soft drugs and hard drugs are not a problem. I’m just 
suggesting we have a very limited role to play with respect to 
their consumption — major role to play with respect to the 
treatment — but a minor role to play with respect to the 
consumption of those drugs. 
 
So let’s stick with alcohol, which we do control. I ask you 
again, Mr. Minister, the consumption of beer and wine is up; 
spirits is down very markedly; what else can that be but 
advertising? What other hypothesis could you suggest to 
explain that dichotomy with respect to consumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I’m concerned about the 
treatment for youth. We have no figures to show us that the 
consumption pattern by youth has changed over the past 10 
years. There’s no empirical evidence to show any difference. 
 
I know how many kids need treatment. I see them coming to 
Calder; I see them coming to Mandan. Many of these are 
hooked very heavy on cannabis, which leads to other problems. 
Some of them are misusing prescription drugs; some of them 
are misusing drugs over the counter; some of them are sniffing 
gasoline; some of them are using Lysol. To me that’s a concern; 
that’s a very significant concern. I think to treat that and to try 
and find ways to get these young people back into the 
mainstream of society, where they can make their contribution, 
is the direction I’d like to go. 
 
Now the member can stand up and make much, and say it’s all 
because of advertising. I don’t believe that. I don’t seen any ads 
for advertising cannabis on the television. And I can tell you the 
consumption of cannabis is going up year after year. There are 
kids sniffing gasoline — and I don’t see any ads saying, sniff 
gasoline. But they’re sniffing gasoline; they’re buying Lysol; 
they’re combing all these things. 
 
I’m concerned about providing for Saskatchewan people the 
best treatment resources that we can. Now they may be against 
that. They may be against that kind of treatment. I hope they are 
not. I hope they are not. 
 
To that end, it’s been brought to my attention that Mandan, 
North Dakota, is one of the best treatment centres in this part of 
North America. Dr. Saul Cohen, the head of the alcohol 
commission, and myself are going there in the next month. 
We’re going to see their program. We would like to bring part 
of that program back to Saskatchewan and build a 
Saskatchewan model, where if we have our young people who 
have these problems, that we can get at it early and we can treat 
them and let them get rid of this terrible habit and move into the 
productive lives that they deserve in this province. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — While Mandan does deal with drug 
addiction, its primary treatment is for alcoholism, not for drugs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if there’s any way we could stick to 
alcohol rather than you heading off into drugs. It is just such a 
relief to know that you think that consumption of illicit drugs by 
young people is a problem. That just provides so much relief 
and comfort to the public of Saskatchewan. We were certain 
that you were all in favour of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could save us these pious 
platitudes of yours and discuss the issue over which you do 
have some control — that’s alcohol. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to drugs, the use of soft drugs, I 
assume you’re talking about, you said the consumption was 
going up year by year. Would you give us the figures for the 
last . . . whatever years you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have a number of . . . a couple of figures 
that might be interesting to you. My officials indicate that we 
have a report from the liquor commission that from September 
15, 1983, to September 15, 1984, sales of domestic and 
imported beer declined 1.7 per cent. So there was a decline of 
domestic and imported sales of beer in the period of time that 
you seem to be very concerned about where they went down 1.7 
per cent. 
 
Getting to your last question about the consumption of drugs. 
Again, I mean there’s no way other than what you hear from 
teachers, and what I was saying to you, I talked to many 
teachers. They indicate that they see kids using cannabis, using 
non-prescription drugs and prescription drugs in harmful ways, 
and we go by our treatment figures, the same as we do with the 
alcohol. I can indicate to you at our two treatment figures in 
Regina and Saskatoon, we see that the figures in 1981-82 were 
117 young people that were treated, escalating to 140 in 
1984-85. So certainly there are more and more, and that’s just 
Regina and Saskatoon, not counting those that went out of the 
province to Mandan for treatment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you give us similar 
figures for the succeeding two years. You gave us the figures 
for September 3, ’83. Would you give us the figures for the 
succeeding years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Which succeeding years are you asking 
for? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Right up to the present, Mr. Minister. I 
assume you could give us the figures for September ’84 to 
September 15, 85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figures that I just gave you from 
September 15, ’83 to September 18, ’85, a decrease of domestic 
and imported beer sales by 1.7, are figures that have been 
supplied to us by the liquor commission. I don’t have them 
from there on. You’d have to check with the minister in charge 
of the Liquor Board when his estimates come up. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How about then breaking down that into 
the two years. You’ve actually covered a two-year  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

760 
 

period, September 15, ’83 to September 15, ’85. Would you 
give me the breakdown for the two calendar years, for the two 
years in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have to work that out. We don’t have 
it handy with us now, but we could work it out for you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. Would you give us the figures for 
the sale of wine during that same two-year period? I do not 
understand how your figures could be of such a confused mess, 
but give us the figures for wine then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to draw to 
the attention of the member that he should be asking these 
questions of the sale of liquor to the member in charge of the 
Liquor Board. I mean, I don’t know which figures, how many 
bottles of beer were sold each year, or how many bottles of 
wine. I mean, if that were my responsibility, we’d know. 
 
There’s a minister in charge of the Liquor Board of 
Saskatchewan, and to get that detailed information, the member 
should realize that that’s where you’d ask them. 
 
A minute ago or two, he was on his feet asking me about the 
figures in the advertisements in the telephone book. I mean, 
good Lord, Mr. Chairman, we can’t be responsible for 
answering the questions for every department in the 
government. And I’m sure that the member in charge of 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board, when his estimates are up, will 
give them every figure that he wishes to know. 
 
I have some statistics that have been handed over to me from 
the Liquor Board. They’re not detailed; every year, every bottle 
of wine, every ounce of liquor, every bottle of beer. So I think 
he would be wise, and I think you should remember, Mr. 
Chairman, that there are certain estimates that you ask these 
questions in where the minister has the back-up of knowing 
those figures. 
 
My people are involved in health care and in treatment. And I 
have always, when I rose to reply in regard to alcohol 
consumption and the use of illicit drugs, talked in the term of 
treatments, which is the mandate that I’m charged for. 
 
As far as the consumption, I haven’t got those kinds of figures 
at my fingertips. So I think, Mr. Chairman, we should direct the 
questions to the appropriate ministers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I am having the greatest 
difficulty believing you don’t have those figures. I show your 
. . . I see you reading off the documents given to you by our 
officials, and they after they . . make an utterly fruitless effort to 
get the figures into your mind, you then stand up and say, you 
haven’t got them. Mr. Minister, either you don’t understand 
what your officials are giving you, or you don’t care to give 
them to us. 
 
Mr. Minister, you had one set of figures which you gave me, 
and you gave it to me because it tended to support your point of 
view that consumption is declining. I, Mr. Minister, then asked 
you for other figures which might present a more balanced 
picture, and all of a sudden the minister’s mind becomes as 
blank as a freshly cleaned  

window pane. He knows nothing except the one fact that beer 
has declined by 1.7 per cent over a two-year period. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is the responsibility of the minister in charge of 
the Liquor Licensing Commission and the Liquor Board to sell 
alcohol. It is not his responsibility to curtail the excessive use of 
alcohol. That is, and always has been, the responsibility of the 
Minister of Health. So please don’t try to beg off this question, 
as you’ve begged off every other one we’ve asked you over the 
last two and one-half weeks, by saying it’s someone else’s 
responsibility. This, Mr. Minister, is your responsibility. So I 
ask you to have another look at those figures and give them to 
us. 
 
(2000) 
 
I am reading from the Leader-Post, and I will read the 
paragraph which I gave you, and it reads: 
 

The sales volume of spirits was down in Saskatchewan last 
year, while wine and beer sales rose slightly. Taking 
volume figures for spirits from April 1 to December 8, 
1984, there was a decrease of 8.5 per cent . . . 

 
And then it goes on: 
 

He said beer sales increased by two per cent and wine 
sales (increased by) 3.5 per cent. 

 
The person who’s commenting, who is a Mr. Bennett, Al 
Bennett, director of finance and administration for the Liquor 
Board, said the economy and the increase in prices were likely 
the main reasons for the decline in sales. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder what was the main reason for the 
increase in sales in beer and wine. I suggest it was because the 
beer and wine was the subject of intensive advertising. If you 
have any other explanation for this fact, or if you dispute the 
facts given by the Leader-Post, then give me your facts. If you 
don’t, let’s deal with the only thing that we have, which is an 
article by the Leader-Post which so far as I know went 
unchallenged by the Liquor Board. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, do you have any different facts? If you do, 
give them to me, and stop giving them to me selectively. If you 
don’t have any other facts, then would you address yourself to 
the clear implication in this, and that is that advertising 
bolstered the sale of beer and wine while it didn’t bolster the 
sale of spirits, because it isn’t done on television and radio. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would just remind the members, 
and I have listened to the debate for the last little while . . . just 
a caution to all members of the House, regarding rule 494 in 
Beauchesne’s, regarding procedure of estimates under general 
administration — and I would read for you to remind you all: 
 

The whole management of a department may be discussed 
in a general way when the committee is considering the 
first item of the Estimates of that department, which reads 
as follows: “Vote 1 —  

  



 
April 21, 1986 

761 
 

Administration”; but the discussion may not be extended 
to any particular item mentioned in the Estimates of that 
department. If, however, the words “General 
Administration” (of which we now are partaking cover 
all the expenses to be incurred during the year by that 
department, it is relevant to discuss every phase of the 
department totally or in detail. 

 
And I intend to follow that rule in Beauchesne’s, and I would 
just caution the members and remind the members that we will 
stick to Health estimates and stay away from going off on 
tangents into other departments. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I ask you again if the 
figures presented by the Leader-Post — and you claim you 
have nothing to the contrary — if those figures do not suggest 
that advertising beer and wine did increase their sales, since 
they showed a markedly different sales pattern . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Perhaps I didn’t state the issue 
clearly from the Chair. But within my opinion as chairman, that 
is not a Health estimate question. You, the member from 
Regina Centre, had indicated a previous question that had to do 
with the Liquor Board, and I would ask the member to put that 
question to the appropriate minister during those estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I am not . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Order! The member from North East 
Regina knows full well that the job of the chairman or the job of 
the Speaker is complete neutrality and I would not want to think 
that the member from Regina North East, whose career has 
been long and lengthy in this House, would want it any other 
way or impute it as any other way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a grant in the 
Department of Health, grant to Saskatchewan Alcoholism and 
Drug Abuse. That is not the only money spent with respect to 
alcoholism and drug abuse, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It is not the responsibility of the minister in charge of the 
Liquor Licensing Commission to deal with excessive alcohol 
consumption. The responsibility of the minister in charge of the 
Liquor Board and the Liquor Licensing Commission is to 
administer the sales of alcohol. The Minister of Health has 
always had responsibility for excessive consumption of alcohol, 
and that’s the subject we’re dealing with. 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is in order. And I say, if these 
questions are deemed not to be in order, then I want the Speaker 
brought back, because we have been asking these questions for 
the full 12 years that I’ve been in this Assembly. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, whether or not you had a report 
yesterday which clearly documented excessive consumption of 
alcohol by young people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Remember that one. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Remember that one, Mr. Chairman? It 
seems to have been the responsibility of the Minister of Health 
to allow . . . to commission a report on alcohol consumption by 
young people which pointed to excessive consumption. 
 
The argument I am trying to make to him is an argument . . . is 
something that is patently self-obvious to everybody in 
Saskatchewan, and that is that those advertisements, which 
feature young people and beer and wine, are contributing to the 
problem. 
 
I have, Mr. Chairman, a piece of evidence here, which I think 
suggests that. Because the consumption of beer and wine is up. 
And I want to know whether or not the Minister of Health does 
not admit that these statistics do suggest that advertising alcohol 
and beer do contribute to increased consumption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I say, we don’t 
keep accurate results of consumption, because I don’t know 
how one is going to do that with young people, other than 
questionnaires, and the questionnaires we have put forth 
indicate that there hasn’t been any dramatic change in 
consumption over the last 10 years. 
 
As I’ve said time and time in this House, and that’s why I 
commissioned the study, I’m concerned about treating kids. We 
all know there’s kids out there that are hooked on a number of 
drugs, and they have alcohol abuse, and they have drug abuse, 
and solvents and so on. I’ve said it time and time again, as 
Minister of Health and minister in charge of the Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission, I’m interested in developing plans to 
provide treatment for these people. Now they may want to stand 
in here and talk and talk and talk about advertising. There is no 
empirical evidence to indicate that advertising raises 
consumption. You can go all across North America and you 
won’t find that. 
 
But we can find that there are kids out there that have problems. 
I don’t know what causes the problems. It may be a broken 
home. That’s hard on a kid in his teen-age years. It may be 
loneliness; it may be poverty; it may be affluence; it may be a 
number of things. It may be a single-parent home; it may be a 
feeling of poor self worth. 
 
You know, you taught school, the same as I did. You know 
when you face a class, there’s 30 or 40 kids in there. And each 
little fellow and each little girl comes from a little different 
background. And he enters into that whole dynamic of junior 
high school. Some excel in sports; some excel in academics; 
some are good in the arts. They’re the lucky ones. 
 
Some unfortunately don’t find their niche and they gravitate to 
a peer group that says, let’s make our mark in life by getting 
high. And they find all ways of getting high. And I want to 
indicate to you, and I’ve taught many teen-age students, and 
I’m sure you have, and I know the member from Regina North 
West, if he would tell the truth in here, would say the same — 
that with young people in high school, peer group pressure is 
the main motivator. The main motivator. 
 
And there are many things in peer group pressure that can  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

762 
 

influence a kid. Many things. I know that my member from 
Wascana could stand up in this House and give everyone in this 
place a very good lesson on what makes young people tick. A 
man that could take boys from all parts of Saskatchewan, right 
off the combines and off horseback and off hay racks, and turn 
them into the best football team in Canada year after year after 
year, understands young people. 
 
And I could tell you a government that gentleman is related to 
and a part of would certainly be interested in helping young 
people, because I say I don’t think there’s an individual in 
Regina that has higher esteem for understanding and helping 
young people than my colleague and friend, the member from 
Wascana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I would say to you that that member 
can tell you what makes young people tick. I can tell you that 
my deputy minister, sitting beside me tonight, who came up 
through the ranks of teaching in Saskatoon to become the 
director of the Catholic school system in Saskatoon, 
understands young people better than most in this province. 
When you have people like that as your colleagues and people 
like that as you advisers, I can tell you that we are concerned 
with the treatment and the health of these young people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I can tell you that those are the kind of people, those men who 
have dedicated their life and their career to helping young 
people, can tell us what the need is. And they believe that the 
need is to try and bring about other programs, bring about 
associations that will take these young people that are headed 
up the wrong road in our society and give them a chance to get 
back into the mainstream, to take part in their education, and to 
fulfil the potential that the good Lord gave them. That’s what 
we want to do, and those are the kind of programs we’ll be 
putting in. 
 
The can talk about ads. They can talk about all these sort of 
things all night. I want to tell you that I am sincerely 
committed, along with the gentlemen that I have mentioned, to 
providing the best treatment services for young people in 
Canada. And we’re going to do it right here in Saskatchewan, 
and we’re going to develop it here, and we’re going to ask a lot 
of people, a lot of concerned parents — as we did with the 
report — to give us the advice, and a lot of young people, on 
how we should best achieve that. 
 
Now if the members opposite are against that kind of a 
procedure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member from 
Regina North East would like to stand in his place and say he’s 
against doing that, so be it. I don’t believe he’s the kind of 
individual to do that. I believe that he sincerely would like to 
help in the treatment aspects also. I haven’t heard many 
comments from him as to say how we should best do it. I 
haven’t heard that, but I do believe deep in my heart that that 
member, given the opportunity, would stand up and say, I think 
this is the way we should do it. Because I do believe that 
sincerely he perhaps has a concern. He’s been in the schools for 
a few years, and I think he has a concern. And I think he’s 
interested in seeing the report, and I’ve promised him, as soon 
as the  

report is printed I will deliver one to him. I will deliver one to 
him. 
 
And I ask him, as a person who’s been involved with young 
people for years, to support the initiatives in there that are good, 
to not always be negative, to not always be casting gloom and 
doom and no new ideas. Certainly, there are initiatives that we 
can take in the recommendations in that report that I believe 
will help many young people in this city and in this province. 
 
I want to get on with the job of doing that. We can’t do it all 
overnight. This problem has been here for years and it is 
increasing. But I think it’s time that we sat down as legislators 
and we looked at this because it is the youth of our province. It 
is the youth of our province. 
 
I’ve put together a committee who have gone out and sampled 
the opinion as best they could. They’ve come with some 
recommendations. That report will be available in the very near 
future. And I ask the members opposite, if they’re sincere, to 
come forward and say, look at, here are some things we think 
should be done. We encourage you as the government to do 
them. Here are some things we don’t think are valuable. Let’s 
discard those, if they can indicate those are not valuable. 
 
But let’s, as legislators, for goodness’ sakes, in this province — 
when our young people are having problems there with 
cannabis, with gasoline sniffing, combined with alcohol — let’s 
provide the treatment centers and let’s quit quibbling away her 
hour after hour to see if an ad . . . where there’s no empirical 
evidence has increased consumption. I say let’s get on with the 
job and stop this nit-picking. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m surprised to hear that the minister 
believes that questioning reports which suggest that 20 per cent 
of young people have a problem with alcohol is nit-picking. I’m 
surprised that that subject is a nit-picker subject. I think some 
people felt that that was kind of an important subject. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you believe it is any part of the responsibility 
of the Department of Health to deal with the issue of excessive 
consumption of alcohol by young people? I would appreciate it 
if the minister would save me all the nonsense about treatment. 
None of us are against treatment. None of us . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh yes, oh yes, there he goes. None of us are 
against treatment, Mr. Minister. We’re all for treatment. We 
have said that. And your attempt to suggest that we are not is 
just simply making a fool out of yourself. No one’s going to 
believe that. 
 
Would you, Mr. Minister, deal with the question of excessive 
consumption and not treatment? Would you deal with that 
question? Tell us whether or not you think it’s any part of your 
department’s responsibility to face the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, you know, I don’t anger very often 
but when I hear him stand here two seconds ago and say . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want to shout  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

763 
 

from your seat? Go right ahead. Keep up the nonsense and the 
hollering. But I heard that member say very distinctly, and so 
did my colleagues — the member from Wascana heard him say 
this — he said, let’s forget talking about the nonsense of 
treatment. He said that. I heard him say that. You can check 
Hansard in the morning. He said, let’s forget the nonsense of 
treatment. 
 
Now I rest my case there. I believe in treatment. He believes 
that talking about treatment for young people in Saskatchewan 
is nonsense. I say you should be ashamed of that statement. You 
should be ashamed of that statement because if that’s what you 
believe, if that’s what you believe — that treatment of young 
people with addictions is nonsense — then you should get up 
and you should apologize to all the young people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m going to repeat my question until the 
minister hears me. Do you believe it is part of the responsibility 
of your department to curtail excessive consumption of alcohol, 
as distinct from treating the disease caused by excessive 
consumption of alcohol which has not now and has never been 
an issue? Mr. Minister, do you believe it’s any part of the 
responsibility of your department to attempt in a preventative 
fashion to curtail the excessive consumption of alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member, if he 
would pay attention when he’s in the House, he might get the 
suggestions and the initiatives that we’re taking. I don’t know if 
he’s seen these or not, but certainly the Christmas alcohol 
advertisements that come out definitely and say to people, 
consumption of alcohol and driving of automobiles will land 
you in jail in Christmas, could cost you your life; how would 
you like to spend Christmas alone; have been award-winning, 
have been tested on the population of Saskatchewan and have a 
90 per cent recognition factor and also have the people of 
Saskatchewan saying, play them again year after year after year. 
 
And he says, do you do anything to try and lower consumption? 
I don’t know where he’s been since the Safe Grad program has 
been in, the Safe Grad program which is adopted in high school 
after high school after high school. And the member from 
Shellbrook will attest that in his school, and I understand there’s 
another one now — I think it’s one of the collegiates in Regina 
— have decided that this year their graduation will be 
completely alcohol free. And that comes from the Safe Grad 
alcohol program. 
 
We have health initiatives up in the Melfort and Tisdale part of 
the province, a program called Health Is it!; programs in several 
of these regions which have a strong component, a strong 
component in those programs against alcohol consumption for 
young people. 
 
So for him to stand there and say, what are you doing — well 
there are some things that we are doing to indicate to young 
people that the excessive use of alcohol is detrimental to them, 
that they should be abstaining from alcohol whenever possible, 
and that they should not be mixing it up with their graduation 
and highs in their young lives. Because as we all know, all too 
often that results in an untimely death of a young person. 
 

So I think there are some instances to indicate that we have 
taken a strong stand against the consumption and excessive 
consumption by young people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All of the instances which the minister 
related with respect to efforts to curtail excessive consumption 
of alcohol were advertising programs. It is apparent the minister 
fervently believes that advertising can discourage the use of 
alcohol. Why does the minister insist that the same advertising 
programs cannot encourage the use of alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I just refer you to study after study 
across this country that will give you no empirical evidence. It’s 
brand selection. And sure, it may change brand preference. It 
odes that with the adult population. It may do it with the young 
people. I don’t know. But I can tell you that there’s no evidence 
to show that the alcohol advertising has upped the consumption. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if advertising so effectively 
discourages consumption, why does the minister believe that 
advertising does not encourage consumption? Please deal with 
the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, certainly, if he 
understands Safe Grad, which obviously he does not, Safe Grad 
is a lot of people-to-people program. 
 
As I remember Safe Grad when I was teaching school, you 
would elect a child or young person from your school who 
would go to the Safe Grad seminar. They would gather in 
Regina or Saskatoon. I remember a gentleman that was very 
instrumental, and I give him a lot of congratulations — it’s 
Gerald Kleisinger. Gerry Kleisinger would run these programs 
for the kids. He would bring them in and they would have a 
period of discussion and make a decision and a commitment 
that they would go back to their high school, and in that high 
school they would talk to their other grades and their peers, and 
they would institute a Safe Grad. 
 
And I think that has had considerable success, and I give men 
like Gerry Kleisinger great support in that, and congratulations. 
I think they’ve gone a long way to helping young people with 
this whole problem of excessive drinking and carousing and 
driving dangerously at graduation. 
 
I see it’s going a step further now, and I congratulate these 
communities. I believe in Shellbrook it’s the local Lions Club 
that are saying, look, we will transport you. And the kids have 
said, okay, we’re gong to have a good time that night and we’re 
going to do it entirely without alcoholism. 
 
So there’s a lot of people-to-people programs too that are 
having a tremendous effect upon young people, and I believe 
also upon adults. I see time after time where service clubs are 
saying to adults, if you’re out celebrating, call this service club 
and we’ll drive you home. I see young people saying, we’ll 
drive adults home. I see programs developing in the schools in 
Saskatoon where it is Students Against Driving Drunk. I see 
parents’ groups saying, parents against drunk driving.  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

764 
 

So it isn’t . . . It’s a lot of people-to-people work that is causing 
a great change in the attitude towards excessive consumption. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the Safe Grad program may 
involve advertising plus work in the schools. Your Christmas 
program was nothing but advertising. You just finished 
extolling the virtues of that advertising program as influencing 
attitudes about alcohol. 
 
Why do you believe that your program, which attempted to 
discourage use of alcohol, did affect attitudes towards alcohol, 
while the vendors . . . while the brewers and the wine 
merchants, their advertisements don’t affect the attitudes 
towards alcohol? 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, is the advertising effective in the negative 
and not in the positive? I really want to hear you give us a crisp 
explanation for that rather strange anomaly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I suppose maybe it has something to 
do with the season of the year too. You know, when you look 
and see, don’t spend Christmas in jail, I think a lot of people 
think, I really don’t want to spend Christmas in jail. And maybe 
that adds. You know, I don’t know. 
 
Maybe he would like to spend Christmas in jail. I couldn’t say. 
I don’t think many on this side of the House would like to spend 
Christmas in jail. Christmas to us is rather a sacred time. It’s 
time of family. It’s a time to be with your kids. I think that’s 
what you believe, Mr. Chairman. In fact it may be a time to be 
with your grandchildren, I don’t know. But I’m sure you 
appreciate Christmas and you sure don’t want to spent it in jail. 
 
So I think significant like that may have an impact. It certainly 
does because people say, show it to us, time after time. It’s 
helping me not go out driving when I’m drunk. It’s helped me, 
maybe saved my life. It’s helped me to be home with the kids 
on Christmas morning, rather than in a jail cell. So I think the 
significance and the impact at that time of year certainly does 
have an impact. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister suggests to this Assembly 
that an advertising program which suggests that there are 
certain delirious effects associated with excessive consumption 
of alcohol may deter consumption. I buy that. That program, the 
Aware program, any number of others, have been effective. 
 
Why does the minister not believe that an advertising program 
which associates good health, popularity, and other good 
attributes in young people . . . Why does the minister not 
believe that the association of those ideas is ineffective while 
the association of the evil effects of alcohol with consumption 
is effective? 
 
I want to know why the minister thinks the Christmas ad was 
effective but the booze merchants’ advertising is not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think you have to look at the 
nature of the advertising, the time of the year. There’s many 
factors there. 
 

I think you can’t find empirical evidence to say that advertising 
of liquor increases consumption. You’ll find brand selection. 
And I think that’s what its designed to do. 
 
The Christmas ads definitely come with a very solid message 
that if you drink and drive you’re going to end up in the pokey. 
And I don’t think many guys want to be there. And therefore I 
think it has a significant impact upon them. 
 
I think we’re comparing apples and oranges here because I 
think the time of the year certainly has an impact. I think the 
message, how it is directed, has an impact also. So you know, 
we can go on and discuss this. This is fine and dandy. But I 
think there’s two different factors and I say the proof is in the 
testing. 
 
You go back and I say you can’t find empirical evidence to 
indicate that advertising increases consumption, but you can 
find designated spot time advertising at Christmas concerning 
safety and driving has had a significant impact upon the 
attitudes of people. 
 
I think they’re two different things, to tell you the truth. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Does the minister acknowledge Dr. Saul 
Cohen to be an expert in the area of alcoholism? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t know. If I say he’s an expert, 
he’d want to know what I define an expert as. Certainly Saul 
Cohen is a respected person in this field in Regina. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do you admit that his experience and his 
training equip him to make an accurate judgement with respect 
to problems associated with alcoholism? Do you admit, Mr. 
Minister, that his experience, his background, his training, 
equip him to make accurate observations with respect to 
alcoholism? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I can certainly say that Dr. Saul 
Cohen and I meet continually and have a lot of discussions on 
this. He certainly has been one of the proponents of my 
encouragement of Mr. Epp on adopting Saskatchewan’s policy 
on the educational aspects of alcohol advertising. I can say 
unequivocally that Dr. Cohen supports that and has encouraged 
me to support Mr. Epp. I think Dr. Cohen has been surprised to 
see that many of the commercial stations are advertising the 
positive aspects far in excess of the 15 per cent. And I met with 
Dr. Cohen just recently, before he went for his winter vacation 
in the South, and we are scheduled to meet again in May and go 
to Mandan to look at the services there. I meet with Dr. Cohen 
approximately once a month. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. I take it from the fact that you meet 
with him once a month that you value his opinions. I think 
that’s probably a fair assumption. 
 
Let me read to you what Dr. Saul Cohen had to say with respect 
to the effectiveness of liquor advertising. He said, and this is a 
direct quotation: 
 

However, there is evidence that youth are the most 
influenced by alcohol advertising. Youth are  

  



 
April 21, 1986 

765 
 

at a very impressionable age and are readily influenced 
by their environment. In this regard the role of 
advertising is significant. One only has to reflect on the 
tremendous impact of advertising of toys over television 
has on children, especially at Christmas time. There is 
every reason to believe that alcohol advertising messages 
will have similar influence on people’s attitudes and 
behaviour towards the use of alcohol. 

 
Do you accept that, Mr. Minister, as an observation from one 
whose skill and training qualifies him to make such an 
observation? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would accept that as another attempt for 
the member to quote out of context. I know that prior to the 
advertising coming in, Dr. Cohen had that viewpoint. I have 
met with Dr. Cohen many times since the advertisement has 
been on. Dr. Cohen has indicated to me on numerous occasions 
that he believes that the positive ads are having a significant 
impact, and he has congratulated the media facilities for playing 
them more than they have. 
 
So I would say the member does the same thing that he does 
time after time after time. He tries to take a quote from a person 
and ridicule that person. He will not speak to a person outside 
of here on a topic like that. He wants the immunity of the 
House. I say that that — and I don’t deny that quote came from 
Saul Cohen — but to stand up and say that is the viewpoint of 
Saul Cohen today is certainly an exaggeration, and I think a 
disservice to Mr. Cohen. Because I meet with Saul Cohen all 
the time and I can tell you that Saul Cohen’s opinion has 
changed considerably, because he has seen and he deals — and 
he deals with these young people. And he has seen in many 
cases the beneficial aspects of that advertising. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
you obviously have been out of the class-room for too long. 
Because a little while ago you were referring to being in the 
class-room and the kind of attitudes that young people have. 
Well, I can tell you that I have just recently come out of the 
class-room, and I will not accept anything you say, when you 
say that advertising does not have an influence on young 
people, whether it applies to the buying of certain kinds of 
clothes, or buying certain kinds of records, or the buying and 
the drinking of alcohol. That is just an inaccurate statement, not 
supported by the best kind of information that you can find. 
 
Oh, it’s supported by the liquor companies, of course. Why 
wouldn’t they provide you with all kinds of documentation 
showing that all it does it try to get them the share of the 
market, as you will argue? 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that when you go into an 
elementary school of 400 students, and you hear some of those 
children coming to school singing the jingles of the beer ads — 
you’re not going to tell me that it hasn’t had an influence on 
them. And it happens every day. Return to that class-room and 
find out for yourself, sir. 
 

So don’t use that as a justification for your misguided policy on 
liquor advertising, in order that you might be able to reward 
those who help pay your campaign expenses. Because that is 
not a legitimate argument on your part. 
 
My colleague from Regina Centre a minute ago quoted from a 
very distinguished person, who had an opinion on liquor 
advertising, and at that time said that it was not the appropriate 
route to go. You stood up and you say, well that’s an old 
statement. 
 
Well, let me give you something that’s very relevant and very 
up to date. It comes back from this report which you have 
refused to deal with the public — your advisory committee 
report, here, which I referred to on Friday last in this House. 
 
And let me read you what this report says on alcohol 
advertising — and says it to you, because it’s your advisory 
committee. 
 
And I quote word for word: 
 

Television is a powerful medium that most adolescents 
watch for hours every day. Alcohol is not only promoted 
through liquor advertisements but through the characters 
and the activities depicted on various shows. Since the fall 
of 1983, Saskatchewan had permitted beer and wine ads 
on T.V. and radio, and spirits through print media. A large 
number of briefs opposed alcohol advertisements, 
particularly those advertisements which associated young 
people, recreation and alcohol. 

 
Those are the large number of briefs that were presented by 
people who made presentations to this committee that you 
appointed — which has done, I think, a pretty good job. 
 
It goes further to say, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister: 
 

. . . some studies suggest young persons are more 
susceptible to advertising, particularly lifestyle 
advertisements. As well, a large number of parents and 
others see the advertisements as presenting inappropriate 
role models. 

 
And just to give you some statistics — not statistics but 
arguments based on statistics — it tells in your report to you 
that, based on Canadian figures, liquor advertisements average 
$4 per capita, or a tenth of all mass media advertising. 
 
Now that is a massive amount of advertising, Mr. Minister. Are 
you prepared to stand up in this House and suggest to the 
members and others in the public that that kind of an 
expenditure of money is simply made for some benevolent 
reason and not to promote the greater sales of alcohol? If that’s 
what you’re prepared to do, Mr. Minister, that’s fine; you go 
right ahead and do that. 
 
Your committee interviewed students — and I’m not going to 
mention any students, because that’s strictly confidential, but 
I’m going to refer to some comments  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

766 
 

which some of them made. One student is making a comment 
on alcohol advertising just blatantly said straight out: no alcohol 
commercials. Another case: TV ads should be banned because 
of the influence that reaches younger people. These are students 
talking to you, Mr. Minister. Another one: 
 

The comment I have about alcohol abuse is that I think the 
alcohol is being abused. And beer commercials create a 
scene of sports, and alcohol is totally not needed because it 
creates a fad which should not be used. 

 
And all that this advertising does is promote that kind of 
fadism. It makes the consumption of alcohol on a regular basis 
appear like the socially correct and appropriate thing to do. It 
attempts to make that young person feel that in order for him or 
her to fit among their peers, the peer that you spoke of, you 
have to do these things, because it makes you part of the action. 
 
Don’t tell us that 85 per cent advertising promoting alcohol is 
going to be counterbalanced by 15 per cent of your kind of 
advertising, which talks about something else. I mean, if you’re 
going to suggest that that is some kind of an even handed 
balance, then I have difficulty understanding where you’re 
coming from, Mr. Minister. 
 
So the arguments you make here . . . And I wasn’t going to get 
into this debate, but you seem to consider me some authority 
because of my recent coming from a class-room. And I don’t 
consider myself an authority, other than I happen to be a parent, 
and I happen to have been a teacher, and I have been pretty 
close to some of those kids that I worked with, some of them 
who needed some particular kind of help. 
 
And when I took a survey with my students on a lot of issues, 
which I took every year, I can tell you that those students, when 
asked by me and others in my staff if they felt that advertising 
had an influence on them — alcohol advertising — in the vast 
majority, said yes. These are middle-year students; these are 
division 3 students, Mr. Minister — the students who are at the 
age where this kind of influence is very, very powerful. And 
that’s the kind of influence that you have been promoting, or 
your government has been promoting, because you have 
allowed, immediately after your election, the advertising of 
alcohol. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, and members, I think a 
man who would stand in his place and say he’s the father of 
children and a committed teacher would have the commitment 
to not leave out certain portions of the report. He read certain, 
select portions. Just for the people that may watching tonight 
and for my colleagues in the House and the members opposite I 
will read entirely, and I will not leave out the terms that the 
member opposite who stood as a teach and as a parent, and I 
will show you when I come to those sections, omitted parts of 
the report. 
 
It’s on page 19, under discussion. And when my colleagues 
have it, I ask you all to look at it — page 19. Let’s listen. Now 
if you want to shout from your seat, because you omitted sir, 
you know very well you omitted  

significant lines . . . I’m going to read this into the record and I 
would ask that the members opposite would be quiet and listen 
to it. It’s under discussion, and you can check Hansard in the 
morning and see what I’m reading and what the member 
opposite: 
 

Television is a powerful media that most adolescents 
watch for hours every day. (I heard him say that about five 
minutes ago.) Alcohol is not only promoted through liquor 
advertisements, but also through the characters and 
activities depicted on various shows. 

 
Those are shows like the Edge of Night or these soaps I guess 
they’re talking about. 
 

Since the fall of 1983 Saskatchewan has permitted beer 
and wine ads on TV and radio and spirits through the print 
media. 

 
That’s nothing new. Spirits through the print media have been 
here for a long time. 
 

A large number of briefs opposed alcohol advertisements, 
particularly those advertisements which associated young 
people with recreation and alcohol. 

 
Now my colleague read that. But you turn the page, and on 
page 20 it says, and I want you to pay particular attention 
because he didn’t read this: 
 

It is difficult to directly link . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Oh, shout from your seats when it gets touchy. I will start again: 
 

It is difficult to directly link advertising to increased 
consumption. 

 
Did you hear him read that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, he left that out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Alcohol advertising has escalated in 
recent years, while overall alcohol sales have levelled off or 
even dropped. 
 
Did he read that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Then he went on to say: 
 

The industry contends that alcohol promotion is not 
intended to increase overall consumption, but shift market 
share from one brand to the other. 

 
An Hon. Member: — He didn’t read that either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 
 

However, some studies suggest young persons are more 
susceptible to advertising, particularly life-style 
advertisements. As well, a large number  

  



 
April 21, 1986 

767 
 

of parents and others wee the advertisements as 
presenting inappropriate role models. (But he omitted 
this.) In discussion with adolescents, it was frequently 
mentioned that the advertisements had no effect on 
consumption, but they enjoyed watching them. (He 
omitted that. Then he went on to say) Based on 
Canadian figures, liquor advertisements averaged $5 per 
capita or a tenth of all mass media advertising. In 
Saskatchewan the 1983 regulations which allow alcohol 
advertising also require that 15 per cent of the 
advertising be devoted to educational messages. (Then 
he forgot to mention) It seems most stations exceed the 
15 per cent quota with messages on drinking and driving 
and so forth. To some degree the educational messages 
help counter the promotional messages. As well, the 
federal and provincial governments have developed and 
aired in their various health promotion programs. These 
include the federal dialogue on drinking, as well as the 
generation and the Break Free* anti-smoking programs. 

 
And it goes on, Saskatchewan Health, and Safe Grad, and so on. 
 
I say to you sir, you know I may have been out of the 
class-room a little longer than you have, and I didn’t have the 
great opportunity of teaching grade 3 throughout my career. But 
I want to say to you, at least when I got up to quote something 
to a student, I read the whole thing. I didn’t use selective 
reading as you did in this House three or four minutes ago. And 
I say to you, if you’re going to be man enough to quote from a 
document, do it all, and cut that out, the selective reading, 
because that’s a shame to you, and that’s a disrespect to an 
educator to do something of that nature. 
 
You should be ashamed of yourself, as a father, and as a 
teacher, to stand up, to stand up and deliberately omit — 
deliberately omit — the lines on the top of page 20 which says: 
 

It is difficult to directly link advertising to increased 
consumption. Alcohol advertising has escalated in recent 
years, while overall alcohol sales have levelled off or even 
dropped. 

 
He omitted putting that into the record. That indicates to me 
a deliberate attempt to mislead this House and the members 
in this House — and more, of course, the public out there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, now that the minister has 
finished his ranting and raving and his hollering, we can get 
back to dealing with some of what he has mentioned. Notice 
that he indeed read . . . and I could have read the rest of it too. 
The problem is Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well maybe I’ll wait till all the members on the government 
side have stopped their yelling, because I can’t even hear 
myself speak, Mr. Chairman. When they have settled down, 
then I will be prepared to carry on here. The member from 
Moosomin seems to be leading the parade here. 
 

Mr. Minister, you did indicate that the report does say that it 
does not have any influence on some. Well I agree, and so will 
the public agree, that advertising does not have influence on 
some. But if it has influence on any amount, does it make that 
policy correct, is what I ask? And I submit to you that it does 
not make it correct. 
 
(2045) 
 
One of the reasons I am not reading from your report, Mr. 
Minister, because even though you stand there in this House 
with the printed version of the report in your hand and read 
from it, you still haven’t tabled it. Now I ask you, as I did on 
Friday, what are you hiding? Are you hiding the fact, Mr. 
Minister, that your final report which was written by your 
people, may not quite be like the final draft which your 
committee submitted? And I kind of suspect, Mr. Minister, that 
when we compare your report, the one you tabled, to the drafts, 
final drafts which I have here, which I was provided with last 
week, that we are going to see some rather interesting 
discrepancies in your report compared to this one. I submit to 
you that that’s going to happen. 
 
I say again, whether there is an influence on 15 per cent of the 
student or young peoples’ population, or on 30 per cent, on 40 
per cent, the policy that you have instituted is a bad policy. 
How is it that those 10 or 15 or 30 or 40 per cent don’t matter? 
They do matter, because we’re talking about here, about the 
unfortunate incidences of abuse and the problems that are 
created. And it’s those people who find themselves in situations 
of abuse who are the ones that are going to be influenced. 
That’s the argument you’re making, that it doesn’t matter. It 
doesn’t matter that some are influenced and some aren’t. I 
submit to you that it does matter. It matters a great deal. 
 
I really feel a little — and this is not on the subject but since 
you mentioned it I will say it — I feel that it’s a little 
unfortunate that any minister of the Crown, and I’ve heard some 
of your private members say this across the way, but somehow 
you relegate people who may have taught grade 3 as being 
inferior teachers. I really take objection to that on behalf of 
teachers in the elementary school system. 
 
I submit to you, sir, that a teacher teaching in a grade 3 
class-room, which I quite frankly did not ever have the honour 
to do and I would have appreciated it because it would have 
given me a better perspective, but I submit to you, sir, that 
anybody teaching in a grade 3 class-room is just as important as 
a teacher as you might have been in whatever level you taught 
in. And for you to stand up in the House and make that 
statement, I think that your Minister of Education should have 
something to say to you about that at your next cabinet or 
maybe caucus meeting. Because I can tell you, sir, that there are 
going to be some teachers and some parents who are going to 
have something to say to you about that. 
 
And the best thing you could do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
and I’ll continue as soon as the member for Moosomin stops 
yelling . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And he’s yelling some 
more. I suggest to you, Mr.  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

768 
 

Minister, that the best thing you could do before we finish this 
deliberation of this estimates in the next hour and a quarter, that 
you should apologize to the teaching profession for the kind of 
inane comment you have just made about those people who are 
teaching at any particular level, whether it’s university or the 
high school, as the member for Wascana was involved in and 
did a tremendous job, or whether it’s a teacher in the division 3 
level or a teacher who’s teaching in the division 1 level. And 
you know that. 
 
The problem with you, Mr. Minister, is when you were pressed 
— and that’s one of the roles of a member of the cabinet, 
sometimes you will get pressed. I know that the pressures are 
great. And I know that they’re particularly great when you’re 
not prepared to answer question and you have to stonewall them 
and when you’ve got everybody who you are supposed to be 
serving in the health field, nurses and chiropractors and doctors 
and the public and the chairman of your board saying, please, 
Mr. Minister, do us a favour and resign. I know that’s tough. 
That’s pressure. But don’t let that kind of pressure cause you to 
take on people who you have no right to take on and be critical 
of. I say that to you, and I would like you to reconsider. 
 
I simply ask you, Mr. Minister, two questions: (1) do you think 
that even if 15 per cent of the population of young people is 
influenced by advertising, that that makes the policy okay; and 
(2) has your alcoholism commission, before it became the Drug 
and Alcohol Abuse Commission, or has your Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission given you a recommendation saying that 
you ought to allow advertising on the electronic media of 
alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I take exception to the 
member’s remarks. You know, he tries to insinuate that 
somehow I was criticizing grade 3 teachers across this province. 
There is only one grade 3 teacher I was criticizing, and he sits 
right over there — the member for Regina North East, who 
stands in a sanctimonious and pious manner thinking that 
because he has taught grade 3 for a number of years, he has all 
the insights into adolescence and alcohol and drug abuse. 
 
I happen to spend 15 years as a principal of a junior and senior 
high school, and I saw it firsthand. I saw it firsthand. And I 
think within that situation you have a little better feeling, a little 
better understanding, of the pressures that junior high kids are 
under, when they’re coming into adolescence and puberty and 
they’re trying to say, look at me, here I am, have a look at me. 
And as I described a while ago, the pressures that are upon 
them, and the variety of backgrounds they come from, that’s the 
indication I was putting out. 
 
But for the member to stand up and try and draw the longest 
bow I’ve ever seen, to say that for some reason I’m against 
grade 3 teachers, is simply not credible. I mean, that’s plain 
stupidity, and that’s what he indicated. I was against one grade 
3 teacher, one grade 3 teacher who now represents Regina 
North East, who doesn’t have the dedication to quote from a 
document in its entirety. That’s the teacher I was criticizing, 
and I’ll stand in this House and criticize him time after time 
again, because I think as  

an educator and a man of letters, that is unacceptable for you to 
let on that those other lines weren’t in there. And I think you 
should apologize, because all you were trying to do is mislead 
this House. 
 
So for you to stand up here and try and make some great 
protestation on behalf of the grade 3 teachers in Ile-a-la-Crosse 
and in Buffalo Narrows and Nipawin and Melfort and 
Moosomin, is simply not in the cards. There’s one grade 3 
teacher I question, and that’s you, because you don’t have the 
integrity, you don’t have the guts, to read the whole thing. You 
want to try and mislead people by reading selected portions. 
And as an educator, I say that’s inexcusable, and you should be 
ashamed of doing that. So let’s set the record straight: there’s 
only one I’m criticizing, and that’s that gentleman right over 
there, and I make no apology for doing it. 
 
Furthermore — furthermore — he talks about young people. 
And if there is one young person in this province that’s 
suffering from addition, suffering from the use of drugs, 
multiple use — sniffing gasoline and Lysol and so on — I’m 
concerned about it. I want to see how we can best treat that 
young person, be there one, be there 20, be there 500, how 
many there are. This government wants to find the most 
appropriate way to treat those people irregardless of what kind 
of situation got them into that deplorable condition that they’re 
in today. 
 
That report will certainly address some of the ways we can do 
this. It has gone to the printers now. It’ll be available to all 
members as soon as it’s printed. The member opposite has a 
report that was distributed to members of the committee. I 
suppose some member thought it would be in the best interest 
of the committee to give him that report. That’s fine and dandy. 
If they so wish to do that, fine. The report I was quoting from is 
not the same report as that, because that was never submitted to 
me. There is the report — there is the report. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, now we know, now we know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly. And now you say, now we 
know. You know what they’re saying from their seats when 
they say, now we know? They’re criticizing the committee. 
They’re criticizing the committee that had a preliminary draft, a 
preliminary draft of a report which somehow that member 
happened to get his hands on. I don’t care how he got it, he got 
it. Fine. A preliminary draft. What I quoted from was the report 
given to the minister, the report given to the minister. And I will 
be distributing that report when it is printed. 
 
So there’s quite a difference between a preliminary draft which 
may not be the same in any way, shape, or form as the report 
submitted to me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now he says 
aha, aha! Changes! Well, those changes, if they were brought 
about, were brought about by the committee. And if he wants, if 
he . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s correct. That’s 
absolutely correct. Oh, you want to shout from your seats and 
says it’s wrong, and make noise, and disrupt. That’s fine. 
 
The member from Shaunavon continually in this House is the 
most raucous member in this House. Night after night, after 
supper he is so noisy he just raises Cain all the time,  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

769 
 

shouts from his seat continually and won’t let his colleague 
sitting beside hear the comments I’m giving him. 
 
I said to you, sir, you have a preliminary draft. I have the 
support submitted to me by the committee. If you want to 
criticize the committee from changing from the preliminary 
draft to the report, you do so. But you must realize, sir, you are 
criticizing the committee. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I beg to differ. Because I 
am not criticizing the committee. I read for your benefit from 
the page which happens to be the second page of this report 
which was presented to you and dated February 27, 1986. It 
states: 
 

The Honourable Graham Taylor, Minister of Health, 
Room 38, Legislative Building, Regina, Saskatchewan. 
Dear Mr. Taylor: We are pleased to present the final report 
of your Advisory Committee on Alcohol, Drugs, and 
Youth. 

 
Now I really think, Mr. Minister, that there is a distinctive 
difference between a preliminary report and what is said to be, 
in the report itself, the final report. 
 
Now if there are changes, Mr. Minister, I ask you, have you had 
since February 27th, a meeting of this whole advisory 
committee, Mr. Minister? Since February 7th, has there been a 
meeting of this advisory committee to discuss the final . . . the 
report which you have, which I’m going to ask you to table 
today because you have it? And if you don’t want to table it, 
we’re going to ask you for some time, why, since you gave us a 
commitment on Friday that when the report is printed and you 
have it you’re going to table it immediately. You say you had it. 
You read from it as if it was the report, and you are trying to 
say that this one was inaccurate. So I’m going to ask you later 
to table it. 
 
But will you answer my question? Has your advisory committee 
had a meeting since February 28th, or the 27th, when they 
presented this to you to consider the report further to what they 
presented to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You’ve been going on for some time 
talking about February 28th. That’s when the final draft report 
was put in place by the committee. The report came to me — 
and this will be a little surprising to you because you’ve been 
hollering about February 28th for I don’t know how long — on 
March 20th. March 20th it was presented to me by the chairman 
of the commission. 
 
He presented me with copies of the report which I have 
distributed to my colleague, cabinet colleagues for a part of the 
social policy subcommittee of cabinet. They have reviewed it. 
We have decided as a cabinet to make it public. The report is at 
the printers and just as soon as the report is finished printing, I 
will, as I have said time and time again, I will deliver you one 
personally. Just the day after it’s printed, when they come in my 
office, when they come in my office and I have them in my 
office, I will give you one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
I’m giving you the printed report, the final report, the same one 
as the public will get. And I’ve told you, I think I’ve told you, 
and if you’re at all honest you must admit that I’ve told you, I  

believe, four times in the last week, that the day I get the report, 
I will personally go and give you one. If that makes you happy, 
I will give you one. You can have the first copy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll come to your office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Come down to my office. I would be glad 
to have you down in my office. 
 
I would say this. If you would come to my office, if you would 
come to my office and discuss a health care issue with me in my 
office . . . I would tell you, in four years, other than Norm 
MacAuley, who was a member of this legislature previously, 
who tried, and tried, and tried under the NDP to get a hospital 
for La Ronge, finally came in because he knew me as an 
opposition member and said, Graham, he said, maybe you’ll 
listen to me. And he said, I tried with those guys, he said, and 
they wouldn’t listen to me. And I said, Norm, I enjoy you, 
you’re a nice fellow. We had a good talk. And I can tell you, La 
Ronge are getting a hospital. Construction and planning for the 
construction is starting now. 
 
But I say to you, member from Regina North East, and I think 
you may be the first one, because I’ve got a little more faith in 
you than some of those other ducks. You would be the first, you 
would be the first NDP member since May the 10th of 1982 
that ever entered my office to sit down and say, do you think 
you could do this in health care? You would be the first, and I 
can tell you, I will deliver the copy to you. If you want to come 
down, I’d welcome you to my office. We can sit down and go 
through it as two gentlemen and look at it. And you can say, 
look, Mr. Taylor, I think this is bad and you’re crazy there, and 
I’ll say fine. And you can say, I think this is good, and we 
should implement that. And our caucus would even support 
that. I would challenge you, I challenge you to come to my 
office when the report is ready and say, I believe this is good. 
And I can tell you my colleagues would support you on this 
initiative. I put that challenge to you tonight. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I am really gratified that I 
am in your good books again. A little while ago I wasn’t so 
sure. 
 
You’ve got us a little wondering here. A little while ago you 
picked up a book handed to you by one of your officials. It 
looked like a pretty final piece of work to me. It was printed, it 
had spiral coils binding it together — not stapled like this — 
which was presented to you. You read from it as if, and you 
indicated it was the final report already printed now. You’re 
now saying, when we ask you if you would table it, sorry, 
somehow it’s not printed again. Are you suggesting that you 
only printed one copy, and that somehow the rest are to be 
printed at your convenience when you are prepared and ready to 
release it, when you think it’s the most opportune time for you 
to do so politically? 
 
I’m quite prepared to come to your office and pick it up. But 
that’s not what I’m asking for. That’s not what I’m asking for, 
because I’m not asking for me to get this report;  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

770 
 

I’m asking for this report to be made available to the public of 
Saskatchewan, because it is their report as much as it is your 
report. 
 
And so I am saying to you, since you have the report in your 
hand, and no amount of denying can change that now because 
you know you have indicated it’s there, why will you not table 
it tonight so that we can have an honest look at it? What is 
preventing you from doing it? And don’t tell us that it’s because 
it isn’t printed, because you just finished reading from the 
printed version, and you know it. And you know it. 
 
Except that when we got to talking about it, you began to back 
off again, or if it isn’t a printed version, Mr. Minister, then you 
are misleading this House in pretending that it was. Because 
when we pressed you a little further, all of a sudden it was not 
the printed version. 
 
Now what is it? I’m asking you one more time: are you 
prepared to table that report tonight, because you seem to have 
it? And two, will you answer my previous question? Are you 
listening? Will you answer my previous question, which you 
failed to answer? Have you received a recommendation from 
the alcoholism commission, as it was, or the Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission? And if you have, I’d like to have you give 
it to me, the written portion, recommending the advertising of 
alcohol in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly getting back to the report, 
what I was reading from is a xerox copy of the report. I want to 
give you a very nice copy, and I will give you the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why does it have coils? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well sometimes we put things together 
with coils. You may have done that in school. I don’t know if 
you did or not. Sometimes I had students, I can remember they 
used to send in reports to me. Some would be coils. Some 
would have a nice plastic cover with a thing on the back. Some 
would be stapled. This one I chose to coil. So that’s why it’s 
coiled. 
 
But I want to tell you, I’m going to give you the best copy, the 
first copy. I come here early in the morning. So the day they’re 
in, I’ll ring you; you come on down; we’ll have a look at it. I’ll 
sign it for you, if it would make you happier. I’ll do that for 
you, and you can have it. But I don’t think you want me to give 
it to you before the press get it, before the public get it, before 
the board of SADAC get it, before my colleagues get it. I don’t 
think you want that. You just want to have the same fair 
treatment, and you’re going to get it. In fact, you’re going to get 
a little bit more. You’re going to come down to my office, and 
if you want coffee, I’ll give you a coffee, and I’ll sign the 
report, and I’ll say, here you are, Mr. Member, there’s your 
report. 
 
But I’m going to hold you to task, too. I’m going to say to you, 
what do you think of this recommendation? Do you think you 
could talk your caucus into supporting that? I’m going to ask 
you those questions. I’m going to say: are you opposed to this 
kind of a treatment facility? Would you support that? Because 
I’m going to ask you that. And I’m going to ask you a lot of 
questions that you and I’ll sit  

down, not here where you can stand up and try and score a 
point or hope to get a headline, but right down in my office 
where two guys, elected, two school teachers, one from the high 
school and one from the elementary — about the same amount 
of time. We can sit down. Both concerned with young people in 
Saskatchewan. And we can say, let’s you and I just move 
politics aside and say, this has got to be good for the kids of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll invite the member from Wascana down, because he will 
certainly tell us. Maybe he’s got a little more wisdom than you 
and I in this, and he’ll say, I think recommendation 13 is a good 
one; 12 may be harder to achieve. 
 
Let’s all work for this for the benefit of young people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what we’ll have. That’s the conversation 
we’ll have down in my office that morning, and you’ll have the 
first copy. 
 
You asked me if the alcohol commission had asked me to 
advertise alcohol. Well you know as well as I do, I am not 
responsible for the advertising of alcohol. Certainly the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m not . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I’m not. It is not under my jurisdiction. It 
is not under my jurisdiction at all. You must realize that. 
 
Certainly they have not written to me and said, we support you 
advertising alcohol. But if they’re going to have discussions, or 
correspondence, they would have it with the minister 
responsible — the minister in charge of the liquor commission. 
So as I’ve said time and time again, when his estimates come 
up, ask him those questions. 
 
But certainly I am not the minister who says we advertise 
alcohol or we don’t advertise alcohol. My mandate, and you 
were once the Minister of Health and you should understand 
that, is that my mandate is to deal with the treatment — the 
treatment of people who have alcohol and related problems. 
 
In the most recent year, because drugs have taken on a larger 
component of abuse within our province, we have changed the 
commission to take in drugs as well as alcohol. So it is a 
commission that looks at two aspects of treatment of not only 
young people, but people throughout the spectrum of 
Saskatchewan society. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m a little amazed by how 
lightly you all of a sudden are taking this issue. You may want 
to joke about it. And you may get all of your cabinet front 
benches and your caucus members laughing about it as they 
have done for the last five minutes as you went into your little 
speech. They seem to think it’s funny. 
 
I want to put on the record, I don’t think it’s funny. I think what 
we’re talking about here is a very serious issue. You have said 
that on a number of occasions. I only have to take your word for 
it. And for you all of a sudden now to treat it as a very 
light-hearted kind of an issue, I think really puts to the question 
your total sincerity. 
 
I know that you’re not in charge of the Liquor Board, Mr.  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

771 
 

Minister. I know that you may not be the one who signs the Bill 
or presents the Bill or the legislation that permits alcohol 
advertising. But you are the Minister of Health. You are the one 
who is mandated to present to your government arguments and 
recommendations on the well-being and the health of the 
population of Saskatchewan. 
 
If the alcoholism commission was not consulted by you to give 
its recommendation when your government was considering the 
allowing of alcohol advertising, then you have been derelict in 
your responsibility. Because it was up to you. And I don’t know 
whether they give you a recommendation one way or the other. 
That’s why I’m asking. And I’m only saying what I’m saying 
because you stood up in the House a minute ago, and you said 
that you never asked the alcoholism commission. I say, why 
wouldn’t you ask your alcoholism commission to give your 
government a recommendation on whether there should be 
alcohol advertising allowed? 
 
It’s a very peculiar situation when you have the minister in 
charge of the Liquor Board pushing booze, and the Minister of 
Health curing the ills. That’s not the way it ought to work. One 
would think that you would get around a cabinet table and even 
consult your caucus once in a while — you know, it’s useful to 
do that — and talk about the issues. And the minister, whoever 
it is who’s responsible for the allowing and the regulating of 
advertising of alcohol, would make his arguments and you 
would make yours, which I hope would be mine, and that you 
would have . . . win the day. But obviously if you were making 
that argument, you lost. 
 
Now in consideration of that kind of an issue, you should have 
had a recommendation from the alcoholism commission. I’m 
asking you: did I read you right or did I hear you right when 
you said you did not ask for a recommendation? I thought I 
heard you say that. I may have been wrong, but can you correct 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I didn’t say that at all. You heard me 
wrong. You can check the Hansard and see my comment there. 
You know, you indicate that there seems to be some strange 
situation, that there’s one minister in charge of the liquor 
commission and another one in charge of the alcohol 
commission — and that has existed for some time. 
 
And you say there’s one minister pushing booze. I can go back 
through, and I will refer you to Hansard, the number of outlets 
that you opened under your administration — the number of 
outlets, a tremendous number of them by the NDP, the walk-in 
liquor stores opened by the NDP. Your party in Manitoba, and I 
won’t criticize you for that, but the NDP in Manitoba — 
dial-a-jug, we’ll deliver it today, home delivery, the same-day 
delivery. That’s the status of the NDP. 
 
I want to indicate some of the initiatives that we have taken in 
SADAC during the 1986-87 funding. In 1986-87 budget 
estimates indicate an overall increase of 7.5 per cent in the 
budget of the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission. Number two, this includes a new benefits package 
for 23 community agencies which are funded by SADAC, 
constituting an increase to the funded  

agencies of 9.8 per cent. I think this is a substantial increase and 
remedies a long-standing situation that had developed under 
previous governments. 
 
Again this year, and we’ve talked about this, I’ve appointed a 
minister’s advisory committee on alcohol, drugs, and youth. 
And this is the first such committee established in 
Saskatchewan and also across Canada to address this very 
important issue. As I have stated, I am currently reviewing this 
report and it will be taking action very shortly. And I’ve 
committed to the member opposite, I’ll give him a report. 
 
Last year I initiated a review of the status of Saskatchewan 
alcohol commission and at the request of the board, which 
resulted in a revision of the existing legislation — you’ll 
remember that, Mr. Chairman — including a new name for the 
commission, that being the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission, reflecting the commission’s broad mandate 
to address issues of drug abuse as well as alcoholism. So you 
see, we’ve expended the mandate. 
 
And also I’ve indicated to the board of the commission that I’m 
very interested in the development of a five-year plan for the 
alcohol and drug abuse are to complement the initiatives taken 
by my government in other five-year plans in health. 
 
So those are some of the initiatives that we have taken with 
SADAC in this budgetary year to increase, shall I say, the 
effect. I’ll say that it’s influence upon the lives of Saskatchewan 
people, and to improve the management — or the treatment 
would be a better word — the treatment of people who are 
suffering from this type of addiction. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would 
consider the Saskatchewan Safety Council a body whose 
judgements and observations with respect to traffic safety are 
worthy of note. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council have some good advice to offer in some situations. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder if the minister is going to answer 
the question. Does the minister believe that the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council is a body whose judgements are to respected 
with respect to questions involving traffic safety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t know the people on the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council. I don’t have dealings with them 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want to continue to 
shout or do you want to hear the answer? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, you can hear your shouting, and in fact 
you’re often clucking. If you aren’t shouting, you’re always 
clucking in this House. Now which do you prefer to do? If you 
want to continue to cluck, do so. 
 
(2115) 
 
I tell you that I don’t know the people on the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council. I’m sure that there are  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

772 
 

some very good people on there, and they’re concerned about 
safety, and I imagine that their concerns and reports are 
certainly things that impact upon safety. But I have to say to 
you, Mr. Chairman, I have very little doing with them. I 
imagine the minister in charge of the Highway Traffic Board 
deals with them in great detail. But I would like to see what the 
member is concerned about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it to be a serious position, Mr. 
Minister, that you don’t know the Saskatchewan Safety Council 
and are unable to offer an opinion as to whether or not their 
judgement with respect to matters involving traffic safety are 
worthy of note? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! I fail to see how the member from 
Regina Centre is tying this into a question related to health. And 
if he can do so, I will accept it. Otherwise, I think we’d better 
get back to the minister’s estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, as the minister vaguely 
suspects, the Saskatchewan Safety Council have had something 
to say with respect to liquor advertising. That’s why I want to 
know whether or not their views are worth discussing in this 
Legislative Assembly. I ask for the response of the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve been 
very liberal in discussing . . . That’s a hard term for me to use. 
I’ve been very considerate — and there’s no similarity between 
Liberals and consideration — but I’ve been considerate in 
discussing the whole thing of liquor advertising. 
 
I must say again, it does not fall under my mandate. I’m not the 
minister responsible. So any quote coming from the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council about liquor advertising should 
be addressed to the member in charge of the liquor commission, 
Liquor Licensing Commission, or else the member in charge of 
the Highway Traffic Board who deals with the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council. 
 
Now the member may want to bring some point out. But I 
think, Mr. Chairman, in fairness we must keep these estimates 
onto Health estimates. And I cannot be responsible for every 
quote that the highway safety council makes or everything 
about liquor advertising, because I’m not the minister 
responsible. 
 
I’m the minister responsible for the treatment of people with 
liquor and drug problems. And I have outlined time after time 
initiatives that we are taking to address that, and I will discuss 
that with the members opposite as long as they want to discuss 
it. But to see what I think about a statement of the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council, which more would appropriately 
be addressed, I’m sure, to the Minister of Highways or else to 
the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan liquor commission 
. . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, as the member admitted a moment 
ago, you also have responsibility for programs which seek as 
their end to curtail excessive consumption of alcohol. You 
boasted, you stated with great pride, what a sterling program 
your Christmas advertising program was. And maybe it was a 
sterling program. I’m sure it was; I’m sure it was effective. 
 

The point we have been trying to make is that those programs 
which encourage the consumption of alcohol, whether they 
associate alcohol with rugger games — I was going to say 
soccer games; that’s not accurate; I think they’re rugger games 
— or whether or not they associate alcohol with old, red trucks 
that won’t run very well, and pleasant summer evenings spent 
by young people, they seek as an end to encourage the 
consumption of alcohol. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have responsibility for those programs, such 
as they are. They’re pitiful compared with the programs which 
encourage the consumption of alcohol. You admitted you have 
responsibility for it. 
 
Let me assist the minister by reading what the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council had to say. Well it was fairly direct: 
 

The increased visibility and availability of alcohol conveys 
a message, especially to young people, that alcohol should 
be an integral part of their future lifestyle. 

 
And then the letter concludes: 
 

In summary, the Saskatchewan Safety Council is opposed 
to any measures that will make alcohol more available, 
such as mass media advertising. 

 
Mr. Minister, why is it that you think that that recommendation 
from the Saskatchewan Safety Council should be disregarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t see where that 
makes it more available. “Available” is the number of outlets. 
And I indicated that it was under the government previously 
that there was a gross expansion in the number of outlets. So 
certainly, if you advertise it on television, that doesn’t say it’s 
more available. That’s what he ended his quote with. He said 
that the alcohol is more available. I don’t see the correlation 
between an ad and availability — none whatsoever. 
 
Availability comes in places where you have walk-in liquor 
stores, such as were brought in under the NDP party — a 
number of them. Availability comes in more lounges, more 
clubs, more dining rooms. I gave the statistics. I could dig them 
out of my files again, but they’re in Hansard for all to read. I 
think it was about a week ago that we brought these figures 
forward. 
 
So for the member to end a quote on something about 
availability — I think he should look at the actions of his own 
government when they were in power. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me, Mr. Minister, quote to you the 
portion I’d like you to comment on: 
 

In summary, the Saskatchewan Safety Council is opposed 
to any measures that will make alcohol more available 
such as mass media advertising. 

 
The particular comments of the Saskatchewan Safety Council 
did not have anything directly to do with availability. They had 
something to do with conveying a message that alcohol is part 
and parcel of a bright future  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

773 
 

life-style. That was the comment from the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council. Why, Mr. Minister, do you believe that those 
comments ought to be disregarded? Their comments are crystal 
clear, Mr. Minister. They’re opposed to what you’re doing. why 
don’t you respect their views? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m not saying that their comments don’t 
have some degree of validity, but I just can’t see the logic. And 
again I go back to this supposed lawyer who seems to . . I don’t 
know what kind of inferences he draws, saying that . . . Again 
he quoted to me that advertising increases consumption and 
availability. 
 
Now I don’t watch these ads; I don’t know anything about 
them. But I can tell you, I can’t see where advertising says 
anything about availability. I don’t think there’s an ad in 
Saskatchewan that says: run down to Slim’s corner store and 
grab yourself a beer. You know, if that were the case it would 
say that’s where it’s available, at Slim’s corner store or at 
Johnny’s pub. I don’t see those kinds of ads. So I don’t know 
what he’s talking about when he says advertising increases the 
availability. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is not what the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council said, Mr. Minister. I’d ask you to stop disregarding 
what is fairly plain language. 
 
The increased visibility of alcohol conveys a message, 
especially to young people, that alcohol should be an integral 
part of their future life-style. In summary, Mr. Minister, they’re 
talking about the message conveyed by the advertisements, not 
its availability. 
 
In summary, the Saskatchewan Safety Council is opposed to 
any measures that will make alcohol more available, such as 
mass advertising. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to address yourself to 
the message that alcohol should be a part of their future 
life-style. Why do you think the Saskatchewan Safety Council’s 
views on that subject should be disregarded in favour of your 
own? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is item 2 agreed? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We both have more questions on item 1, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Did the member for Regina Centre have a 
question for the minister? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I do. I can understand why the 
government caucus is in a rush to get off of it. I would not 
describe health as this government’s most sterling success. It 
seems to me, Mr. Minister, there have been a number of people 
who have been detracting from your successes. And I can 
understand why you want to get away from it, Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if, since you believe that Saul Cohen — and I frankly, I 
frankly doubt your word. You suggest that Dr. Saul Cohen has 
now changed his mind, he’s now in favour of liquor advertising. 
Is that what you’re saying? Because if it is, I’m going to be 
contacting Dr. Saul Cohen for an explanation as to his views. 
That was the impression you tried to leave us. Is that what 
you’re saying, or were you just simply trying to mislead this 
Assembly? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, getting back to some of 
the guide-lines, then I’ll address the question of Dr. Cohen. 
Getting back to some of the guide-lines that are in the 
regulations concerning the liquor amendment regulations 1983, 
I think to try and inform the member, difficult though it may be, 
what the regulations are concerning the advertisement of liquor. 
I would like to quote these into the record so that the member 
would be able to see the guide-lines, strict guide-lines that were 
put on if he should be able to understand them. 
 
It says the board shall not approve an advertisement where, in 
its opinion the advertisement: 
 

(a) encourages the use or consumption of liquor; 
(b) contains family scenes, drinking scenes, or scenes 
involving minors; 
(c) associates the use of liquor with activities prior to or 
in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle, 
aircraft, boat, or snow vehicle, or activities involving 
skill or elements of physical danger; 
(d) claims that liquor causes any healthful effects or 
benefits; 
(e) conveys the impression that liquor is an important or 
necessary element of an activity; 
(f) creates the impression that liquor may be used or 
consumed in a way or manner prohibited by law; 
(g) states prices; or 
(h) contains any personal endorsement of liquor by any 
person who may be generally known or recognized. 

 
In connection to Mr. Cohen, the quote that the gentleman red 
out previously was one taken from Mr. Cohen prior to the 
introduction of advertising. 
 
All I can say is that Mr. Cohen has indicated to me on 
numerous occasions that he thinks that the educational aspects 
— he agrees with the Hon. Jake Epp — that the educational 
aspects of the liquor advertisement in Saskatchewan is having 
an impact. That is, he has indicated to me and to the executive 
director of the alcohol commission. I’m not saying he favours 
advertisements. I’m saying that he’s indicated to me on a 
number of occasions that he does believe that the educational 
portion is having an impact. And I think that is also seen by my 
colleague in Ottawa, the Hon. Jake Epp, who is adopting the 
Saskatchewan model and suggesting it to the CRTC as the 
model to be followed by all provinces in Canada. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Has he ever indicated to you that his 
opposition to the advertising of alcohol by brewers and by 
wineries has changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I can’t say he has changed his 
opinion on that. But I can tell you what he has told me and has 
told my executive director, that he does think that the 
Saskatchewan model — he realizes that the advertisements 
were coming in, Mr. Chairman. The member makes a big to-do 
about this. The advertisements — you must have read 
magazines in your day, I’m sure a number of them in your 
professional career. There has been liquor advertising in those 
magazines as long as I  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

774 
 

can remember. 
 
Cable television was coming in across the line all the time. Dr. 
Cohen has said that he saw that those things were happening, 
and he says that in his opinion the 15, and I should give credit 
to the networks — it’s in excess of 15 per cent in most cases, in 
some cases up as high as 50 per cent — are having an impact, a 
positive impact. 
 
(2130) 
 
The same type of statement that was said in the report by the 
committee on youth and alcohol and drugs, where the kids 
themselves said, 300 children that had been — young people 
that had been interviewed by the commission — said that it 
didn’t affect the consumption patterns. Many of them watched 
them because they liked the look of the ad, not because it 
convinced them that they should be drinking any more. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I gather that the upshot of 
your statement which, I suggest, was intended to convey an 
impression that Dr. Cohen no longer ascribed to those views, I 
think there is no other fir interpretation to be placed on your 
remarks, and you were attempting to suggest to this Legislative 
Assembly that Dr. Cohen no longer ascribed to those views. 
You have now stated that that is not accurate. He has not 
changed his views. 
 
He apparently believes, Mr. Minister, that the positive 
advertising would suggest that alcohol consumption should be 
curtailed is effective. He also believes that advertising which 
seeks to promote consumption by private brewers and wineries 
is effective. Why, Mr. Minister, do you accept just one-half of 
that equation that advertisements which attempt to affect 
attitudes towards alcohol by curtailing consumption are 
effective, but those which attempt to affect attitudes towards 
alcohol by increasing consumption, are ineffective? Why do 
you accept just one-half of Dr. Saul Cohen’s position with 
respect to the advertising of alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Because, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said time 
after time, there are no empirical studies that indicate that 
advertising increases consumption. Brand name preference, yes 
— consumption, no. All I can say, and he has every right to ask 
Saul Cohen and if he wants to phone him, fine. I’ll even give 
him his number. I don’t know if Saul will be very anxious to 
talk to him, but that’s up to Saul. But I will indicate to you that 
he has indicated to me, as he has to others, that he saw the 
situation before, and there was no positive advertisement at all. 
He has told me on numerous occasions that he thinks, and that’s 
to the best of his knowledge and I don’t question his authority 
on this topic, that he thinks that the positive ads are having a 
beneficial impact in some cases. He said that to me personally. 
He’s told my director the same sort of thing. So I guess to go 
further on this would be to talk to Saul Cohen himself, and I 
invite the member opposite to phone Dr. Cohen and to discuss 
with him and ask him, if you’re really sincere and interested. I 
doubt if you would. I doubt if you would phone him. I doubt 
that very much because I know your degree of sincerity is very, 
very minuscule. I doubt if you would take the time to phone 
him and ask him that question. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I have a suggestion for the minister. We 
have on occasion called witnesses before the bar of this 
legislature. I ask the minister, are you prepared to second the 
motion that Dr. Saul Cohen be called to this Legislative 
Assembly as a witness, as an expert witness, with respect to 
advertising and alcohol consumption? Mr. Minister, if I ought 
to call him, then perhaps the public ought to have the benefit of 
his views. Are you, Mr. Minister, prepared to call Dr. Saul 
Cohen as an expert witness with respect to advertising and 
alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Dr. Saul Cohen . . . 
and I take exception to the kinds of things that he insinuates 
about Dr. Cohen. Dr. Cohen and the committee have travelled 
this province; they’ve been in many, many areas of this 
province, have travelled the province to talk to committees, to 
talk to groups, to talk to people, to outline the concerns of the 
alcohol commission. I’m sure if the member wants to call Dr. 
Cohen, he can call him himself. But to ask Dr. Cohen to come 
in here, I think it’s just simply ridiculous. Dr. Cohen travels this 
province, as do the members of the commission. 
 
If the member wants to meet with the commission members, 
certainly he can come and meet with them at any time. But I 
doubt if he’d take that interest, because all that member is 
interested in is trying to score some cheap political points. 
That’s all his arguments are. That’s all it ever is — and that’s 
the same for the member of Shaunavon, the member from 
Regina Centre, the member from Quill Lake s- they’re all cast 
from the same mould. If they’re not shouting from their seats in 
here, or clucking like chickens, or throwing socks in the air, all 
they’re trying to do is score some cheap political points at the 
expense of some very dedicated people in this province. And I 
take exception to that kind of nonsense. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Shaunavon, and I’m prepared to accept an amendment with 
respect to the wording of this, as it’s been done very quickly. I 
move, seconded by the member from Shaunavon: 
 

That Dr. Saul Cohen be called to this legislature as a 
witness with respect to alcohol and the advertising thereof. 

 
Mr. Chairman: — According to the rules of the committee of 
the whole House I find that this motion does not meet what I 
will say: 
 

That the practice of permitting substantive motions in the 
committee of the whole and committee of finance be 
discontinued. 

 
Adopted December 10th, 1980. The motion therefore is not in 
order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, it is in order with leave. SO 
I ask for leave to move the motion, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — For the benefit for the member for Regina 
Centre, it is not granted with leave. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

775 
 

Mr. Shillington: — You have misunderstood your role, Mr. 
Chairman. You have misunderstood your role. You have to ask 
government members if they will give leave, and if . . . Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Chairman, you must . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman. Order, order. Regardless of leave or not, I have 
read the rule, and it is final that it is not permitted to present 
these motions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, you are wrong, and I 
suggest you get some advice on this before you go any further. I 
have asked for leave . . . Let me finish. I asked for leave to 
move this motion. There is an obligation, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Do I take it that the member from 
Regina Centre is challenging the Chair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I gather, not wishing to 
deal with the motion moved by my colleague, the member for 
Regina Centre, it struck me that the subject matter was 
absolutely germane. We had the minister putting forward what 
is surely an unusual proposition, a very . . . and I heard him put 
it forward, that electronic advertising which is directed to lower 
the consumption of alcoholic beverages is very effective; but 
electronic advertising directed to increasing the consumption of 
alcoholic beverages is not effective. 
 
When asked why this remarkable situation obtains, he says of 
the one: it is effective because people say it is; that is why the 
electronic advertising will reduce the consumption of alcoholic 
beverages. When asked why the electronic advertising wouldn’t 
increase the consumption of alcoholic beverages when it makes 
it look attractive, when it associates it with the sporting 
activities, and young people, and fun, and all the rest of it, he 
says opinions are not relevant, there’s no empirical evidence. 
 
May I ask the minister: what empirical evidence is there that 
electronic advertising, which discourages the consumption of 
alcoholic beverages, is effective to do that? Would you give me 
the statistics which have illustrated this, and which, in your 
judgement, is empirical evidence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I guess one of the things, that 
certainly indicates overall consumption in the province has 
gone down, so I don’t know how you could equate that to any 
evidence that consumption has increased because of electronic 
advertising. It’s gone down, simply gone down. So I don’t 
know how you could relate advertising to an increasing 
consumption when consumption has decreased. I fail to see that. 
 
Secondly, I was talking about the Christmas ads, and I indicated 
that it may well be the time of the year, it may well be the 
direction of the ad, it may well be the safety component of the 
ad. It may well be that people just don’t want to spend 
Christmas in jail. I don’t know. But certainly that one has a 
great impact. 
 
Now you want to say that all consumption — and consumption 
hasn’t gone up. But if you want to make that argument that 
consumption is affected because of  

electronic advertising, I think you have to realize that there’s 
many other types of advertising. There’s print advertising, 
things of this nature, that certainly have an impact, as well as 
electronic advertising. Study after study indicates that overall 
consumption patterns have not increased because of electronic 
advertising. Brand name preference may have, certainly. 
 
It’s exactly the same as I explained to you about five nights ago, 
that that’s probably why Chrysler and Ford advertise their cars 
— that Chrysler would like to sell a few more of its models than 
Ford does. So they advertise them, and they tell the qualities of 
their cars. 
 
So certainly I would want to see where the member is coming 
from on his line of questioning. But there is no strong evidence 
that the advertising on the electric media has increased 
consumption — and you can look right across the country on 
this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Surely, Mr. Minister, if you want to 
know where I’m coming from, may I respectfully suggest that 
you listen to my question? My question was: very, very simply 
and very narrowly, what is the empirical evidence that the 
advertising to discourage consumption is effective? I’m asking 
for the empirical evidence. That’s all I’m asking, because I want 
to know what you’re talking about when you use the term 
“empirical evidence.” 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think some of the things that are 
going on within our province is empirical evidence. I think the 
very fact that high schools in this province, this year for the first 
time in history, in recent history, have said, we’re going to have 
a safe grad where there’s no booze allowed — Shellbrook and 
also one of the collegiates in Regina here. I’d have to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cochrane. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Cochrane. My colleague from Wascana, 
who was the principal there, indicates it’s Cochrane High 
School. I think that’s empirical evidence, that there is evidence 
that people from the 145 per cent ads are saying — they’re 
getting to young people — that’s what Saul Cohen is saying. He 
says, I can see that they are doing some good out there when I 
see . . . And I don’t think you’ll take exception to this, and if 
you do I’d be very shocked. I don’t think you’ll oppose — 
surely you won’t — the two high schools have elected to have 
entirely safe grads — no liquor involved at all. I congratulate 
those schools. I hope you would stand in this Assembly and do 
the same thing. I hope they set a pattern for other schools in this 
province. And I don’t think you can stand in this Assembly and 
say that the positive 15 per cent ads could not have affected 
some of the decision of that school. If that is true I think there is 
empirical evidence that there is a change coming about, and 
that, to some degree, may be the responsibility and the impact 
of those 15, and in some cases up to 50 per cent, positive and 
educational ads. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Everyone, I 
think, congratulates any school that has a safe grad which 
doesn’t involve the consumption of alcoholic beverages; fair 
enough. What I found a little difficult was your linking that to 
the advertisements. You were saying,  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

776 
 

and, Mr. Minister, what I asked you for was not empirical 
evidence that there might be less consumption, but empirical 
evidence that there was less consumption resulting from these 
advertisements. And all I heard from you was a comment that 
perhaps it couldn’t be denied that they might have had some 
effect. And that is empirical evidence. That is what you’re 
putting forward, Mr. Minister, as empirical evidence. 
 
(2145) 
 
You put forward a proposition of fact, and then you say, I say 
it’s due to X. Can you deny that it just could have been due to 
X, and if you can’t, that’s empirical evidence. Now this is a 
remarkable judgement as to what is evidence and what isn’t 
evidence. 
 
But let me pick this up a little more. The figures I’m now using 
are somewhat older figures because they have regard to what 
happened in 1984, a period when there was liquor advertising, 
electronic advertising of beer and wine. And to your knowledge 
is it not true, sir, that during that period, that calendar year 
1984, the consumption of spirits declined, the consumption of 
beer went up, and the consumption of wine went up? And I ask 
you, sir, when wine was advertised, and beer was advertised, 
and spirits were not advertised in the electronic media, is not 
that empirical evidence based upon your test that those ads led 
to an increased consumption of beer and wine and not in spirits, 
because surely what other explanation do you offer for the 
consumption of spirits declining and the consumption of beer 
and wine increasing during that 12 month period, when there 
was no electronic advertising of spirits, and there was electronic 
advertising of beer and wine? 
 
You have doubtless observed and studied those figures for 
1984, and I would be happy to have your explanation of them 
and your admission that that is, to use your words, empirical 
evidence that beer and wine advertising increases consumption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think, sir, if you want to find out 
the details . . . (inaudible) . . . you’d have to question the 
minister responsible and in charge of this. He can give you 
much more detail than I can because that is his mandate, to be 
looking at the sales. 
 
The figures that I have, and I will share with you, and I have 
before, that in ’79-80, spirits, presented below are the 
Saskatchewan per capita consumption levels as compared to 11 
other jurisdictions. I gave this to you before. The spirits in 
’79-80, we were the sixth lowest compared to 11 others. In 
1983-84 — and you admit this — we were the eighth lowest in 
comparison to other jurisdictions. In wine, we were the fourth 
lowest in ’79-80 and we stayed at the same for ’83-84. In beer, 
we were the lowest and we stayed the lowest and we moved to 
the fifth lowest. And those are the figures that we have, and any 
further detail . . . Certainly you could question my colleague 
and he may have more information, but that’s the information I 
have, and as I’ve told you members of your caucus, time after 
time, that we are certainly concerned with treatment, and I’m 
bringing forth a report.  

I’ve said to your member from Regina North East — we’ve 
even made an agreement to meet to exchange the report. And I 
asked him, and I ask you, sir, to look at that report. If there were 
recommendations in that report you don’t agree with, you have 
every right as an opposition member to criticize it. Nobody 
disputes that. 
 
But on the same hand, on the same hand, as an elected 
legislator, a person who I hope is concerned with the welfare of 
our youth in this country, you have the same obligation where 
there are sound and legitimate recommendations. And I want to 
say to you, sir, these are not recommendations coming from me. 
These are not partisan recommendations. These are not Tory 
recommendations. These are recommendations of a concerned 
number of people that I’ve put together on a committee, to go 
out and look at this situation, to talk to 300 young people across 
this province, to get their input. 
 
And I say to you, and I ask you sincerely, if there are 
recommendations in there that you think should be supported, 
you can call me; you can write me. I would appreciate your 
support because I think this is a bigger thing than pure politics. I 
don’t think it’s right to be playing politics with young children 
who need help, who need help, who need their lives 
straightened around. I think that’s bigger than all of us. I think 
that’s a thing that we should put our shoulder to the wheel 
together and try and help those young people. And I ask you 
that. 
 
Certainly I can’t find the empirical evidence to indicate that 
advertising is increasing consumption. If you can, bring it to 
me; I will look at it. But I don’t know if you know if there’s 
studies of that degree around either. So I just say to you, if there 
is a problem out there in society, it didn’t happen overnight. 
You know that as well as I do. And it’s getting more 
complicated. Each and every year there seems to be new drugs, 
new things that young people are becoming addicted to. I’m 
sure five or six years ago, or eight years ago when I entered this 
legislature, I don’t think you and I ever discussed the effect of 
cocaine on our young people. It’s here today. It’s here today. 
It’s rampant throughout our society. 
 
We’ve got to sit down; we’ve got to take a look at this. We 
can’t play politics over the lives of young kids. We’ve got to 
come up with suggestions that we’ll put together to try and help 
solve that situation. We’re not going to do it overnight. I don’t 
think you expect us to. You were in government for a number 
of years; you didn’t solve it. We’ve been in government four 
years; we haven’t solved it. 
 
But I think with suggestions, with sincere appreciation of the 
problem, with all of us working together for the betterment of 
the young people of Saskatchewan, we can make a dent upon 
this, Mr. Chairman. We mightn’t solve everything, but certainly 
as elected members we will be doing what the people of 
Saskatchewan have asked us to do; to try and collectively solve 
problems that face those out there in our society, who due to 
immaturity, who due to lack of education, who due to lack of 
parental support, who due to a multiplicity of factors, have got 
themselves into jackpots that they can’t solve themselves. 
That’s what I want to do. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

777 
 

We can sit here tonight and argue and argue empirically: does 
this affect this, or does that affect this? Let me tell you, as we 
stand here and go through our intellectual arguments on 
empirical influence and proof, there’s a kid out there tonight in 
Saskatchewan, somewhere in Saskatoon or somewhere in 
Regina or in Meadow Lake, that needs some help. 
 
I think what we should be doing is letting us get on with the 
work of governing this province Let us get on with building the 
institutions that will help these young people. Let us get on with 
putting programs into our schools that will benefit them. Let us 
get on with bringing them the awareness of what the terrible 
effect of these combinations of drugs can do to these young 
lives when they’re in their prime. 
 
I know that the member opposite shares with me, he shares with 
me that desire — at least, I hope he does — to try and keep 
these young people developing their potential and to try and 
steer them away from these addictions that so many are caught 
up in. That’s what we want to do. That’s what I think the report 
will lead us to do, and I welcome the support of the opposition 
in marching together on something that I think is bigger and 
above political partisanship. 
 
We can fight politically wise over a lot of things, in health care, 
in agriculture, in many aspects of the governing of this 
province. That is the way politics are. So be it. Fine and good. 
I’ll take my shots at the opposition. They can certainly take 
their shots at me — at any of my colleagues. But I think with 
this matter of drugs and addictions in our youth, we would be 
wise to quit bantering politics about it — to stop that, and to get 
on with building a system that will benefit those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure we’re all 
indebted to the minister for this little lecture. I want, however, 
to ask him again about something which, whether he believes or 
not, is still true, that many people regard the consumption of 
alcohol as a very serious problem for young people. Many 
people believe that this society, which we have a responsibility 
to help to shape, should not be encouraging the consumption of 
alcohol by young people. And many people believe that the 
electronic advertising of beer and wine does that. Whether the 
minister subscribes to that view — he obviously does not, but 
many people do. 
 
Many people such as Dr. Saul Cohen, whose views ought not to 
be lightly cast aside; many, many of the people I have talked to 
— people who work in churches and other organizations are 
very concerned about the abuse of alcohol. They’re concerned 
about the abuse of other drugs, but right now we’re 
concentrating on alcohol. And they are concerned about 
anything which our society may do which puts the stamp of 
approval upon the abuse of alcohol. 
 
And they take the view — I know the minister does not — but 
they take the view that ads which glamorize the consumption of 
beer and wine lead young people to the belief that this is 
thoroughly, socially acceptable  

behaviour and leads . . . it is the argument, an argument which I 
share, that this adds to the amount of abuse. 
 
I may say, parenthetically, that nothing we’re doing here in any 
way stops the minister from getting on with the job of the work 
which he earlier spoke of, with respect to the abuse of other 
drugs. 
 
I put forward to the minister some statistics from 1984; he did 
not see fit to reply to them as to whether or not there was an 
increase in consumption of beer and wine and a decrease in the 
consumption of spirits. I maintain that was the situation. He 
suggests I ask the minister in charge of the Liquor Board. I’m 
not encouraged by that suggestion. The minister in charge of the 
Liquor Board, as the Minister of Health well knows, is busy 
running sales and other proposals to merchandise liquor, as his 
general manager is perfectly free to state. And whether or not 
that’s wise, we can argue when the minister’s estimates come 
up. What I’m now talking about is whether or not it is wise to 
encourage young people to consume more and more alcohol. I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, I would like you to reply to my 1984 
statistics, if you care to do so, and I would like you to do one 
other thing — would you repeat the last statistic you gave us, 
saying that dealing with the consumption of absolute alcohol? 
 
And will you agree that whereas once we were the third lowest 
in Canada, we are now the fifth lowest in Canada? And will you 
therefore agree that our relative position with respect to the 
provinces has become less favourable since we are consuming 
more alcohol in relation to other provinces? Do I interpret those 
statistics accurately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll check that figure out for you through 
the Liquor Board. I’ll check that out. There’s some ambiguity 
there for us . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, there’s one thing 
I just want to indicate . . . when the report from the Liquor 
Board here though — just to indicate to the member opposite 
who seems to be chortling away quite a bit over this serious 
topic, that the advertising of beer and wine and spirits has 
produced absolutely no increase in the sales and consumption of 
alcohol in this province. That is on the report from the Liquor 
Board. That’s what they indicate, that the advertising has 
absolutely produced no increase in the sales and consumption of 
alcohol in this province. So I just thought we’d better end on 
that note. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 
 


