


















































April 17, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 17, 1986 
 
 

681 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just before 
supper, Mr. Chairman, I was debating the motion that was 
introduced earlier today by the NDP in opposition which would 
in effect reduce the Minister of Health’s salary to $1. I had 
outlined earlier today, Mr. Chairman, that this was a credibility 
question and that of course the NDP opposition have absolutely 
run right out of questions. They have tried to regain some 
foothold in the health issue, and, Mr. Chairman, they’ve been 
totally ineffective in doing that. Subsequently, because they’re 
out of questions — the minister has provided answers — and I 
might add, Mr. Chairman, that he’s given answers to the NDP 
in opposition over and over. In other words, the NDP have been 
asking the same questions over and over because they cannot 
come up with anything new, and they’re not offering any real 
proposals for the minister and his department. They’re not 
identifying the problems. When they do occasionally identify a 
problem, they’re not providing the solutions for the Minister of 
Health. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, of course this whole matter then, 
interestingly enough, being a motion placed on the floor of this 
Assembly by the NDP, is one that in fact brings their own 
credibility into question, because they can only deal with a 
matter relating to a salary of the minister of Health. So it’s 
nothing short or more than a headline grabber, Mr. Chairman — 
that’s all it is. It’s meant to grab a headline in the next paper, 
tomorrow’s Leader-Post, I suppose. But as I said in particular it 
draws into question the credibility of the NDP in opposition. 
 
I want to, just for a moment, you know, allude to that. And I 
want to refer very briefly . . . The member for Regina Centre 
has been up asking a few questions with regards to Health. Of 
course his credibility, along with the NDP as a group in here in 
opposition, is as well in question. And it should be recalled, Mr. 
Chairman, that he one time ran in my riding and was defeated. 
He was also in this government trying to serve in the same 
capacity the Minister of Health is, whose salary he wants to 
reduce to $1, and obviously he wasn’t able to do a very good 
job because he was removed from cabinet. So I wanted to make 
mention of that, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the whole 
credibility question of the NDP in opposition. 
 
The other thing that they have found out, and I want the public 
to know this, and I made mention of this earlier today as well, 
Mr. Chairman. The NDP in opposition did some polling, and 
they found out that there was an 85 per cent approval rate of the 
Minister of Health’s department in terms of its programs and 
the services it’s providing for the people of Saskatchewan. They 
have found out, Mr. Chairman, they have found out that the 
billion dollars that we have placed for the Department of Health 
in our budget, which represents one-third of our budget, is 
effective. It’s doing the job. And, Mr. Chairman, we on  

this side of the house, of course, are very pleased, and we’re 
proud of the government’s direction and the government’s . . . 
the total accomplishment in the health care field. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
on I don’t know how many occasions, but for a very long time, 
along with other members in the opposition, asked questions 
relating to liquor advertising, and that we shouldn’t have lifted 
the ban on liquor advertising, and so on and so forth. So they 
asked a whole range of questions, Mr. Chairman, on this matter 
of liquor advertising. In relation to that, they are saying that the 
Minister of Health is stonewalling and not providing answers 
and not giving commitments to the NDP to do something about 
it. 
 
And when the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was making 
those comments, I was rather interested in listening to him, 
because I was aware of something that, of course, the whole 
House is going to be aware of, as is the Minister of Health has 
made them aware. And I want to read it into the record again. 
Wherein, Mr. Chairman, he had written a letter to the churches, 
and I want to indicate to the House what the reply was on that 
alcohol related issue that he was asking the Minister of Health 
in questioning during the estimates. And this was a reply that he 
got from the church, Mr. Chairman, and it starts out: 
 

I am prompted to write you regarding the letter you have 
sent out to churches in connection with the beer/wine ads 
which are now being shown on Saskatchewan T.V. 
stations. 

 
And he further says, and I quote, Mr. Chairman. It’s very 
important to note this. This reply to the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says — from a church: 
 

I am shocked to think you would stoop so low as to spread 
political propaganda through church pulpits! 

 
Well Mr. Chairman, so am I shocked to think that a member of 
this Assembly would use such a means to gain political support. 
And I just clearly marked in the letter, Mr. Chairman, the 
relevant parts of it. I certainly am not going to take the time to 
read the whole letter. 
 
The last two sentences of this letter in reply to the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says: 
 

Please don’t waste any more time with the negative 
approaches to a government that is working hard to make 
this a better province. 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we on this side of the House could hardly 
put it better than this reply to those low tactics of the member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
And that’s what were talking about here. We’re standing here to 
defend the record of the Minister of Health. We’re opposed to 
the motion presented by the NDP which is, as I said, nothing 
more than a headline grabber, to reduce his salary to a dollar. 
When in fact, Mr. Chairman,  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

682 
 

members of the clergy are right on side with the Minister of 
Health, with this government in terms of its health care 
approach. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there are a number of things related to 
that, that I would like to allude to. It’s interesting to note, Mr. 
Chairman, that the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
Opposition now, has clearly indicated that he’s not prepared to 
make any commitments to change the current policy that’s in 
place with regards to liquor ads. He’s not prepared to make that 
commitments. That’s the Leader of the Opposition’s position. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg holds an opposing 
view to his leader, the Leader of the Opposition, on the issue of 
liquor advertising — a totally opposing view. He says that if he 
had his way, he would change the current policy that’s in place 
by this government. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, clearly there is quite a division in the NDP 
opposition on the issue of liquor advertising. Now that kind of 
indecision on their part, and they have the nerve to raise a 
matter in here through their motion of condemnation of the 
Minister of Health and our policy. They themselves do not 
know what the policy is. And it’s fair enough if the member for 
Assiniboia and Gravelbourg wants to campaign against their 
leader, and he has. He’s done that. After their devastating defeat 
in 1982, when people rejected their policies, he flew around the 
country in his own air plane, which he owns — that’s 
interesting, but be that as it may — campaigning against the 
leader. Well that’s kind of water under the bridge. We won’t 
dwell on that and it’s kind of off the subject anyway. 
 
What’s really relevant, Mr. Chairman, what’s really relevant is 
that the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone who used to be the Premier, and the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, do not agree on a liquor advertising 
policy. They do not agree. That needs to be noted, Mr. 
Chairman. Very relevant to what this motion’s about. Very 
relevant because they condemned our Minister of Health and 
this government. They themselves, Mr. Chairman, have no 
policy, obviously. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I’m of the view that if a matter can be 
proven from two different precedents, then in fact it’s likely 
pretty well proven. So I want to, Mr. Chairman, for your benefit 
and of course the benefit of the members, draw to your attention 
yet another division in the ranks of the NDP. And I want to 
refer, Mr. Chairman, if I may just take a brief moment, the 
Hansard, page 647 in the Hansard. And I want to quote what 
the NDP opposition’s position is as it relates to this whole 
liquor advertising question. 
 
Now I have some degree of respect for the Leader of the 
Opposition, and I quote what he was said to have taken as a 
position on this whole matter of liquor advertising. This is the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chairman: 
 

We ought not to encourage the advertising of alcoholic 
beverages, and we ought not to encourage the consumption 
of alcoholic beverages in association with sports activities, 
and other activities where young people frequently gather. 
We ought not to encourage the  

consumption of alcoholic beverages at functions of which 
we are a part. 

 
That now, Mr. Chairman, and members of the House, is the 
position of the Leader of the Opposition. It’s clearly stated. It’s 
here in the print and it’s in the Hansard, Mr. Chairman. So now 
we have the Leader of the Opposition’s position again. 
 
Now I will point out very succinctly and very clearly where 
they are divided on this issue and yet have the audacity to 
challenge the minister and this government on our policy on 
liquor advertising. And yet, Mr. Chairman, they themselves do 
not have a position, and because of all of this confusion on their 
part, they can only think of one thing to do, and that’s try to 
reduce the Minister of Health’s salary to $1 for, you know, a 
means of discussion and headlines and so on. But let’s point out 
now . . . Let’s stay right on the topic of alcohol advertising and 
where the division is and why it’s improper for the NDP to be 
taking this kind of position. 
 
Now we move to the member for Shaunavon, and I have of 
course before me, Mr. Chairman, a copy of an ad that was run 
in a paper. It says at the bottom here, sponsored by the 
Shaunavon New Democrats. That’s the New Democratic Party 
as I would understand it. And it says here, as I read it — it’s 
with regards to an NDP picnic — come to this picnic on 
Saturday, August 13th, and it says, enter a team in the softball 
tournament, take part in the horseshoe pitching, play some 
bingo, ride some real ponies. You know, real ponies. I guess 
there’s other kinds, but anyway, ride the real ponies. Now then, 
what else, Mr. Chairman? What else does he say in this ad to 
point out how the difference is in the NDP? What does it say? It 
says, come and cool off with a beer and have some ice cream 
for the children in the beer gardens. 
 
Now, you know, and kiddies in the beer gardens having ice 
cream and cooling off with a beer, now this is the member for 
Shaunavon. And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that certainly is not 
what the Leader of the Opposition said, which I just quoted for 
the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. I just quoted the 
Leader of the Opposition. He said, we ought not to be at places 
where there are liquor associated events — we ought not to do 
that. Well, the member for Shaunavon, as far as I am aware, is a 
member of the NDP party, and I would understand that the 
Leader of the Opposition should be his boss. But they do not 
agree, because here it is the member for Shaunavon. 
 
(1915) 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I have pointed out very clearly that there is a 
difference in the NDP ranks on this whole question of liquor 
advertising. They themselves are not decided in their own 
minds what their position should be. I’ve given you, Mr. 
Chairman, two perfect examples to show where the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is not in agreement with the Leader of 
the Opposition, and the member for Shaunavon is not in 
agreement with the Leader of the Opposition. So, Mr. 
Chairman, I have to rest my case on that. 
 
I have to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that this motion, placed  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

683 
 

by the NDP to reduce our Minister of Health’s salary to $1, is 
nothing more than absolutely disgusting coming from a group 
of people in opposition that are wasting the time of this whole 
Assembly, when they should in fact be up asking good 
questions about health related issues, when they should be 
offering solutions as we did when we were in opposition, which 
is one of the reasons that we became government, because we 
were able to do that, Mr. Chairman. They don’t offer anything. 
They just are against everything, absolutely against everything, 
negative, critical. And, Mr. Chairman, that just isn’t acceptable 
in my mind. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, as I said, I made a number of remarks earlier 
today. I’ve had an opportunity to make a few more remarks 
early this evening. And, Mr. Chairman, I just want to tell you 
that I, for one, on this side of the House, am going to be totally 
opposed to this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Parker: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d like to add a couple of comments to this debate. I 
wasn’t going to enter into this debate because, Mr. Chairman, as 
members will well be aware, and I’m sure the viewing audience 
is well aware, the function of estimates is an opportunity for the 
members of the opposition to ask questions of our minister. So 
obviously there has to be a motive when the opposition finds it 
necessary for the members on this side of the House to carry the 
floor and carry the debate during estimates. 
 
When we look at the issue of health care, Mr. Chairman, it’s 
obvious what the motives are. The reason that the members 
opposite don’t want to ask questions about health care is 
because they’re embarrassed. And no one should know the 
problems that are being encountered in Saskatchewan as it 
relates to health care more than the members opposite who are 
responsible for creating them. 
 
Now it’s very interesting, Mr. Chairman. We have a motion 
here, presented by the members opposite, indicating that in their 
view the Minister of Health should have his salary reduced to 
$1. Now I think if anything should happen, Mr. Chairman, we 
should have a motion which offers an increase in salary to the 
Minister of Health, and I want to explain why. 
 
When one looks at the situation that exists in Saskatchewan, not 
unlike the situation existing across Canada right now as it 
relates to health care costs, we find that we’re in a situation 
where it would have probably been very justifiable for a 
government to not spend the percentage of money allocated to 
health care that this government did, and to find some 
justification in it. 
 
And I say that for this reason. When we took over government 
in 1982, Mr. Chairman, you’ll be well aware of the fact that 
high interest rates and inflation, which was running rampant 
across this country, would quite often put a government in a 
position where maybe the priorities should be that they would 
spend more money in areas of government attention that are 
going to return on the investment of the public purse. As we all 
know, money that’s spent in health care doesn’t generally return 
much to the province. It’s an expenditure which we find  

necessary. It’s a commitment that we’ve made to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s very interesting if we look at the comparison, Mr. 
Chairman, and we look at what happened in the 1970s when the 
members opposite were in power. Was health a priority with 
them? I seem to recall, Mr. Chairman, that the then Finance 
minister, the member from Regina North East, as a Finance 
minister he seemed to think it was more important that we cut 
nursing positions in this province so he could allow more 
spending to be put into the area of buying potash mines. 
 
Now clearly I have to give then our Health minister, and I think 
the citizens of this province will give our Health minister an 
awful lot of credit for carrying the fight to the table of cabinet 
and insisting that money spent on health care in this province 
not be diminished and not be reduced — in fact, be expanded to 
the point where we’re now spending over a billion dollars 
annually on health care. 
 
Now if we contrast that to the situation which we found 
ourselves inheriting as a result of the previous administration, if 
we had the member for Regina North East, for example, as the 
Finance minister, as was the case then, we wouldn’t have a 
billion dollars being spent on health care. We would have 
reduced nursing positions, which was prevalent under his reign, 
and we would find more money going into government buying 
things: buying air planes, buying buses, buying potash mines — 
you name it — but not health care. And they stand up there and 
they suggest to us that we shouldn’t be spending the kind of 
money that we’re spending on health care, and they’re 
criticizing our Health minister for spending that kind of money. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, I wonder how the people 
around Saskatchewan feel about a Health minister that carries 
their fight to the table and insists that we spend over $1 billion 
out of our $3-plus billion budget annually on health care. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Chairman, when they’re talking about 
reducing the salary of our Health minister to $1, I wonder what 
the people at the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge would think, having 
just been approved for additional funding for the dining and 
kitchen renovations at their lodge, and the activity centre 
renovations to the tune of $236,000 and another $99,000. No I 
wonder what they think, Mr. Chairman. It would have been 
very easy to postpone these kinds of payments and reduce our 
spending in health care and put it into other areas. But this 
Health minister carried the fight of these people, carried it to 
cabinet and said no, we have to have that kind of money spent 
on health care regardless of what the economic situation is like 
in this province. 
 
If we had the former minister of Finance from Regina North 
East in there, there wouldn’t be any funding for the Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And I’ll give you a classic example. 
 
In the 1978 election campaign I wonder how many people in 
Lafleche remember the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
going and campaigning on the  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

684 
 

promise that they were going to put some facilities into 
Lafleche. Well if I recall, Mr. Chairman, the NDP won that 
election in 1978, and I wonder if that facility is in Lafleche 
today. I suspect that it’s not and I suspect the people in Lafleche 
remember that it’s not, and they know that the only way it’s 
going to get there is with a Health minister such as we have on 
this side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention a couple of other 
items of interest. I think that the individuals and the people 
concerned in these various communities around Saskatchewan 
might take a different view towards the minister’s salary being 
reduced to $1, the people of Bengough, Saskatchewan, at the 
Twilight Home, who just received approval for additional 
funding; the people of the Cudworth Nursing Home, installation 
of stand-by power. It’s not a big item, Mr. Speaker; it’s $5,152. 
But I’m sure to the people of the Cudworth Nursing Home it’s a 
big item. And I think that they appreciate a Health minister 
that’s prepared to stand up, recognizing the fact that every 
minister in every department has increased demands on them 
for continually increasing funding. 
 
Now we have a minister, Mr. Chairman, who has said health 
care is going to be number one in this government. It has been 
since we were elected in 1982, and regardless of the economic 
situation that exists in the province it’s going to continue to be. 
 
And I find it very, very unusual, Mr. Chairman, that during 
Health estimates we would find that the members opposite are 
more concerned with having us debate the minister’s salary, as 
opposed to debating and questioning the issues of health on a 
general, broad range. And to me it points out, and I’m sure it 
points out to the people of this province, where the priorities are 
of the members opposite. It certainly isn’t in dealing with 
general health care issues. They’re more concerned about the 
minister’s salary. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I could go on and on, as could members 
on this side of the House, probably, for another couple of days 
on this issue. But we’re interested in getting into the business at 
hand, which is estimates, which involves the members opposite 
asking questions to our minister. And when they have to ask for 
support, as the member from Regina North East did, where he 
has to plead with the members of our back benches to get up 
and carry the debate for him because he hasn’t got any good 
questions to ask, then I’m sure that the people are wondering 
why they have these members sitting opposite. And I think that 
that’ll be reflected in the upcoming election. If they’re not 
going to be able to ask any questions, then they may as well not 
be here. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I just want to make those few comments, 
certainly, in support of our Minister of Health and his officials 
and his department who, in my estimation and I’m sure that of 
— as was mentioned — over 85 per cent of the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, is doing an excellent job. And I 
certainly will be voting against this motion, and I encourage all 
other members on both sides of the House to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to enter 
into the debate here, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the motion 
before us. 
 
I’ve noted with interest the input and the involvement by the 
members opposite, members on that side of the House. They 
seem to be very worried in terms of the motion before them, 
and they also seem to be missing a point, a very important 
point. 
 
The motion before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I should read 
it to the members opposite so that they can get back to the 
basics of what the motion is intended to be. The motion reads, 
moved by the member for Shaunavon, seconded by the member 
for Regina Centre: “That the salary of the Minister of Health be 
reduced to $1.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the Minister of Health, I say this to 
you in all sincerity: there is a point with respect to this motion. 
We are not attacking . . . I am not attacking the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley or the Minister of Health, personally. 
Perhaps the member has some integrity. Certainly he’s a family 
man and he has held his position with some respect. And like 
the member for Moosomin said earlier, when he indicated that 
he has had some respect for the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Elphinstone, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, I too carry a 
little bit of respect for that member, the Minister of Health. 
 
The point of the motion before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
point that is being missed by members on that side of the 
House. The point that is being missed is that the members of 
government, the PC government of this province, is not facing 
up to the needs of the people in Saskatchewan. They are 
running scared. 
 
They are coming out with all kinds of major public 
announcements, all kinds of government ads, all kinds of major 
promises — in desperation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in desperation 
— because they foresaw, they had some confidence just prior to 
May 17th when they came down with the presentation of the 
throne speech. They had some confidence, but all of a sudden 
that diminished a little bit. So they came out with another 
announcement, which indicated to us and the people of 
Saskatchewan that we would be presented here today . . . I 
mean on the 26th of March with a budget — the fifth 
consecutive deficit budget presented to us, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, by the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan — a budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
Minister of Health, that was loaded with higher taxes and 
billions of dollars in the red for the people of this province. 
 
In preparing the fifth budget of this legislature by the 
Progressive Conservatives of today, the members on that side of 
the House, they came out with a budget and prepared it in 
desperation — in desperation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
desperation they put together all kinds of hypothetical figures. 
In this 1986-87 budget they came out with a five-year program, 
a five-year program. 
 
And what is happening today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they 
can’t defend their budget presented by the member  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

685 
 

for Lumsden, the former minister of Justice. They cannot 
defend their budget. So what they’re trying to do today is cloud 
the issues before us. 
 
(1930) 
 
The Minister of Health, this the 22nd day of the session, the 
fifth session of the 20th Legislature . . . This is the 22nd day of 
the session and I say to the members opposite, you have not 
answered one question that has been brought before you by 
members on this side of the House. And we have raised very 
serious issues and questions before the Minister of Health, 
before the government, before the Premier. 
 
We have raised very serious questions regarding the social and 
economic development that are of concern to the people in this 
province, and certainly to people that we represent in our own 
respective constituencies. 
 
The member for Moosomin just earlier discussed how proud he 
was about the ambulance program or whatever. Just for the 
record, I want to read to him, if he’s present — I see his chair is 
vacant — but regardless, for the members and for the record 
there’s an article here published by the Sun. That is the paper 
that the member for Meadow Lake put thumbs down on just a 
couple of years ago, because it had high criticism for this 
government, because this paper was being partisan. And 
anyway, for the record I want to read for you: 
 

Jim Thomas, owner of the Thomas Funeral Home . . . has 
stopped transporting deceased persons for the Attorney 
General’s department, and nobody else seems to want the 
job. 

 
I raise this matter because the member for Moosomin raised the 
matter of ambulance and how proud he felt that his party ought 
to be, you know, with respect to health and medical services in 
this province. Well, I’ll tell you in this document, or this paper, 
it goes on to say that your government gave a little increase, a 
little raise, somewhere in the neighbourhood of $48 for loading 
and 42 cents per kilometre for ambulance service and the type 
of services that this Jim Thomas Funeral Home provide. But it 
also goes on to say that this certainly didn't please those people 
that perform that type of duty. 
 

In a letter dated March 5, made public last week, (Mr. 
Deputy Speaker) Thomas advises that the Attorney 
General’s department that “I feel it is an outright insult to 
our intelligence for your Department to even attempt to 
think that the above mentioned increase of $3.00 for Basic 
and two cents per km would even scratch the surface of 
increased costs since 1979.” 

 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what the member for 
Moosomin was bragging about. They say they have provided 
top-notch medical and health programs for this province and yet 
we have letters published publicly to people in this province 
indicating the discontent faced by a number of groups and 
organizations and individuals relating to programs associated 
with medical and health needs. 
 

And I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the motion 
before us is very serious indeed. The point we are trying to 
make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that not only have we 
raised serious issues in this legislature . . . And I want to give 
you some examples. I have raised the questions about the North 
like my colleague from Athabasca has, questions pertaining to 
the food and transportation subsidy which is a part of the 
portfolio or a part of the responsibility of the Minister of 
Health. But we have not had any answers to that question. 
 
And we have as well questioned the minister relating to the La 
Ronge hospital and the nursing care home. We have had no 
answers. We have had promises made, promises committed by 
the Premier, the member for Estevan, but nothing concrete on 
paper, concrete evidence that would indicate a commitment by 
the Conservative Party, by the PC government, by the Tories; 
nothing of substantial evidence that would lead me to believe, 
to tell my constituents that on this day, on this month, and that 
year, we can expect a facility, a first-class health facility for the 
people in this region. Nothing. Nothing but promises, desperate 
promises made prior to an election. That is what is happening, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I raised questions with regards to the community health workers 
program. And we also raised questions related to community 
visits made by medical and professional staff related to health. 
The Minister, in his response to me in some of these questions, 
indicated that plans were under way. But for the record I want 
to tell you that he also mentioned the former member for 
Cumberland, whom he has a lot of respect for and who I concur 
with, I want to say for the record that that member and his 
colleagues phoned me just last night just after the debates, and 
they indicated to me that Norman MacAuley worked hard to 
priorize that hospital, and that the need was established, and 
that he was convinced at that point in time, in 1982, that that 
project would go ahead. 
 
In fact — in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the lot assembly and 
the site development work was, in fact, already in place; in fact, 
there were three sites located. And the La Ronge hospital board 
of the day were already committed with funds to complete that 
study and to provide the architectural design. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a local consultant, a Gary Cooper from La 
Ronge, or more precisely from Waden Bay just north of La 
Ronge, was in fact solicited by the La Ronge hospital board to 
begin some architectural designs, some architectural work. 
 
Now, four years later — four years later — the minister is still 
talking about plans. He is still talking about promises made by 
the member for Estevan, a member that keeps talking about 
family, love, faith, God, and does the opposite. That’s what the 
member does. The Premier of this province, that is all he does. 
And all the members on that side of the House, that is all you 
have been doing. As far as the needy are concerned — as far as 
the people that are in need, the unemployed, the people that are 
on welfare — that is basically all you’ve done. You have had 
. . . 
 
This is why we are here today: we’re debating this motion 
before us. We’re debating a point — a point — not the  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

686 
 

personality of that person, the Minister for Health. As I said 
before, I have a certain amount of respect for that man as a 
person. But he certainly hasn’t stood up with your caucus to 
defend what he believes to be inappropriate. Has he gotten up 
against the Conservative government if he felt that it was 
justifiable? No, he’s carried the PC banner and the PC policy 
and philosophy — not like the member for Wascana, and the 
former member for Cumberland. 
 
To this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in getting back 
to that motion before us, and I keep saying the motion before 
us, because the members on that side of the House keep missing 
the point. They keep hammering away at the New Democrats 
on this side of the House, saying that we are looking for 
headlines. 
 
Well I’ll tell you something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not 
looking for headlines, certainly not the kind of headlines your 
party has been getting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — The kind of headlines your party has been getting 
is headlines like this, coming out of that Minister for Health: 
“Drug plans are threatened.” And even letters coming at us 
from all over the country: “Taylor accused of dodging the 
nurses” — the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses — “Nurses 
protest at the legislature.” 
 
And we have signatures submitted by the Saskatchewan Union 
or Nurses, 30,000 strong — 30,000 strong — supporting the 
staffing shortages that that group, that professional group, have 
with respect to their professions, with respect to help the dire 
need of new funding that is required by that association, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also have 8,800 patients waiting, beds that are direly needed 
in this province. And what are we doing? The Minister of 
Health says, oh, we’ve got this five-year program, we’ve 
earmarked $100 million. But where is to going to go? What 
portion of that money is going to go towards staffing, towards 
the other various areas of health? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about headlines, we 
certainly wouldn’t want headlines like we have against the 
Minister of Health. The headlines that I have before me 
indicating to me and to the people of this province that the 
budget presented to us on the 26th of May and the budget 
presented to us and the estimates that are now before us, being 
defended or trying to be defended by the Minister of Health — 
we certainly wouldn’t want to have these types of headlines. 
Certainly not. 
 
Here I have one that says, “Taylor accused of dodging nurses.” 
Your members on that side of the House . . . I have been very 
amused, very much amused, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to look at the 
members standing up, the back-benchers, but not the main 
cabinet members, just the back-benchers all over the areas. 
They have stood up and joined in the debate with respect to the 
motion before us — the guys that are on their way out . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I thank the member for Regina North East for reminding  

me that at least we had the member for Regina Rosemont get up 
and say a few words with respect to the budget. 
 
But mainly what they have been doing is defending the Minister 
of Health. They have not been defending their budget. They 
have not been defending their budget. That is one thing that I 
have been amused with, with respect to members on that side of 
the House. They have not been defending their budget. 
 
On the 22nd day we have not had a second reading of any Bill 
in this House. And we have not gone through one estimate, 
because we’re not getting any answers. We are not getting any 
positive co-operation. We are not getting any headway based on 
the fact that your government has no plans, no concrete plans 
for the people of Saskatchewan. The social, cultural, and 
economic conditions of the people I represent certainly are not 
being addressed. 
 
They tried to make it look as if things are very great in 
Saskatchewan. But when you look at the economic statistics, 
they look pretty dreary. And that is why today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is why today we are still debating that one item 
that was first introduced in this legislature after the budget was 
presented, that item pertaining to Health — the Health 
estimates. 
 
(1945) 
 
The members on that side of the House certainly have not stood 
up to defend the budget, but rather to defend a member, a 
fellow colleague, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 
missing the point. And the point I’m trying to make is: we in 
the House are responsible, as elected officials, to try to provide 
the type of programs and the type of policies and the type of 
legislation that people in this province want to see. They don’t 
want policies like you have today, policies that provide for the 
rich, for the wealthy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — They don’t want to see those kinds of policies. 
They want to see policy that will help the people at the local 
level, at the grass roots level, people in skid row. They don’t 
want to see Peter Pocklington getting $10 million a year out of 
this Conservative government. They don’t want to have their 
forest resources in northern Saskatchewan sold to a Washington 
firm — certainly not. This government, this Progressive 
Conservative government has sold out all the forestry rights 
north of P.A. without even consulting the people directly 
affected. That is what this government has done, and I say that 
for the record. 
 
I wanted to make a point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In estimates 
regarding Health and in the debate regarding a motion before 
us, I have noted with interest, and with a bit of embarrassment, 
a fact that we have had invitations sent to members on that side 
of the House by the medical profession, invitations to attend 
meetings in Prince Albert, invitations to attend medical 
professional meetings in Estevan. But I’ve noted with interest 
that the members for P.A.-Duck Lake, the Minister of Justice; 
and also the member for P.A.; and the member for Estevan,  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

687 
 

the Premier of this province; and the member also for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, the Minister of Health, have done nothing but 
dodge meetings pertaining and relating to medical and health 
issues. They have dodged and tried their darndest best to stay 
away, to stay clear away from the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses. They have continuously ignored their responsibilities 
— they have continuously ignored their responsibility. 
 
When people are elected into office, they’re expected to provide 
services required by their constituents and the people of this 
province. And they are also expected to provide answers. And 
as I'm speaking today regarding the issues before us, I can see 
the Minister of Health is not interested. He's got his back 
towards us. He's got his back towards us, he’s not interested. 
It’s no wonder we’ve got no medical and health program — no 
concrete program for this province. 
 
On the serious side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had experienced 
some very serious incidences since December 14, 1985. I had 
an unfortunate incident whereby my father got involved in a 
very tragic accident which put dad away, at the age of 63, on a 
permanent basis as a handicapped person. 
 
Prior to this incident he was an active person. But I had the 
occasion, this unfortunate occasion of having to be at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon, for three months. I spent the 
entire fall, after the session was over, the entire Christmas and 
New Year’s and the entire spring, close to my family. And I 
spent a good amount of time at the University Hospital and the 
Meadow Lake Hospital with my folks. 
 
And I had occasion to talk to a good number of medical staff. 
And they told me, in their own words, that they were short of 
medical professionals. Physiotherapists — you know there was 
no provision for such, there was no funding for such in Meadow 
Lake. 
 
And it’s no laughing matter. I remind members on that side of 
the House that I’m talking about a serious subject. The tragic 
accident that my father got involved in took the lives of two 
other people. Those two people happen to reside in my 
colleague’s constituency in Beauval. Two other old-times lost 
their lives. 
 
And due to the fact that we are behind in medical health 
facilities and staffing and funding, I witnessed my wife’s uncle 
pass away 20 minutes after they were able to bring him to the 
Meadow Lake Hospital. That’s nothing to be laughed at, 
members on that side of the House. That is a serious matter. 
 
Just the other day I received a call from Flin Flon-Creighton. I 
know Flin Flon is in Manitoba and I know Creighton is in 
Saskatchewan, but there’s a combination of co-operation 
between the two communities in terms of community facilities 
and services. Just the other day — and I have notes here in front 
of me — I received a call where I had to intervene because of 
the uncertainty of the minister’s department. I received a call 
whereby I had to intervene. A Mrs. Lloyd Goodman was 
refused admission to the University Hospital in Saskatoon. And 
I’m sure the minister will remember that I gave his office a call. 
I had to  

intervene on their behalf. 
 
This patient that I refer to is 58 years old, and she unfortunately 
had a mild heart attack just prior to the stroke that she had when 
she direly required some help. When she direly required an 
ambulance and a bed and some medical attention at the 
University Hospital, I had to intervene because the staffing and 
the medical services that we have in remote northern 
Saskatchewan are so inferior and so insufficient. That is what 
that side of the House has brought to the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. And they’re proud of their record. 
 
I want to say as well that very fortunately, I suppose the 
minister and his staff gave the matter some immediate attention. 
I understand today that 10 days later she was able to be 
admitted at the University Hospital in Saskatoon — 10 days 
later she was admitted. And today, very, very fortunately, Mrs. 
Goodman is in stable condition. 
 
But these are serious issues. These are matters that you just 
can’t jeer at the members on this side of the House. We have a 
responsibility the same as you guys have. I may be on my way 
out, but I’m going to carry my responsibility right to the last 
hour. That’s what we’re elected for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — And I want to give some fair warning to members 
of cabinet. You’re elected to do a job. You’re elected, not into 
cabinet, but your members have a policy within your party to 
provide certain members with a cabinet position. And they have 
a duty, and they must be responsible for all the electorate of this 
province, not just a select few — not just a select few — but all 
races and nationality and all people of this province. 
 
But what I have seen is a complete disregard for the needs of 
people that are in dire straits for help. I have seen this 
government’s performance. I have seen this government’s 
preference for the rich, for the wealthy. I have seen the policies 
of capitalism, and those policies of . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. I find the member’s 
remarks interesting myself, but I’m afraid that he’s kind of 
wandered from the topic, and I’d ask him to come back to it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I accept your ruling. 
I’m referring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again to the policies and the 
programs and the services that a government ought to provide 
to the people of this province. And when I’m referring to the 
policies of the government, and how and who it’s benefiting, I 
am saying very clearly and very concisely that they are not 
providing and fulfilling the needs of the people that are in dire 
straits in this province. 
 
And the top half of this province was supposed to be 
mainstreamed with the people in the South. We were supposed 
to be part of Saskatchewan. We were not supposed to be cut off 
and be put back there behind a jackpine curtain and left behind. 
We were supposed to be  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

688 
 

part of the mainstream of this province, mainstream of 
Saskatchewan. I think that is what the former minister for DNS, 
or the former minister for northern affairs had mentioned when 
we talked about programs for the North; when we talked about 
health; when we talked about dental care; when we talked about 
various other health programs and services. They told us then in 
those days that they would provide the kinds of programs and 
services that were available to those people living in the South 
— south of P.A. and south of Meadow Lake. 
 
But today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members on that side of the 
House have only one vision — one vision, and that is to take 
from the poor and give to the rich. That is their philosophy; that 
is their policy. The dental care programs, vision care program, 
the medical and health services that are direly needed and 
required by the people in the top half of this province, have 
been ignored, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and ignored too long. 
 
(2000) 
 
I received a letter from La Ronge, from Lisa Boychuk, 
representing the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; and other 
members of the legislature received that, and I know that 
members on that side of the House received it. And I’d be very 
curious to see just how many members on that side of the 
House signed the petition on the back of that memo. I’d be very 
interested to know just how many members on that side of the 
House signed that petition and sent it back to the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses. It’s deadly quiet on that side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they’re trying to find one member 
that supported the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
I doubt very much if there have been any members that signed 
that document and sent it back. But there were 30,000 other 
people in this province that supported the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses and their need to send the message to the Progressive 
Conservative government on that side of the House. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are they listening? Are they answering 
questions? Are they delivering the type of programs and 
services and policies that this province needs in terms of 
medical and health facilities and services and programs? 
Certainly not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that is why we have this 
motion before us. That is the point of the motion. That is the 
point of the debate. 
 
If members on that side of the House want to enter the debate 
any further, let’s debate on the point of the motion, not on the 
personality of the man, the Minister of Health. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
basically address four or five specific items as it relates to the 
motion that we have here. I want to point out the reason for the 
motion and to indicate specifically that the motion is in order 
and that it’s incumbent upon the opposition to use the 
procedures of the House when we feel that it’s appropriate in 
order to get a response. 
 
I want also to say that part of what is happening here is a  

lack of providing information. And I want to point out to the 
people of Saskatchewan that there’s a hidden agenda. There’s a 
hidden agenda that’s being adopted by Brian Mulroney, the 
Prime Minister, and his Finance minister, in collaboration with 
the provincial government and the Minister of Health here in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m going to talk about it and I’m going to 
point out what is happening in the health field. 
 
I’m going to talk also about the Department of Health here in 
Saskatchewan and why the minister has refused to answer 
questions. What he has been attempting to do is to keep a lid on 
the time bomb. The health situation in Saskatchewan is on the 
verge of blowing up in their face. 
 
You know, the other day we were in this House talking to the 
minister and we asked him: have you been meeting with the 
chiropractors? He said, oh I’ve been meeting with them all the 
time. No problem at all. 
 
The trouble is there’s no credibility, Mr. Minister. You’re not 
telling us the truth, because we met with the chiropractors and 
they said there is no communication with this government. 
 
And that day, on Friday, I drove home. And you said you had 
met and you had communications with the medical association, 
and everything was fine with the medical association. And as I 
was driving home the president of the medical association of 
Saskatchewan was indicating that they have tried to 
communicate with you and you won’t answer. They can’t get a 
communication going with you. You refuse to meet with them. 
Let’s take a look. And that’s what they said. They said that they 
want to meet with you to determine a fee schedule for the 
medical profession. You won’t meet. 
 
The same has taken place with the nurses. You virtually won’t 
go out to the communities to meet with them, to discuss with 
them. We have asked you for information as to the major effect 
of the cut in the federal government expenditures in the 
established program funding, and you have absolutely refused 
to give us the extent of the cut-back by the federal government. 
And so what you’re doing is . . . What you’re trying to do is to 
keep the lid on the problems that this department is facing in 
providing health care to the province until after the next 
election. 
 
I want to say that some members got up, and they were saying 
that what we were being is contemptuous of the process here, 
this afternoon. Well I’ll tell you that the procedure that we’re 
using here is in order. And what we’re saying is that we used it 
on one other occasion, and I want to point it out. 
 
In the last four years we’ve used it on one other occasion, and 
that was in respect to the minister, the member from Arm River, 
the minister without portfolio, the minister who was in charge 
of crop insurance. And he was like the Minister of Health; he 
absolutely refused or was incapable of answering questions in 
estimates. And we used this procedure — exactly the same — 
stating that his salary should be reduced down to $1. 
 
And do you know what happened, Mr. Chairman? The Premier 
of Saskatchewan took that seriously. He watched  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

689 
 

the performance of that minister, the member without portfolio, 
the member from Arm River, and he watched the performance 
of that member in the House, his inability to answer questions. 
And do you know what the Premier did? He took our advice 
and he tossed him out of cabinet. He wouldn’t even pay him $1. 
He wouldn’t even pay him $1. He chucked him out of cabinet. 
 
And what we are urging here, Mr. Chairman, is that the Premier 
again will be watching the performance — the lack of 
performance, I should say — of this minister. And I’ll tell you, 
given another opportunity, he'll follow our advice again. And 
he’s going to chuck this guy out of office, out of cabinet, and 
reduce it down to less than $1. 
 
You know what really has happened here is that we have a 
government that is sick with arrogance. They won the election 
in 1982, and they came in here with a huge majority, and they 
said, we can do what we want. And ever since, they said we 
don’t have to answer to that small opposition; we got a large 
majority; we’ll do what we like. And the arrogance has set in, 
and it’s starting to destroy the inner soul of that party. You can 
see it destroying that party, that government. 
 
But the sad part of it is that it’s destroying the health care that 
we have in this province, because this minister here refuses, 
one, to have communication with the health providers; and 
secondly, he fails to provide answers to the opposition. 
 
So as I indicated to you, Mr. Chairman, that this arrogance 
started at the time when they won the last election, the big 
majority that they have. They’re saying to this opposition, we 
don’t have to answer to you; we are not going to allow 
ourselves to be questioned here in this Chamber, because what 
we’re going to do is use taxpayers’ money and try to get elected 
again without answering any questions. And the arrogance and 
the big majority is what this minister typifies. 
 
And, you know, they have the audacity to come into the House 
here and say that we’re abusing the procedures. Just imagine — 
just imagine — if they know anything of the history of what has 
been happening within their ranks of their own party, they 
would have known that this is a proper procedure and can be 
used by the opposition; and they would have also known that no 
New Democrats have gone to the extent that Tories have in 
Ottawa when they actually charged the Speaker’s Chair to 
confront him, and had to be intervened by the security guards. 
And Tories talk about having respect, having respect for the 
institution of parliament. 
 
Well I want to close, Mr. Chairman, in respect to this motion, to 
make it evidently clearly why we raised it — evidently clear. 
We have been here asking questions in respect to a whole 
variety of topics. For two and a half hours I have in fact 
questioned the minister in respect to the very serious cuts in the 
established program funding by the federal government. This 
minister gave us what would be the cut in the first year, and he 
has absolutely refused to give the projected cuts that would take 
place in subsequent years up to 1990-91. 
 
And let’s face it, that minister has that information.  

Because if he hasn’t got that information, then he shouldn’t be 
the Minister of Health, because how is he going to defend our 
health care program against a federal government that is intent 
on cutting funding, if he doesn’t know those facts? The fact of 
the matter is, he’s intentionally withholding information from 
the Chamber, from the opposition, because he knows he has to 
go to an election pretty soon, because by law you have to go in 
five years on the parliamentary system. 
 
Now I know you opposite may need a little more time than that 
to get the people ready, and I don’t think you ever will. You’ve 
held office now for longer than any other government since the 
Second World War, over four years. And what you’re trying to 
do is to shut out the information. And you’re trying to govern 
by press releases, not concrete results. And the people of this 
province, I’ll tell you, are going to get the information if we 
have to sit here for another two weeks, Mr. Minister, because 
it’s your duty to inform yourself and to provide it, the answers 
to the opposition. 
 
Can you imagine when we talked about, and my colleague from 
Regina North East was talking about, alcohol consumption and 
the adverse effect of the government opposite’s advertising 
policy; and he asked him, can you give us some of the statistics 
relating to the consumption among young people? 
 
And do you believe it or not that that minister refused even to 
provide those statistics? Is he that disinterested in the young 
people of this province not even to be able to provide that 
information? I doubt it. He knows what the advertising has done 
and he’s hiding that information, because he will be damned by 
the people and the parents of young people who are drinking 
more because of advertising of alcohol. 
 
So you’re hiding the information. That’s what’s the problem. 
And we go on with asking in respect to the nursing staff 
shortages, cuts in mental health. We talk about the fresh food 
subsidy in the North. We talk about the waiting lists. And on 
and on we ask with very, very little results from the minister. 
 
And certainly you know, if you look and follow what is being 
reported in the papers, there’s no doubt that there’s problems in 
the health field. 
 
(2015) 
 
“Tories absent from meeting (and this is with the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) — won’t attend.” We go on and we see that, 
“Patient calls often handled by volunteers” — a problem. Here 
you have an ad by the . . . 
 

Quality health care is your right. Patient care in 
Saskatchewan hospitals is declining. (Patient care in 
Saskatchewan hospitals is declining.) Nurses have 
documented 600 incidents since 1980 where they believe 
patients were at risk because of inadequate staffing. Nearly 
two-thirds of those incidents occurred in 1985. 

 
I guess there is reasons why this minister won’t answer 
questions. This is an ad that has been put out by the  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

690 
 

nurses. “Help nurses defend it.” “Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses . . . is fighting to change this dangerous situation.” 
 
Obviously the minister won’t give us details, because the health 
care is deteriorating at a dangerous rate here in Saskatchewan. 
“Saskatchewan patient care falling behind” — another headline. 
“Hospital staffing essential.” “SUN not convinced that staff 
plan will work.” 
 
But then there’s one other headline here: “Expensive exercise.” 
And when it came to providing the minister with some 
propaganda, he had some money. And that’s in respect to his 
$41,000 public relations — sending out speeches that no one 
wants to read or in fact wanted to hear. 
 
Here’s another one. “Government avoiding its responsibilities.” 
“Hospital said running out of fat.” “Hospitals face soaring 
insurance premiums.” “Seventy-seven beds lost,” over in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And this is the situation, and they don’t want to . . . And what 
they’ve decided is what this government would like is for the 
minister to come into the House here and go very quietly 
through his estimates — no probing by the opposition — give 
general answers and no specifics so that the public won’t be 
informed, and try to keep it under lid until after the next 
election. 
 
But let’s take a look at where the health care is. It’s in a sorry, 
sorry state. Who’s running at you, Mr. Minister? The union of 
nurses are running at you. You won’t even meet with them. 
You’re scared to. The medical profession want to meet with you 
and you won’t meet with them. The chiropractors want to 
negotiate their fee schedule and you won’t meet with them. 
Administrators and health providers want to meet with you and 
you won’t. And you come into this House and you won’t 
provide any answers. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it’s 
not fair. 
 
The opposition has a duty and I’m going to tell you that we’re 
going to carry out that duty no matter how long it takes. And if 
you want to come clean with it, with the facts, if you want to 
inform yourself, we can wrap this up in a relatively 
straightforward manner. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you’re not going to deceive the 
people of this province, because health care has been too 
important to them. They depend on us to make sure that this 
Tory wrecking crew doesn’t undermine the health care of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll stand here as proudly and say that the New Democratic 
Party and the New Democratic government gave to 
Saskatchewan quality education. And I’ll say that one of the 
great leaders of Canada, Mr. Tommy Douglas, led the way in 
developing a health care in Saskatchewan that was copied 
across Canada. And I’ll tell you that New Democrats are proud 
of their health record. And I’ll tell you we’re going to stand in 
this legislature and fight for the people of this province that they 
continue to get the best health care that money can provide. 
 
And let us be perfectly frank, Mr. Minister. We want answers 
from you and we want specific answers. I don’t think you have 
the right to not provide information in the  

massive slashing of funding that the federal government is 
anticipating. They are anticipating cutting back $2 billion in 
funding of health and secondary education. And I say to you, 
Mr. Minister, that what we put forward here is to draw to the 
attention of the Assembly and to the people of the province 
what is happening, basically in the undermining of the health 
care system in Saskatchewan — that what you are doing is 
hiding the facts. You’re hiding the hidden agenda of the federal 
government which are not going to continue to participate in 
providing first-class health care and education across Canada. 
You know that they’re going to be cutting hundreds of millions 
of dollars from the funding budget towards health care and 
you’re trying to keep that quiet until you can sneak into, 
possibly into another election. And then the people of . . . it’s 
too late. 
 
And so what I’m saying to you, the reason I raise this motion is 
to bring to the attention of the people of this province: 1) the 
problems that are developing in the health care under your 
administration; 2) your basic inability or unwillingness to 
provide information because you’re protecting your 
counterparts in Ottawa which are determined to undermine the 
health care; and 3) you’re afraid to provide concrete specific 
answers because you know that the medical profession are after 
you, you know the chiropractors are after you, you know that 
the union of nurses are after you. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, when you call, when we have 
the next election, the people of Saskatchewan will have an 
opportunity to determine whether or not they are satisfied with 
your performance in that particular portfolio. And I can assure 
you, I can assure you that in speaking to the people across this 
province that there is a tremendous concern with what is 
happening in the health care in this province. 
 
So accordingly I would think that the motion is in order, and I 
would ask all of the hon. members in the back benches of that 
government side to take this opportunity — to take this 
opportunity — take this opportunity to reduce the arrogance of 
the front benches. I’ve talked to many of you and you indicated 
that they don’t in fact even discuss, they don’t even discuss 
with you the directions that they’re taking. And here is an 
opportunity for you to join with us to make it perfectly sure that 
this minister performs as is required in the House, of providing 
the opposition with the needed information. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 6 
 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Lingenfelter Shillington 
Koskie Yew 

 
NAYS — 22 

 
Birkbeck Martens 
McLeod Hodgins 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Parker 
Katzman Hopfner 
Pickering Weiman 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

691 
 

Folk Rybchuk 
Myers Caswell 
Hepworth Baker 
Dirks Sauder 
Klein Swenson 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We now will return to item 1 of the Health 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
want to follow up on some questions we were asking and have 
been asking for the last few days, and which led to the motion 
that was put forward earlier, which 21 members of the 
Assembly decided to vote against. 
 
(2145) 
 
I know that the minister will have had time to reconsider his 
position on this important issue. It’s one which led to a rally on 
the steps of the legislature. And everyone saw the pictures in 
the Leader-Post, and the many thousands of postcards that were 
sent in by people from across the province to the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, who have been expressing concern in ads in 
the newspapers. Many, many thousands of people responded to 
them in saying, yes, in fact, we want more nursing staff in our 
hospitals. 
 
And I think it’s interesting as well, that even after the February 
25th news release from the minister which outlined some 
staffing that he was going to put in place, that the nurses did not 
have confidence that he would come forward with the 
announcement and believed it to be only a press release and 
continued on their campaign to get bedside nursing. 
 
And I want to read from that press release of February 25th, and 
then I think we’ll be following it up, Mr. Minister, if you can 
clarify and list the places where these nurses will be at now that 
the budget is in place and we’re dealing with the estimates of 
your budget. And there’s absolutely no reason why you can’t 
come forward with which hospitals will be getting the staffing. 
 
But this news release was issued on February 25th of ’86, Mr. 
Chairman, and the headline is, “100 million for patient care.” 
And we know full well that the leader of the Liberal Party took 
credit for it or tried to take credit for it. And everyone was 
wondering what he was doing at that time getting into bed with 
the Minister of Health in trying to take the credit for a press 
release when there was no positions attached to it. 
 
And the press release basically says: 
 

A $100 million program to enrich hospital and special care 
home services was announced today by Health Minister 
Graham Taylor. The five year program which will provide 
funds for services, staffing, and equipment will have two 
major components. Firstly, $40 million is being made 
available over the next four years to enrich patient care 
services in hospitals. 

 

Now this is the portion that we want to talk about, the portion of 
40 million which will be made available over four years to 
enrich patient care service in the hospitals. And Taylor also 
said: 
 

. . . there are three main goals for those funds: to reduce 
waiting times for surgery; to provide new equipment and 
diagnostic services; and to substantially increase 
patient-care staff including the provision for 500 additional 
nursing positions. 

 
Now specifically you said 500 nursing positions. And what I 
want to know is, this year in this budget, the first year of the 
four-year plan, how many of those positions are now in place 
and being announced to the hospitals? That’s nursing staff, if 
you can give me that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, Mr. Chairman, my 
officials are working with the members of the administrators of 
the hospitals to work out where the greatest needs are and what 
numbers of staff would be required in the various hospitals. 
 
It’s our policy to work with the hospitals to decide that — not 
for me to sit in here in Regina and dictate those figures. And at 
this time we’re in those consultations but the figures are not 
available. We’re just going through the process now. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there we go again. 
 
We’re simply not able to get this minister to respond to a very 
important question that is being raised by nurses around the 
province. It is being raised by doctors around the province who 
are unable to do surgery because they don’t have nursing staff. 
 
And I say to you, how many nursing positions are available in 
this budget? Is 500, as you say in this press release, the correct 
number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I’ve said many times in here, there’s 
approximately 300 for this year, and we’re working it out with 
the hospitals at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And how many dollars will these 300 
positions — nursing positions — you’re indicating here that 
they’re nursing positions. How many dollars will be allocated to 
funding these 300 nursing positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In the neighbourhood between 10 and 
$12 million. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister says between 10 and 12 
million. We’re now dealing with the estimates of your 
department. Now we’re talking about $1 million difference. 
Now in dealing with a subvote, you must have clearer numbers 
than that, because in writing up your budget — I’ve done 
budgets before, and you don’t write in there 10 or $12 million. I 
would like the number that you’ve written into your budget for 
this increased nursing staff, because I want to know how much 
you’re going to spend. Lord knows that when we’re $2 billion 
in the hole, it’s this kind of budgeting that has led us to that —  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

692 
 

between 10 and $12 million. 
 
And what I want to know is, from your officials through you, 
what the number is. Is it 10.9 million? What number do you 
have written in your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, as I say, we’re in consultation with 
the hospitals. I can indicate that it’s in that ballpark, that we’re 
going to be . . . what the figure will be. But certainly there may 
be some support staff that are needed at some hospitals. That’s 
why I give a figure somewhere between 10 and $12 million. 
Because that’s what we’re doing is, we’re sitting down with the 
hospitals and saying, what is the best mix of staff that you need 
to provide the patient care that I want to see in your hospitals? 
And that varies from hospital to hospital. 
 
But certainly for nurses we have indicated a figure. But there 
may be certain number of support staff that are non-registered 
nurses that the hospitals also need, and we’re looking at 
providing that also. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, if the Minister would just tell me 
what number, what amount he has written in the budget. I very 
well know that during the year you may have to change that 
number upwards to meet additional pressures. But at this time 
— at this time, Mr. Minister — what have you written into your 
budget for additional nursing staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, we have a 
minimum of $10 million for nursing staff. And as I said, there’s 
another component there for support staff, and we’re working 
that out with hospital boards. It’s the boards that decide how 
many people they need in their hospitals. My officials are 
meeting with the base hospitals at this time to work this 
component out. 
 
So, you know, the member opposite can stand up and say, well 
why don’t you have an exact figure. Well I tell you why we 
don’t have an exact figure. I’ll tell you why we don’t have an 
exact figure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if they want to 
shout and yell from their seats, as they do at all times, then we 
will be here a long time. We’ll be here a long time. You just go 
ahead and continue the type of behaviour that you are so typical 
of, that the school children of this province are writing to us 
about, shouting and yelling from their seats. Now if they want 
to hear the answer, fine. If they want to shout and yell, just go 
right ahead and do that, but make up your mind which way 
you’re going to go. 
 
Now I’ve said there’s a minimum of $10 million for nursing. 
I’ve also said that we have between $10 and $12 million in the 
budget, because there may be other support personnel that are 
needed to complement that nursing contingent. That seems 
logical to me. We’re sitting down with the hospitals and 
working that out. We’re working those figures out with them so 
that we can best equip those hospitals with the personnel they 
need. 
 
Now I know the NDP would like to say, there is this many 
dollars, and Mr. Hospital Administrator, or Mrs. Hospital 
Administrator, that’s what you get, shut up about it, and don’t 
ever ask for anything else. That’s the way they ran the hospitals. 
That’s why the hospitals had cuts. I’ve read  

this out many times and I’ll do it again. In 1976 a 5 per cent cut, 
a dictate coming out from the government of the NDP 
government of Allan Blakeney, that dictate coming out saying 
you’re going to be cut five or six nurses in this hospital and so 
on. 
 
We don’t operate that way. We put money into the budget. We 
say we will sit down with you and we will develop a pattern of 
delivery of service for you that will best satisfy your hospital. 
That’s what’s going on now, that’s what true consultation is. 
And that’s how you build a proper health care system — sitting 
down with those boards that are duly nominated boards and 
working out a pattern of staffing that will satisfy the operation 
of that hospital, rather than the dictates and the slashes and 
vicious cuts of the NDP in 1976. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But the minister is now indicating that 
it’s $10 million for nursing staff, and it’s taken a long time, a 
long time to get that number, and it’s not 10 or 12 million for 
nursing staff. We have now determined it’s 10 million. A 
minimum of 10 million, that’s what you’re saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, in talking about antics in the house, I think you’re 
remiss in not referring to your behaviour in this committee, 
which has been less than impressive. And I’ve had people in the 
gallery watching you the other night, when you were going 
through your process of making faces at members of the 
opposition. And I want to say that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A cheap shot. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well you say it’s a cheap shot. Obviously 
when you get up and talk about the antics of the members of the 
opposition and then when somebody refers to your antics, then 
you’re hurt. I say, obviously your behaviour in this committee 
is less than impressive. 
 
But I wanted to ask you: the 300 nursing staff that you are now 
saying you’re going to hire this year, or fund this year with the 
$10 million, are those bedtime nursing staff, all 300 of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, wherever the hospitals figure 
that those nurses can be best utilized. Some will be in operating 
rooms, some will be in neonatal and in recovery, and in various 
areas. Some of them will be bedside nurses — not bedtime 
nurses but bedside nurses — and the deployment of those will 
be up to the decision of the hospitals working in concert with 
my officials. And I think that’s the way it should be. After all, 
Mr. Chairman, there’s many dedicated people out there in 
Saskatchewan that are on hospital boards. They want to provide 
the best possible service they can for their hospital. So we’re 
sitting down . . . We said we will put up a $40 million package, 
a very substantial commitment to staffing. You can see that 
there’s between 10 and $12 million of that will be spent in this 
year. 
 
And the hospitals are working that out in conjunction with my 
department. And until those negotiations and discussions are 
complete, I can’t say where each nurse is going to be. But I can 
give you some generalized ideas: that there’s going to be some 
in operating rooms — we’re  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

693 
 

opening some new operating rooms — there’s going to be some 
dealing with people who’ve gone through by-pass operations; 
there’s going to be some dealing with people that have cancer 
operations, cancer treatment; there’s going to be some in 
pediatric wards, with children; there’s going to be some dealing 
with elderly people in nursing homes and in hospitals. They will 
be deployed. 
 
And I feel . . . I have confidence — maybe the members 
opposite don’t — but I have confidence in sincerity of the 
hospital boards. I think they are on boards, these people, and 
have taken up this commitment to try and have their hospital, 
whether it be the University Hospital of Saskatchewan or 
whether it be a small hospital in Small Town Saskatchewan, I 
believe that those board members have a dedication to operate 
that hospital to the best of their ability. And we want to sit 
down and consult with them and not to dictate to them. 
 
So, for me to be able to tell you tonight where each nurse will 
be, I can’t do that. And I don’t think it would be fitting that I 
would be able to. Because if I could do that now, when the 
process has started on April the 1st, if I could do that now, that 
would just simply be saying that the ministry of Health and the 
Department of Health sit in Regina without ever consulting with 
the local conditions and decide how many nurses are going to 
be in each area and each hospital. I don’t think that would be a 
wise way to deploy professional nursing staff. I believe that to 
sit down and consult with the hospitals, the administrators and 
the boards, is going to come up with the type of mix that will 
best serve Saskatchewan health care. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister in his answer indicated that 
some of these nurses would be in new operating theatres. It was 
my understanding that the $40 million we were debating and 
discussing . . . that they would be in enrichment in existing 
hospitals. Now here again, you’re not being very clear as to the 
allocation of the 40 million which would be enrichment for 
existing facilities, and now you’re saying that part of these 
nurses will be in new operating theatres. 
 
(2100) 
 
And I want to go back and get this clear, Mr. Minister, when it 
comes to the 300 new positions, nursing positions, is this the 
total of the new construction and enrichment, or are you talking 
about just enrichment for existing facilities? Because the nurses 
want us to make sure that we’re clear on this when we’re 
discussing it — that you’re not talking about a combination — 
because then it’s much less relevant to the needs of the patients. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly the vast majority of the 
positions are enrichment positions. And you questioned about 
operating rooms. We’re opening an operating room at 
University Hospital and staffing it, one that had previously 
never been opened under the prior government. But we’re going 
to be opening that and staffing it, so that’s where your 
additional operating room will be. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well maybe the minister will indicate to 
the committee how many of these positions will be enrichment 
and how many will be in new  

construction in the coming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In the hospitals there will be 331 
positions are enrichment and 130 enrichment in the special care 
homes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, when you say 331 
enrichment for hospitals and 130 for nursing home enrichment, 
now obviously you must have a plan of how you’re allocating 
and offering this to hospital boards. I believe that, as Minister of 
Health in the department, you must have some plan and criteria 
of what you’re proposing the base hospitals and regional 
hospitals and rural hospitals. And I wonder if you could outline 
to me, let’s say the Regina hospital, what is being offered to 
them in terms of nursing positions in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s dictated to a certain extent, and that’s 
what their consultation is, of what the needs of that hospital is. 
Certainly we’ve discussed waiting lists. I’m concerned about 
waiting lists at the University Hospital. Therefore, we’re 
opening another operating room. We’re opening an operating 
room there. That’s enrichment. And certainly I would see if 
you’re staffing in your operating room, there may be more go 
there than to another hospital that has different needs. So we 
have to sit down and that’s what we’re doing — discussing with 
the hospitals what their needs are and how they would deploy 
these people to best improve the service of their facility. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And the question that I asked was: at the 
Regina General, how many nursing positions are being offered 
in the negotiations that you’re doing with them? How many 
nursing positions are you offering to the Regina General? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You take the Regina General Hospital, 
for example. We’re in discussion with them at this time to 
decide on how much money that they feel they need to put the 
positions that they think they require into place. What those 
positions will translate and where they will be is certainly the 
prerogative of the board and the administration of the hospital. 
 
My officials are discussing the lump sum of money that would 
translate into positions. But at this point in time, until the board 
has decided, and the administration, where they are going to, 
how they are going to deploy those moneys, I wouldn't’ know 
how many positions there are at the General Hospital that 
would be enrichment positions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well then let’s go at this a little slower, 
then, and we will see if you can answer the question: how much 
money is being offered? Now you say that you’re negotiating. 
But obviously when we’re doing estimates, the public would 
like to know what kind of money you’re offering to hospitals in 
terms of increases of funding. You’ve announced a program. 
You took the political credit for announcing a $100 million 
plan. And now two months later we’re here asking questions 
about how it’s going to be divvied up. 
 
There are many people who are saying that they don’t believe 
you. Now this is your opportunity to come  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

694 
 

forward and say, yes, the General Hospital, we don’t know 
exactly how many nurses they’ll be able to hire, but there’s how 
much money that we are allocating out of this $10 million in 
this new fund. 
 
The question I will then put: for nursing staff, how much money 
are you planning to offer, or are you offering, to the General 
Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate that they’ve been in 
the process of working out the amount of money that is 
necessary for the General Hospital — for various aspects, not 
only for staffing. But they’re reviewing their total budget. As I 
said, we’re under a global budget review. But at this point in 
time, they haven’t come to a concrete figure as to what it would 
be, so we wouldn’t be able to indicate to the opposition what 
that figure is. I mean, I wouldn’t want to mislead anyone by 
giving a wrong figure. All I can say is that we are in the process 
of developing that. But what it is at this point in time, we don’t 
have a hard and fast figure. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister could 
indicate which subvote this $10 million is in, and we’ll go at it a 
different way. Because obviously when you’re dealing with an 
estimate book and you’re trying to work out the budget and 
we’re asking questions, you simply can’t say to us, we don’t 
know. 
 
Like, obviously, when you did up the budget, your officials 
knew how much was going to this hospital, how much was 
going to that hospital. Otherwise this book is useless, because 
the numbers are written in here, and obviously you must know 
what you’re proposing for various hospitals. The same as 
school boards will know how much money they’re getting and 
municipalities will want to know how much money they’re 
getting. The questions that we’re being asked to put to you are: 
in terms of the General Hospital, how much money are you 
proposing to spend on this program? The $100 million for 
patient care, how much of that will go to the General Hospital? 
 
Like, obviously, when you did up the budget your officials 
knew how much was going to this hospital, how much was 
going to that hospital. Otherwise this book is useless, because 
the numbers are written in here and obviously you must know 
what you’re proposing for various hospitals, the same as school 
boards will know how much money they’re getting, and 
municipalities will want to know how much money they’re 
getting. The questions that we’re being asked to put to you are: 
in terms of the General Hospital, how much money are you 
proposing to spend on this program? The $100 million for 
patient care — how much of that will go to the General 
Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You asked for which subvote this is 
under. If you’d turn to page 52 and look at payment to 
Saskatchewan hospital services plan of $12.9 million, that’s the 
subvote where the money is in. 
 
Let me illustrate to you again or try to explain because I don’t 
think you totally understand how these budgets are worked out. 
There’s money there for incremental and for enrichment 
positions, and we work with the hospitals. I  

mean, you know that these are an estimate of the expenditures, 
and certainly the budget comes in on the 1st of April. There’s 
nothing new with this, Mr. Chairman. We’ve done this year 
after year; sit down and work with the hospitals to see what 
amount of money of that they need. 
 
Now the needs and the demands of the various hospitals vary 
considerably because of, number one, the type of procedures 
that they do; number two, because of waiting lists and other 
factors that they have. So there is no universal formula. I think 
the members opposite think there should be a universal formula 
that you just look at the hospital and you slot them in the 
formula and say, aha, that’s what you’re getting. 
 
Well we certainly don’t operate that way. We’re sitting down 
with them and we’re deploying that money where we can best 
service the needs of the people in Saskatchewan so that their 
hospitals can provide the best service to them. I think that is the 
way to do it in consultation with hospital boards and 
administrators. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I understand 
consultation. I mean, we’ve all been through that process. But 
what I’m saying, of the 12.9 — last day you were just giving 
the number of 12 million and you wouldn’t answer any further. 
Now we’ve got it broken down, 10 million for nursing staff and 
something else for contingency. And I understand that now. 
You’re giving a little more information. 
 
But obviously when you worked out the $10 million, you would 
have broken it down into an estimate on base hospitals, those 
hospitals in the city, and the regional hospitals, and the rural 
hospitals. And if we can just slowly go along here we’ll try to 
get then. Let’s not say the General Hospital, let’s say the base 
hospitals ;in Regina. How much did you estimate of the $10 
million for nursing staff would go to the three basic hospitals in 
Regina? 
 
Then after we get that maybe we can break it down one by one 
and see what you’re allocating because you must have done an 
estimate. Because that’s how you do budgets and that’s why we 
have many thousands of people hired by governments to do this 
planning and research and put together budgets. Then we come 
here in this House and we ask questions and you’re supposed to 
give the answers. Then we see whether the money’s being spent 
right and that may not seem like a very important process for 
you. But I’ll tell you if we don’t get the answers, then people do 
wonder what we’re doing here. 
 
What I would like to know is if you can give me an indication 
in the city of Regina, at the base hospitals, how much of this 10 
million is being offered to the three base hospitals in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly the member opposite doesn’t 
listen to the answers, Mr. Chairman. I’ve told him before, we’re 
in a process of developing with the hospitals what they need. 
We’re working on that in the month of April — the fastest it has 
ever been done. We’re in negotiations and discussions with 
them. I can’t stand here and say it’s this many dollars because it 
hasn’t been all completed at this point in time. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

695 
 

Certainly we believe that $12.9 million will look after the needs 
of the hospitals. But how it fits into this hospital and that 
hospital, and Carrot River and Shaunavon and Kipling, we 
haven’t got that worked out at this point in time. We’re 
discussing with them. 
 
We have said here — and that’s what the estimates are — we 
have said as a government we are going to put $12.9 million 
into the payment to the Saskatchewan hospital services plan. 
That’s what an estimate is. These people don’t seem to 
understand. We’re saying that’s what we’re going to do. Now if 
you don’t think that’s enough, stand in this House and say it 
should be more, and we’ll debate that. That’s the purpose of 
estimates. 
 
But to try and say here before we’ve dealt with the hospitals, 
how much is going to Carrot River, how much is going to 
Shaunavon, how much is going to Kipling, before we sat down 
and talked with those hospitals — you just simply can’t give 
that kind of an answer, and I would hope the member opposite 
would realize that. If he disputes $12.9 million, stand up here, 
and that’s what the estimates are for. 
 
There are various subvotes here, Mr. Chairman, as you well 
know — grants to hospitals and health centres. And we can 
look through the whole estimates here. And any one of those 
figures, I’m quite willing to debate those and describe those to 
the member. And if he doesn’t think it’s enough, fair it be to tell 
me that, bring that point. If he believes there are suggestions 
that should come forward that can help improve delivery of 
service, let’s hear his ideas. But to pick away at something that 
hasn’t been resolved, something where consultation is going on 
with the hospitals . . . 
 
Now if they don’t want consultation, be man enough to stand up 
and say, I think you’re wrong in having consultation. Do that. If 
you don’t believe with this, if you don’t think to sit down with 
the hospitals and jointly work out how we can best satisfy the 
needs of that hospital — and those people who run that hospital 
understand those needs — then stand up and say that. You 
know, that can be a point we can argue. I believe it’s the right 
way to go. But to try and insist what is the figure when the 
consultation is going on — how do we know? How do we 
know? 
 
It’s like this. If you were going to be selling a horse, Mr. 
Chairman — all right? And the member wants to know, how 
much did you sell the horse for, before you and I made the deal. 
I mean, how on earth could you say to me, I want this, I’m 
going to get this much for my horse, until we’d had a 
consultation and come to a conclusion? What he’s trying to ask 
me to do is say how much are these hospitals getting before we 
ever sit down and have it all worked out with the hospitals. We 
just simply can’t do that. 
 
(2115) 
 
But I say: if you don’t believe that to be the way to do it, if you 
believe it’s better to sit in here in Regina, take a universal 
formula and say, I believe that Regina General should get 13.2 
per cent of something, and I believe  

Saskatoon St. Paul should get 14.67 per cent of something — 
maybe if they want to do it that way, that’s fine and dandy. 
 
I believe to sit down and consult. And I can’t give him a figure 
because we haven’t finished that consultation, and a decision 
hasn’t been made yet. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I find it interesting 
how to saddle a horse. I’ve done . . . but I like your way of 
doing it. It sounds like a very interesting way to saddle a horse. 
Now if we could get back to the funding of base hospitals. But 
what were you doing with your horse? 
 
An Hon. Member: — He was selling it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh, you were selling it. I thought you 
were talking about saddling it. 
 
I would like now to get back to the funding of base hospitals, 
which is an important issue to nurses, and more importantly to 
the 8,000 people waiting to get into surgery in Saskatoon. 
 
What I would like to ask you is by category. Now obviously 
you may not have each individual hospital. I know you have 
some because the hospitals are now telling us that the 
negotiations are completed. You’re not being honest in saying 
that the negotiations are complete for none of the hospitals. In 
the days to come we will be bringing those to you, because we 
now have some of them. 
 
But in terms of the base hospitals, how much of the money, the 
10 million, is going to go to base hospitals? Now you may be 
able to say at this point you don’t have all the base hospitals 
worked out. I know you have some of them worked out and that 
an agreement has been reached, because they’re now telling us. 
And as the days go by we will be bringing those into you and 
making our arguments. 
 
But for the base hospitals, how much of the $10 million 
enrichment plan will go to the base hospitals in Saskatoon and 
Regina? I’ll make it broader yet — the base hospitals in 
Saskatoon and Regina. And I understand as well that you may 
pay a little more or a little less. But what is your estimate? This 
is estimates, I understand that. How many dollars will go to the 
base hospitals in the two cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly Mr. Chairman, again it’s 
an example of the opposition in this House not listening. Within 
the last 15 minutes, the member opposite has been talking about 
bedtime nurses, when they were talking about bedside. Check 
Hansard. He said, “bedtime.” 
 
I talk about selling a horse; he gets up talking about saddling a 
horse. I mean, how on earth do you get a point across to a 
member who either suffers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
if you want to yell, that’s fine. If you want to shout and yell, if 
that’s the type of behaviour that you want to persist in — 
yelling from your seats, loud outbursts from your seats — you 
continue. Because I’ve got lots of time to wait here until we get 
onto the  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

696 
 

parliamentary way of handling estimates. 
 
So if they just want to shout and yell, just please go ahead and 
do it. But it’s an indication of the attention that is paid to the 
responses by the member opposite. 
 
Now he says: what amount of money is available to the base 
hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon? Certainly, Mr. Chairman, 
there will be different numbers and different figures with both 
hospitals — with all hospitals. 
 
There’s the concern for waiting lists, a concern for waiting lists 
in Saskatoon, so it would seem to me logical that there may be 
more money provided to some of the hospitals in Saskatoon. 
Because the waiting list problem, for some reason which we 
don’t know, is greater in Saskatoon than it is in Regina. 
 
But until the boards have ratified, until the boards have ratified 
those agreements, Mr. Chairman, there’s nothing that has been 
. . . I can’t report anything because there is no agreement of 
what it would be. 
 
My officials are working with the hospitals but there is no 
figure that I could put out at this time. And it won’t be right if I 
did. Because until the boards . . . Now they may think that the 
boards shouldn’t run hospitals. That’s what it seems to be 
coming across to me. I believe that the board should have that 
responsibility, and they do. 
 
So therefore until whatever figures in negotiations have been 
ratified by the hospitals, there is no figure to report. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I do want to apologize to the 
minister for not understanding his horse story. I really — you 
know it’s very important to the estimates that we follow that 
closely. 
 
And I will try . . . Next time you tell about horses I will try to 
follow closer. 
 
But I want to know when you come to estimating how much 
money is going to be spent in the base hospitals in Saskatoon 
and Regina for nursing staff, you do have an estimate. 
Obviously you do. You can’t plan a budget and not have an 
estimate for base hospitals, for regional hospitals, and for rural 
hospitals. You have to have it. You can’t come to this 
committee and say, we didn’t estimate how much we were 
going to allow. Now you can say, I don’t know how much it’s 
going to be within a $10 thousand number for the Regina 
hospital, and I can appreciate that because you may be 
negotiating on some of them. But certainly you must have an 
estimate for the base hospitals. 
 
How much of this 10 million will be going to the base hospitals 
in Regina and Saskatoon for increased nursing staff? And when 
you say you don’t know, well what do you know about the 
estimates? You don’t know how much the federal government 
is proposing to cut back. Manitoba and all the other provinces 
do. Here you’re spending over a billion dollars and we say, how 
much money is used of this $10 million for new nursing staff in 
the cities? I don’t know. 
 
I don’t know how we can go at this differently. What are  

we doing here? If you can’t give any answers, why don’t you let 
the member from Morse or the member from Rosthern come to 
your place and give us some of the answers. Because if you 
don’t want to do it, I’m sure there are many of the 
back-benchers who are capable of doing it. Or your former 
Legislative Secretary from Moosomin. He would be able to say, 
we estimated approximately, and then give the number for base 
hospitals out of the 10 million. And that seems reasonable. And 
then you would go on and you would negotiate and you’d come 
up with an agreement with the hospitals. 
 
Now I understand your consultation that you’re saying you do. I 
don’t agree that you’re doing it all the time because the doctors 
say you aren’t and the nurses say you aren’t. But at any rate, 
we’ll ignore that comment that you made about how much 
negotiating you do. 
 
The question is: how much did you estimate for the base 
hospitals for increased nursing staff of the 10 million you’re 
telling us that you laid on the table or that you’re putting 
forward for us to approve? Because it makes it very difficult for 
members of the opposition to vote on a number when you won’t 
tell us what the number is — because we’d like to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, you know if we had more time it 
might be advantageous to give that young man a little bit of 
horse sense. What he could benefit from, I think, is some horse 
sense. But that may take a long time to do something of that 
nature. 
 
But I want to tell you this, Mr. Chairman. In regard to the 
amount of money, and of course it’s right in the estimates, 
$12.9 million is the amount we estimate that we will need for 
the SHSP for the staffing, and that’s the enrichment is in there. I 
can’t give a figure of what it is for the base hospitals because 
we haven’t worked it out. And as I say, the needs vary from 
hospital to hospital. 
 

I can tell the member that a point from where we would start — 
and this may help him; I don’t know — a point from where we 
would start, if he would look back to the breakdown of the 
hospital expenditures between base and other hospitals over the 
past years, he will find out that about 55 per cent, 
approximately 55 per cent of the budget towards hospitals of 
the SHSP budget goes towards base hospitals. So I suppose 
that’s the basis from where we’re starting. 
 

But what that works out to, then it’s very, very difficult to say 
that when we haven’t come up with the final figure. I don’t 
know what the man opposite expects me to say when we 
haven’t come to an agreement yet, and it hasn’t been ratified by 
the boards. And until that happens, I can’t say what that 
translates into dollars and how many staffing positions. The day 
that that is decided I’d be glad to share that information with the 
members opposite or anyone else. But until that is completely 
worked out, and until the boards have ratified it, there is no hard 
figure. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get a point clear. I think the 
minister indicated now that 55 per cent of the 10 million will go 
to base hospitals. I think the minister indicated now that 55 per 
cent of the 10 million will go to base hospitals. I think that’s 
what I heard him say. Now that’s not . . . Fifty-five per cent of 
10 million is 5.5 million. So we’re saying, estimated 5.5 million 
for  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

697 
 

base hospitals. Why didn’t you say that an hour ago, and then 
we could get on with it? Now I want you to confirm that 5.5 
million is the estimate for base hospitals. I think I heard you say 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
again refuses to listen. I said that the figure to the hospitals this 
year is $12.9 million. I said I don’t know what amount of that is 
going to the base hospitals until it is worked out . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well if you want to shout from your seat, go 
ahead and shout. But let me explain to you, sir, what I said. And 
if you would be kind enough just to listen, you may get the idea. 
I’m not sure you will, but you may. I question as to your 
capability of understanding. 
 
What I said was that if you looked at the last year’s 
expenditures of SHSP, about 55 per cent goes to the base 
hospitals. And I said, we’re starting, and this year we’re looking 
at enrichment. How much that will be, I don’t know. I don’t 
know. As a rough figure, I said that’s what went last year. 
Certainly some base hospitals are going to get more because 
there’s waiting lists, and that’s what the enrichment fund is 
there for, to try and address these problems that are there, of 
waiting lists. I make no denial of that. And I think that’s the 
way the people say, try and staff up those hospitals. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan, the people who are on 
waiting lists in University Hospital, will be proud and pleased 
to hear that there will be another operating room that will be 
open in University Hospital, one that the previous government 
wouldn’t open. They built it and they kept it closed; they kept it 
closed all the time; they would never open it. We’re opening 
that hospital, that operating room. It will be adequately staffed. 
Therefore, that’s going to take some of the people. That may be 
a different mix than what happens at the Plains Hospital in 
Regina, or what happens in City Hospital in Saskatoon, or may 
be different than what happens in Melfort or Nipawin or in 
Swift Current or in Estevan. 
 
I can tell you, and I’ll tell the people of this province, that my 
officials are sitting down with those hospitals and working out 
how we can best use that $12.9 million, stand up and give me a 
suggestion what you think it should be. Tell me. If you don’t 
think it’s the right way to allocate those funds, by sitting down 
and discussing with the hospital boards; if you disagree with 
that, stand in your place and tell me the system that you think 
would be better. If you believe that it’s better that we sit behind 
the closed doors in the Department of Health and decide what 
every hospital will get and send that out as a dictate, then I 
heartily disagree with that — I heartily disagree with that. And I 
believe in consultation. 
 
So you know, if you have some ideas, gentlemen, please put 
them forth. I ask you and I invite you to bring forth an idea, that 
if you don’t think $12.9 million is enough, suggest a number — 
suggest a number. If you don’t think consultation is the right 
way to deal with hospital boards, suggest an alternative. But 
don’t sit here and say, what is the figure, when the figure hasn’t 
been worked out, when  

the consultation hasn’t been completed. That is a waste of time, 
Mr. Chairman, because until that consultation has been totally 
completed, until those figures have been ratified by the board of 
that hospital, when they’ve come to an agreement with my 
officials and SHSP, I don’t know what the final figure is. And I 
have no intention to mislead you, the members of the 
opposition, my colleagues, or the people of Saskatchewan, by 
giving figures that we don’t know are firm. Until that happens 
. . . And the day that those figures are there, I will be glad to 
share them with any person in Saskatchewan. Because I can tell 
you, as the member of this side of the government, we’re proud 
of those figures because they’re going to improve the health 
care in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would appreciate being able to discuss 
whether the numbers are right or not for the base hospitals, but I 
am having a great deal of difficulty getting the number that 
you’re using for the base hospitals. If you would tell me that it’s 
$6 million or $8 million or $2 million then we could debate 
whether that’s enough to deal with the waiting list of 8,000 in 
Saskatoon. But we are still waiting for the answers to the 
questions. 
 
First of all you say that it will be about 55 per cent for the base 
hospitals and that’s a start. Now for regional hospitals: of the 
$10 million, approximately what will be spent for regional 
hospital nursing care increase at the regional hospital level? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, all I can say is 
that we have put a figure of $12.9 million in the budget for 
those payments for this year. I can assure you that we’ll be 
expending those moneys and they will be done in consultation, 
and different amounts and different hospitals. 
 
I don’t know how much it’s going to be at the regional 
hospitals. We haven’t got that worked out with them yet. And 
until we have that I don’t think it would be fitting to estimate or 
to offer a guess. As soon as we have those figures worked out, 
we will provide them, and that’s going to take some time. It’s 
going to take some time to go out and discuss with all these 
hospitals what their specific needs are because the needs vary 
from hospital to hospital. Different hospitals do different 
procedures; different hospitals have different numbers of 
patients coming in to them, so there’s a lot of factors that have 
to be taken into consideration. And that’s just exactly what is 
happening in the consultation process that’s taking place 
between my officials and the hospitals at this time. 
 
So to ask about the regional hospitals, the base hospitals, the 
large community hospitals, the small hospitals, we haven’t been 
in contact with them all. We were working very diligently since 
the 1st of April, and certainly those figures and those decisions 
will be made. And then they go and they’re ratified by their 
boards. And after that kind of an agreement has come between 
SHSP and the boards, that is the figure. 
 
How those figures translate into positions and where  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

698 
 

those positions will be placed, again, it’s the prerogative of the 
boards. They run the hospitals. 
 
So that’s the kind of discussion that’s taking place. That’s 
what’s taking place right now. And I think I would just as soon 
wrap up these estimates and get on with this, because I think in 
the betterment of health care, that’s what we should be doing. 
But if they want to ask more questions, that’s fine with me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we’ll be asking many more 
questions as the days go by, because we don’t get any answers. 
So we just have to keep slugging away here and trying to get 
some answers to important questions. And I will be meeting 
with my nursing home board and my hospital board this 
weekend, and I’m sure my colleagues will be doing the same, to 
check on how these negotiations you’re putting forward are 
doing, because we’re not going to be getting off this this week 
because you’re just not giving any answers. 
 
We’ll find out from the base hospitals what the negotiation 
stage is at and how many are being offered, because I think 
many people in the province are saying they don’t believe your 
press release. They don’t believe your press release of 500 new 
nurses. That’s what the nurses say. That’s what the doctors are 
saying in the University Hospital and other places in Saskatoon 
where 8,000 people are waiting for beds. And many of the rural 
hospitals have told me this. They said, I’ll bet you can’t get the 
number from him for rural hospitals, because he doesn’t intend 
to spend any in rural hospitals. And you’re confirming that; 
you’re confirming that simply by the lack of answers. 
 
I think what you’re doing is playing a game. You’re playing a 
game based on politics, and you’re going to put them in the 
areas where it’s the best politics for the election. And some 
places where it’s not good politics, you’re not giving any, and 
that’s why these are not being released at the present time. And 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, to play politics with the allocation of 
these nurses and the money to hire them is not in the best 
interest of the patient care in the province. 
 
And otherwise you would come forward in a general way and 
say, look, we have estimated $10 million for new nursing 
positions at our hospitals. That you’ve said. Then it would be no 
problem at all to say approximately, or I estimate that, 55 per 
cent will be in the base hospitals and this percentage in regional 
and this percentage in rural. Why aren’t you doing that? Well 
anyone who’s listening to the debate will know full well why 
you’re not. They will know full well why you’re not giving the 
information to this committee — because you have an agenda 
that’s based on politics and not on health care, and you intend to 
try to buy your way even further to the next election by using 
taxpayers’ money. And I say that’s not fair. 
 
And we’re going to stay here for a few more days until the 
hospital boards start phoning us — and they are, telling us what 
you’re offering — and then we’ll compile a list for you, and 
we’ll announce to the public. It’s going to take a long time, but 
you are not willing to give the answers or the estimates and I 
say that’s unfortunate. And I’ll ask you again: why don’t you 
simply come clean on this and give  

us an estimate — I know it’s an estimate because your 
negotiations are going on — of what amount of money will be 
spent in the three main areas? And that will not give any of your 
negotiating power away, and you can say, I estimate that this 
percentage will be spent in the base hospitals. That’s all we’re 
asking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, let me point out to you, 
you know, I think if you would look back in history, usually 
these negotiations have never been completed into May or June. 
We’re working hard at these in April and as I say, my officials 
are here with me in estimates. We’d like to get out with the 
hospitals and get working with them, but if the people here feel 
it’s more beneficial to health care to tie up everybody in here 
and keep us from getting out and working out these figures with 
the hospitals, so be it. If that is the feeling of the opposition, 
that they would prefer that, that’s fine. I won’t hesitate to tell 
the hospitals. If the hospitals phone in and say, why haven’t you 
had your consultation, I’ll say well I’m sorry, but we’re still in 
our estimates. The opposition feel it is better to tie up the 
officials from the Health department in here than to let them get 
out and get on with the job. And I say, usually under their 
administration, it wasn’t done until May or June. I wanted to try 
and have that done within the month of April. But if they would 
like to do that . . . I mean, if it’s their choice, if they want to 
holler from their seats again, that’s fine. The same old thing — 
holler and yell from your seats, waste time. That’s up to you. 
 
I say, we’re willing to sit down with the hospitals and consult 
with them and work out the figures. And certainly that’s going 
to take place and is taking place. But certainly by this kind of 
action, they’re holding up valuable time of my officials that 
could be out working with the hospitals and getting those 
figures hard and fast. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
we cannot believe that you can prepare the estimates and print 
them without having any idea of how these figures were arrived 
at. We believe, Mr. Minister, that you must have some way of 
estimating these figures. You must have some sort of an 
analysis. If you guessed at the figures, if you threw a dart at the 
wall, and that’s how you arrived at the figure, then tell us that. 
And that may say something about your style of government, 
and it’d be believable, given the mess that you’ve made of this 
government. But that at least would be an answer. 
 
But to stand in your seat and say that you’re dying to get out 
and negotiate with the hospitals, and therefore you can’t answer 
questions . . . And when the nurses wanted to engage you in a 
discussion about health care, you were tied up with your 
estimates and couldn’t get out and discuss health care with the 
professionals. Mr. Minister, no matter who wants to discuss 
these issues with you, you always claim you should be 
somewhere else. That, Mr. Minister, may say something about 
your success in dealing with health care issues. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: how did you arrive at the figures? 
How did you come by those figures? We understand that it may 
be approximate figures; they may be subject to change. But, Mr. 
Minister, you must have had some way of arriving at those 
figures. We ask you how you did that, Mr. Minister. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

699 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I’ll explain 
gladly how we arrived at the figure of 12.9 — certainly. We 
went out in the consultation process and talked to the hospitals 
of Saskatchewan and said, look it, we’re concerned. As I 
explained to you a week ago, when we took over health care in 
this province we saw many deficiencies. We saw there was a 
deficiency in long-term care. So we said, let’s come with a 
five-year plan of nursing home construction. We’re into the 
third year of that plan now — 1,600 beds. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This has got nothing to do with the 
question — nothing to do with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, it does. It has a great deal to do with 
the question. But if you want to holler from your seat, and yell 
from your seat, and not let me explain, you just go right ahead, 
because I’ve lots of time to wait until you quieten down. But if 
you like to holler, please continue. I mean, the whole province 
is talking about your conduct in this House. 
 
But let me indicate to you that our first plan was a five-year 
plan for nursing home construction. That’s well under way. Our 
next plan was a five-year plan — $300 million for capital 
construction in hospitals. That’s well under way. 
 
You go to University Hospital — you know, Mr. Chairman, you 
come from Saskatoon — you see two floors being built. I was 
just down past the Regina General today. I see the crane up 
there and the work going on. I see the rehab being built. I see 
the cancer treatment in Saskatoon being built. You look all 
around Saskatchewan, and you will find more health facilities 
being built this year than any other year in the history of the 
province. 
 
So then we look at . . . the next thing is to staff these. So we 
went out to the hospitals and we said, what do you think is a 
realistic figure that would come up with a five-year plan to staff 
these new facilities and to enrich the staffing components? 
After that consultation we decided that $100 million — $100 
million over the next five years — will be expended for 
staffing, for certain equipments, and for certain initiatives to 
address the waiting lists in the city that you represent. 
 
Of that, $40 million is basically staffing and the staff 
enrichment. Our estimate was that 12.9 would be adequate for 
this year. You know, you may question, but I believe an 
injection of 300 nursing positions in this year is a considerable 
commitment. The people that have been contacting me from 
across this province say exactly the same thing. So that is the 
way we come up with a figure. The member from Regina 
Centre wants to know how we come up with the figures; that is 
how. 
 
These are estimates. But I can assure you that we’re going to 
spend that money and we’re going to do. Once again I will say 
it, and I’ll say time after time after time in this House, that we 
will spend that money in conjunction with the hospitals after 
consultation with the hospitals. And that’s what’s going on. 
 

And I’d like to get out, I’d like to be able to release my officials 
to go out and get it all done within the next couple of weeks. 
Obviously that isn’t going to be possible if we continue with 
this type of charge that the members opposite like to ask — 
questions about what’s happening in Alberta with the 
chiropractors, or Ontario. What are the federal government 
doing? Good Lord, I don’t run the federal government. I don’t 
know. 
 
To persist with that line of questioning is going to take some 
time. And we will be here for a long time. And we're quite 
willing to be here for a long time. But if they believe that is in 
the betterment of health care to do that, rather then to allow us 
to get out and have the consultation with the hospitals, well that 
is their choice; mine would be the latter — to let my officials go 
out there and work these figures out. 
 
And just as soon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now if you 
want to shout from your seat, please go ahead. That’s fine. 
That’s the decorum on that side of the House, to shout from 
their seats, unruly, undisciplined, that’s all right if they want to 
do that. I will stand here and explain as best I can, to this House 
and this Chamber and the people of Saskatchewan, the plans 
that we’re having for the hospitals. And we’re going to be going 
out there, and we’re going to enter into those discussions as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t exactly want a 
discussion about all the work you’ve done over the last four 
years and who you’ve met with and what grand folk they were, 
and how much you got out of it. I was hoping you’d save me 
that blether. And I was hoping you would tell us how you 
arrived at the figure; not who you talked to arrive at the figure. 
You’ve spent 10 minutes telling us what a sorry situation you 
inherited. You’ve spent part of that time telling us who you 
talked to, but you spent none of that time telling us how you 
arrived at the figure. I’m going to be quiet . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And on how you apparently were trying to sell 
a horse that kicked you. I gather that’s the story. 
 
Mr. Minister, your deputy is giving you some figures. I’m going 
to sit down and see if you can concentrate long enough to give 
us those figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, I know it 
bothers the members opposite, and especially the member from 
Regina Centre. It just grates at him to see the fantastic job that 
we have done in health care over the last four years. 
 
You know, and I will repeat it time and time again to him. I 
mean, if you want to compare the four years under the Devine 
government, a 65 per cent increase in health care funding, to the 
pitiful show of the NDP that had a moratorium on nursing 
homes — they cut staff — we’ll compare that any time, any 
day, anywhere. 
 
And I know it’s hard; it’s not good music to their ears because 
the truth hurts, the truth hurts, that the moneys that have been 
put into health care by this government exceed the moneys that 
have been put into health care by any other government across 
Canada. Can you believe this — 65 per cent increase between 
’81-82 to 1986. I  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

700 
 

think that speaks for itself and shows the commitment of this 
government to health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now you know they want to know how 
we come up with the 40 million figure, things of this nature. 
And I want to tell you, we did it through consultation and 
discussion with executive directors and board members, and 
consulting in meetings with hospitals in North Battleford and 
P.A. and Weyburn and Swift Current, and we went out and 
discussed with all of them. And we set a target. We said we’re 
coming out with a $100 million program for patient care 
improvement, and a good portion of that is going to be staffing 
— $40 million. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I believe $40 million to be a significant 
amount of money. Maybe they don’t but I do. I can tell you that 
with the implementation the target was to have us above the 
national average for nursing staff per patient day by the end of 
the four-year term, and we’re going to reach that target within 
the second year. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Chairman, I think our patient care program 
that we have announced and are implementing now, is going to 
be a great benefit, and I know the hospitals are just wanting to 
sit down with us and get it worked out, and I want to do that 
too. I want to have my officials out there working with the 
hospitals. If the opposition want to hold us up and prevent that 
kind of consultation to take place, so be it. So be it. They have 
every right to drag these estimates as long as they want. They 
can do that. That’s the right of this Chamber. I just want to warn 
them and let them know that as they’re doing that, and many 
people are looking at it as a type of charge, they are preventing 
certain important initiatives and certain important consultations 
that could take place in the health care field to better the 
delivery of service and to shorten the waiting list in Saskatoon. 
 
If we want to stay in here and keep these officials tied up, fine. 
You do it. But remember, it’s on your neck, boys, not ours, 
because we put up the money. The money is there. We have 
committed to that, $100 million. We’ve committed that money. 
 
I’d like to get out there and say to the hospitals, here’s what 
you’re going to get; let’s work together so that you can hire 
your people, get them in place, reduce your waiting list, open 
your operating rooms, and get this show on the road. But no, the 
decision is to tie it all up. That’s fine. I just want to be 
eminently clear that the decision as when that can take place is 
the opposition’s. 
 
The opposition have the power in the legislature to either drag 
out the estimates or either let them go. I can tell you tonight 
there are many people out there that are interested . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, Mr. Chairman, they’re very, 
very interested in that 11.6 per cent raise in the health care 
budget. They want to see what piece of this do we get. The only 
way that will happen is with these people to sit down and work 
those figures out. We do it by consultation. They say, tell us — 
tell us. This is what they  

say. Well I know it was the NDP style to sit in behind the doors 
in Regina, to get all huddled around and dictate to the people: 
this is what you’re getting and if you don’t like it, you shut up 
because you’re not getting any more. That was their system. 
 
Now when you look at that it is very evident why, in 1982 when 
the people in Saskatchewan got an opportunity to say what they 
thought of that type of administration, let me tell you they 
spoke and they spoke loud. And I can tell you that if they want 
to tie these things up so that the hospitals don’t get their money; 
so that the various groups in the health care field who want to 
get their part of that $1.2 billion; if they want to keep us in here 
and keep that all tied up, so be it. I tell you that when we go to 
the polls, the people will speak exactly the same way. They will 
speak exactly the same way, and we will trounce these fellows 
the next time around again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I recall listening to 
another besieged minister who sat for two weeks and would not 
answer questions. And I recall his plaintive plea to the 
opposition — let my people go. If you don’t the public are 
going to be angry with you because the business of the province 
must go on. The minister was a member from Kindersley and it 
was his undoing. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you feel besieged, if that is your plaintive cry 
— let my people go — if you feel besieged, then, Mr. Minister, 
you feel besieged with good reason. You are besieged, Mr. 
Minister, not by the opposition but by the public themselves. 
You are besieged by the public, and we merely represent their 
frustration and their concern with respect to health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, you blabber on about 11.9 per cent. Our concern 
and the public’s concern is each year and you claimed 
enormous increases in health care spending, and each year the 
health care system has deteriorated rapidly. Indeed it has, Mr. 
Minister. Indeed it has. Each year we have been back here, the 
health care system has gotten worse, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again to tell us, Mr. Minister, how you 
arrived at the 10 to 12 million. Because the figures which you 
use aren’t trusted by us, and they aren’t trusted by the 
professionals. And I suspect, Mr. Minister, your deputy gave 
you some figures which might have explained it; you held it in 
your hand and never referred to it. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to 
give us the information. I thought for a moment, Mr. Minister, 
after we spent the entire day trying to make the point that 
estimates are a process of give and take, whereby you justify 
your expenditures and we ask questions — I thought at the end 
of that motion that that had been understood. It seemed for a 
brief, fleeting moment that you were starting to give us some 
information. 
 
What we have had in the last half-hour is these tirades about 
how bad things were before ’82, how much we distrust people, 
how against hospitals we are, how against nurses we are, how 
against hospitals we are. I  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

701 
 

don’t think, Mr. Minister, that the key question in the minds of 
those nurses who demonstrated out here was whether or not the 
opposition was for them or against them. Their question is the 
question which we ask: what are you doing to remedy the 
problems which are so painfully evident in our health care 
system? So I ask you again, Mr. Minister, I ask you: how did 
you arrive at the 10 to $12 million figure? 
 
I’m delighted to hear that you’ve been consulting with people 
previously, delighted to hear that you’re going to consult with 
people in the future. But, Mr. Minister, I want to know how you 
arrived at the figure. So I ask you to take a run at telling us how 
that figure was arrived at. Did you guess at it? Was it as 
convenient as any other? Was that a figure you shoved into the 
book so that you could make the thing add up? Is that how you 
arrived at it, or was there a more logical, rational process? 
 
If, Mr. Minister, you had a more rational process than simply 
guessing at figures, then tell us what the process was. Tell us 
how you arrived at that. Just take a crack at convincing 
ourselves and the public who are watching this thing. Just take a 
crack at convincing us that the figure is rationally arrived at, 
that it is adequate, and that it will solve the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, you know, he wants to 
know how you arrive at a figure. Well, I said there would be 
approximately 300 nursing positions put in this year — 300. 
Well then you take 300 and you look at what is the average 
wage. Well, a little over $30,000. Now what I would do is 
multiply those two figures and come up with something that 
was around $10 million — $10 million . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No you asked me how I arrived at the figures. 
If you want to shout from your seat, please continue to shout. 
You asked how I arrived at the figure; I’m answering how I 
arrived at the figure. I took the number of nurses, which we 
have indicated, and if they’d have listened on budget night, my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance indicated on budget night the 
number of nurses that would be going into the hospitals. 
 
So you take that number and you multiply by the average 
salary. That gives you a figure of around $10 million. I said a 
half an hour ago in here that the minimum amount would be 
$10 million. And that there would be between $10 and $12 
million because there are other things that fall into this. So that 
is how we arrived at it. Certainly. I hope that explanation is 
understood by the gentleman opposite. He said to me, what are 
you going to do about it? How are you going address the 
situation? 
 
Well, it’s very evident. In the estimates of the department of 
Health. I’m addressing it by putting $12.9 million into that 
subvote expenditure. That $12.9 million is going to be used in 
the various hospitals of Saskatchewan. There are 132 hospitals 
in this province, Mr. Chairman, as well as a large number of 
nursing homes that we have to deal with. 
 
I believe it is in the best interests of health care that we could 
get out and start dealing with them. Obviously they don’t. They 
think it’s more valuable to the taxpayers to ask me to explain 
how I would come up with 10 million, when I say there’s going 
to be 300 — when I say there’s  

going to be 300 and their salaries are somewhat in excess of 
$30,000, then you multiply that, you come up to about $10 
million. That’s how we arrive at our figures. 
 
And for the member opposite to stand in here and to make a 
cheap shot, a cheap shot at my officials, who I tell you, my 
officials work very, very diligently. He stood in this Chamber 
and he said how did you officials figure it out? Did you take a 
dart and throw a dart and hit a number? 
 
Well, I don’t like people trying to put that kind of accusation on 
the professional people that work for me in the Department of 
Health. I tell you, we have some of the best people in 
government working in the Department of Health. We have 
some of the most dedicated people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can tell you that when you’re charged 
with a third of the expenditures of the government of the 
province of Saskatchewan, you have good people working with 
you — and I have some of the best in Canada. When we go to 
national conferences across Canada, when I take my deputy 
minister and associate deputy ministers, I can tell you I stand 
proud, because when those people speak at the table, all Canada 
listens. And I’ve told you time after time the number of 
initiatives where Saskatchewan government are leaders in the 
health care field. 
 
That leadership in the health care field comes from the 
dedicated people that work in the Department of Health — the 
best in Canada, by any man’s imagination — dedicated people. 
And for a member opposite to have the audacity to stand up and 
say that those people, responsible for a third of the budget of the 
province of Saskatchewan, stood back with their dart and threw 
it an hit a number — that’s what he said about these people that 
work for me. 
 
And I . . . you may see me getting a little riled. And I tell you, I 
will get mad, and I’ll get an awful lot madder when people take 
cheap shots at the people that work for me. I don’t put up with 
that kind of nonsense. And I won’t put up with it from an 
NDPer or anyone else, because these are good dedicated people. 
And to say they take a cheap shot is simply nonsense, and I 
expect an apology from you. If you have any guts, stand up and 
apologize to these good people here sitting here beside me. 
 
Why don’t you do that? Because you are the kind of person that 
takes shots at people in or outside of this Chamber — people 
who can’t defend themselves. Hansard is full of allegations by 
the member from Regina Centre. And let me tell you, when the 
history is written on you, when you’re defeated in the next 
election, the downfall of the member of Regina Centre was that 
he was the type of person that took cheap shots at poor people 
who couldn’t defend themselves because they didn’t have the 
right to stand in this Chamber. 
 
Well, if you keep doing that with my department, we’ll be here 
till Christmas, because I won’t tolerate that kind of nonsense 
from you, or from the fellow from Shaunavon, or Quill Lakes, 
or . . . Well I don’t think the fellow from  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

702 
 

Pelly would get up and say something like that; he’s a little 
more decent. But these other three people who continue to bark 
from their seat, they’re not going to get away with that kind of 
accusation against the people who work in the Health 
department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


