


















































June 5, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 5, 1986 
 
 

1719 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's an honour for me 
to introduce today to the Assembly some students on behalf of the 
Hon. Pat Smith — 21 students from Dickson elementary school. 
This is a special school, in my opinion, because my sons have all 
gone to that school. And I want to welcome Miss Joanne Dyck 
and Mrs. Pruden to the Assembly, together with the students. 
 
I will be meeting with them later on to discuss what goes on here, 
and I hope you enjoy yourselves in your stay here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to rise and 
introduce to you, and through you and to the members of the 
legislature, a group of adults sitting in the Speaker's gallery. They 
are hosted here today by Mr. and Mrs. Bev McDougall from 
Liberty, which are from the great constituency of Arm River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are here today accompanying five adult students 
who represent the International Agriculture Exchange Association. 
These five students are from Denmark and Australia. Mr. Speaker, 
they are also accompanied by their host families. Host families' 
names are as follows: Ron and Irene Bishoff of Keeler; Richard 
and Marjorie Vickaryous from Watrous; Terry and Gloria Hamre 
from Kenaston; Bev and Fran McDougall from Liberty; and 
Martin and Donna Bohrson from Kenaston. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be visiting with these groups at 3:15 for a brief 
visit and some pictures. My wishes are that this will be an 
educational and productive year in the lives of both the students 
and the host people. 
 
I would now ask the five students from Denmark and Australia to 
please stand and be acknowledged when I call your name: Robert 
Herbohn, Atherton, Australia; Wayne Lewis, Gibson, Australia; 
Jessie Hansen, Borre, Mon, Denmark; Peter Mollegard, Assens, 
Denmark; Per Horlyck, Vamdrup, Denmark. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these students 
and their host families to the legislature today. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deficiency Payment for Western Farmers 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture, 
and it deals with your stand on a key issue of vital interest to 
Saskatchewan farmers and rural communities, and that is the need 
for an early and major deficiency payment from the federal 
treasury. 
 

And I might add that it's a weak-kneed stand that I really didn't 
appreciate. The New Democratic Party, the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, even the Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association, 
have all been pushing for a deficiency payment in the order of $2 
billion for months now, with no meaningful support from either 
you or your colleagues in the government. Today even Brian 
Mulroney's own back-benchers joined in this fight when the 
special parliamentary committee on the pricing of domestic wheat 
unanimously called for a deficiency payment. 
 
Will you as Premier now show some courage and stand up for 
Saskatchewan farmers and join the fight for an early $2 billion 
deficiency payment from Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member had 
have been doing his homework and read the western premiers' 
communiqué, he would see that all four western premiers 
recommended a $1 billion payment by the federal government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the four western premiers — and Manitoba, 
which is obviously the same side politically as the members 
opposite — have agreed with me and agreed with the Premier of 
Alberta and the Premier of British Columbia that the deficiency 
payment be made, Mr. Speaker, then I guess . . . I mean, that's 
pretty clear as far as western Canada is concerned, that all four 
premiers say that it should be there and it should be paid. 
 
And I, at the outset — at the outset — have said that I want to see 
the money coming here, and I would take any kind of money that 
they could offer, and we could have deficiencies or we could have 
any kind of money that we could, and we've received in the 
neighbourhood of $2 million. And now we've put on the table . . . 
the western premiers are saying, another billion. So, Mr. Speaker, 
it's been on the table; it's in the public; and the member opposite 
asked a question when he hasn't even read the western premier's 
communiqué. Well the least he could do is read that so he knows 
what the issues are and the results are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier 
and it concerns the same issue raised by my colleague, the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the position of the Premier 
on deficiency payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent study by the Canadian Wheat Board 
estimated that the Canadian farmer will get about $31 in subsidies 
per tonne, that an American farmer will receive the equivalent of 
$96, and the European farmer, $115 per tonne for wheat grown in 
the 1986-87 crop year. And it goes on to say that it will cost an 
estimated $2 billion a year to bring Canadian grain subsidies up to 
the level of the United States. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have not called for a $2 billion payment. You 
have said that you might support one of $900 million, I believe, is 
the figure, but only if certain conditions on the world market take 
place in the months ahead. 
 
Mr. Premier, surely this view is grossly inadequate. Will  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1720 
 
 

you now join with all the other farm organizations who are asking 
that Saskatchewan farmers receive a deficiency payment which, 
together with other payments, will yield at least $2 billion, the 
amount being received by American farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
wouldn't acknowledge yesterday that we had a billion two out at 6 
per cent money in Saskatchewan when they're talking about 
money for farmers. And again today the Leader of the Opposition 
hasn't got control of the MLAs because they continue to speak 
from their seats. They won't even listen to the response. So I 
would ask the Leader of the Opposition to at least control his 
members long enough so that they can listen to the response. 
 
The response is that we have put $2 billion out in western 
Canadian agriculture, the majority of it coming into the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
At the western premiers' conference that we've just finished, and at 
the first minister's conference that we've just finished, the western 
premiers recommended to the Prime Minister that they put $1 
billion up to make sure that the grain that we export receives the 
same benefit here in Saskatchewan and in western Canada as the 
Americans are receiving. An equivalent basis to keep the price up 
to what it was last year would be about $1 billion on the export. 
 
Today the committee's report is out with respect to the two-priced 
wheat. They recommend $10 a bushel. The premiers 
recommended $11 a bushel — well, we were with $1. But it's a 
major increase that was recommended by me, and recommended 
by the premiers, and we will now be looking I would suspect . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I would ask if the Leader 
of the Opposition could get control of his members again. They 
want to talk from their seat; they don't want to listen . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Listen to them, Mr. Speaker. If the Leader of the 
Opposition could just control his members. If he can't control his 
members, then it's a little bit difficult to provide the answer. 
 
We will get in the neighbourhood of 10 or $11 wheat. We have all 
recommended $1 billion right now to compete with the export side 
of it. So on the domestic side the recommendations from 
Saskatchewan is we have $11; the committee has now 
recommended $10. On the export side we said $1 billion in cash. 
You put the two together, plus the cash that's already been out 
here, Mr. Speaker, and you're in the neighbourhood of $3 billion 
to western Canadian agriculture. 
 

Withdrawal of Services by Doctors in Swift Current Health 
Region 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier, in the absence of the Minister of Health for the last 
couple of days. I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, a question, and it 
deals with the withdrawal of services by doctors in the Swift 
Current health region. I wonder, can the Premier give the 
Assembly a full report on exactly  

what action the doctors have taken, and can he tell us what 
specific steps he has taken to guarantee that the health and safety 
of the public in the Swift Current region is not threatened by this 
action taken by the doctors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was advised by the deputy 
minister of Health this morning that the action taken by physicians 
in Swift Current will not jeopardize health . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to again control his members so they can listen to the 
response. They're no longer interested in a response. They don't 
care about health care or agriculture, Mr. Speaker; they just want 
to talk from their seats — they just want to talk from their seats. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they don't know how to behave themselves 
in here, the public will soon find what they're like, all over 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Listen. Listen to 
them, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to 
get control of them if he could. Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean, I can 
speak . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
Swift Current I'm advised that there's emergency services there. 
I'm advised that the medical profession will say that there will be 
no danger to anybody, that they will make sure that they respond 
to any concerns that they have. 
 
I'd also point out, Mr. Speaker, that I am optimistic that we can 
reach an agreement and, Mr. Speaker, I would look forward, and I 
certainly invite the medical profession back to the bargaining table 
at the earliest convenience. 
 

Availability of Health Services 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Premier, I wonder if you could explain 
to the public your legal and moral obligation to guarantee full 
access to medicare to all residents of Saskatchewan — and 
specifically here I'm referring to the fact that eye service, the 
specialists in the province, one of them has chosen to opt out of 
medicare, and two are now leaving the province — can you 
guarantee the people of the province that full access will be 
available to them when it comes to the need for eye specialists, as 
well as, that they will be able to afford to have their eyes checked, 
the seniors and others who need that kind of service? 
 
The other part of the question, Mr. Premier, is: can you explain 
why, in the past six months, we have had such a great deal of 
difficulty with health care givers in this province under your 
administration? We've had the nurses demonstrating on the steps 
of the legislature; we've had the doctors now taking work action in 
the Swift Current health region; we've met with the chiropractors 
who say you're doing a rotten job with health care; and we have 
waiting lists in Saskatoon of 8,000 people waiting for surgery. Can 
you tell the people of the province what you plan to do to get the 
health service in this province back to the high standards that it has 
been in the past? 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1721 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, obviously that's a fairly broad 
question and I hope the hon. member will allow me the time to 
respond in some detail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of opting out, if individuals, Mr. Speaker, 
decide they don't like the health care system because we removed 
direct billing, which no longer exists . . . We had direct billing 
under the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, we decided because the people 
of Saskatchewan said . . . Mr. Speaker, again they won't listen. 
They sit and holler from their seats. If they're interested in the 
question and they're interested in health care, at least they could 
have enough respect to listen to the response . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you judge for yourself. But they holler from 
their seats when they are supposed to be listening to the response. 
If we remove direct billing, as we have, and some people decide 
that they are going to move, Mr. Speaker, that's the way health 
care is in Saskatchewan and there is no more direct billing. We 
have Saskatoon Agreement II where we agreed that there would 
not be any more direct billing. And that's the case. 
 
With respect to health care generally, we have increased the health 
care budget, Mr. Speaker, far beyond anything that was under any 
NDP administration in this province. We removed a freeze and the 
moratorium on nursing home construction in this province. We 
removed it, Mr. Speaker, and we have built thousands of new 
facilities or beds in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of us 
spending more and more money on health care, both in terms of 
new hospital facilities, new nursing home capacity, and the 
combination thereof. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's just a little bit . . . We're playing catch-up, Mr. 
Speaker. It's a little bit like the interest rate thing. When interest 
rates were 22 per cent, people across never did anything — got a 
lot of folks into trouble. We had to pick up the ball, Mr. Speaker, 
and help folks because they wouldn't. 
 
In terms of health care, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member for Quill 
Lakes. 
 

Charges Laid Against Credit Union Manager 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I'll bail him out of his embarrassment. Mr. 
Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, on January 15th a charge was laid under section 383 of 
the Criminal Code of Canada against the former manager of the 
Cabri Credit Union, Mr. G. L. Morris. The charge alleges that 
between 1974 and late 1983 Mr. Morris accepted payments from 
the law firm of Hagemeister, Wilson, MacBean, and Maurice, in 
exchange for showing favour to his law firm in awarding of credit 
union legal work. 
 
Well the former credit union manager has been charged with the 
accepting the secretary payments, and his preliminary hearing date 
has already been set for August. No one to this point apparently 
has been charged in respect to offering of such payments. 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, has the minister been made aware of this 
situation? And have you instructed your officials to make sure that 
everyone involved in this case is being treated equally and fairly 
before the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice of the 
question to see whether there is anything unusual that I should be 
aware of. However, I have been preliminarily informed about the 
proceedings. The proceedings are handled as any other case. And 
the decision as to who to charge and when to charge was made in 
the usual course of the Crown counsel's duty. And to my 
knowledge there's nothing unusual about the process in this 
matter. And I'll provide further details when I can apprise myself 
of those details, Mr, Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further question to the minister while he's 
taking notice of the first one. I ask, Mr. Minister, are you aware 
that the Swift Current law firm named in the charge against the 
credit union manager at Cabri had among its members, during that 
period in question: Mr. Geoff Wilson, currently the conservative 
MP for Swift Current-Maple Creek; Gene Maurice, currently 
Queen's Bench court justice; and Mr. J. W. Hagemeister, currently 
a Crown prosecutor. I ask you, in light of those involved, surely 
the minister will understand the need, not only for justice to be 
done, but for justice to be seen to be done. 
 
And I ask you again, does it not concern you that to this point only 
one party to these alleged transactions has been, in fact, charged? I 
ask you if it has been alleged that he broke the law by accepting 
these payments, how can those alleged to have made these 
payments not have broken the law? And these are the questions 
which are being asked by concerned citizens in the Swift Current 
area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I'll first of all indicate that I don't 
believe that citizens are contacting the member showing concern, 
which the member indicates he has. I want to indicate that the 
member hasn't really raised any issue to me which would indicate 
that anything unique or different is being done in this particular 
case. I'm advised, Mr. Speaker — and it's clear the members don't 
want to hear the answer again — I am advised that matter is 
proceeding in the usual course as in any other case, and if there is 
something unusual that the member has in his position or to his 
knowledge, I'd like to hear. 
 
However, I think I am fair in assuming that the only reason that 
the member just rattled off the names that he did is that he's on his 
usual witch-hunt procedure which we've seen in this legislature 
before. I hope the member has more information to present to this 
legislature, and I hope he isn't simply attempting to use our 
judicial process for political purposes. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I will bring back further details, if there are 
unusual details that I should be aware of. But to date I'm not 
familiar with anything unusual in this particular proceeding. And I 
might indicate that the member knows . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm going to caution the members. 
There's just too much yelling in the Chamber, and I would ask for 
order during the questions. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1722 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the second part to the 
question: the member got into some details regarding a case and 
he, as well being a lawyer, should know that I can't discuss the 
details of the investigation since there is a court case in progress at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The last supplement. I ask the minister, and I 
want to make it perfectly clear. I ask you: have you at any time 
discussed this case or the circumstances surrounding this case with 
any of the members mentioned in the law firm, and in particular, 
Mr. Wilson? Have you ever under any circumstances discussed 
the matters with him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Definitely not, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Power Line from uranium City 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, and it has to do with his March 19th announcement 
that a new power line will be built from Uranium City to five other 
northern communities and Eldor mines at Rabbit Lake. 
 
Can the minister give the people of the North a quick status report 
on this project? Has SPC actually taken possession of the three 
hydro stations near Uranium City, owned by Eldorado nuclear, 
where the power line will originate, and both clearing and 
transmission tower construction work begin this summer. And 
also, what is the current start-up date for transmission of power 
over this new line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As it relates to the question of taking 
possession, I don't know if the legal hoops have all been jumped 
through. But the intention is that as soon as the legal hoops have 
been handled, that we will take possession of the plant and the 
units, as well as the people who are employed there would become 
members of Sask Power staff. 
 
As it relates to start-up, my understanding is that the first leg will 
be from Beaver Lodge to Camsell Portage, and that will be done 
almost immediately they'll be going in to complete that one. And 
that's something like 16 kilometres, I believe. 
 
As it relates to the completed line right from Uranium City to 
Rabbit Lake and over to Wollaston Post, I think the completion 
will be in 1988. The surveying and the alternate routes, and 
etcetera are being done this summer. But the line to Camsell 
Portage should be started almost immediately. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A supplementary, 
Mr. Minister. Could you clarify your statements of last March in 
which you said that the construction of this line would result in 
immediate power rate cuts for people in the communities of 
Camsell Portage, Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Black Lake, and 
Wollaston Post. Could you indicate your statement: 
 

However, SPC is asking all commercial rate users, such as the 
Northern Lights School Board, to sign  

contracts which would see them continue to pay higher rates 
until the $48 million cost of the power line has been fully paid. 

 
Is the minister aware of this arrangement, and how does he square 
this with his claim that the line would mean immediate cuts in 
power rates for everyone in that northern region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are certain . . . like school boards 
and other governmental agencies that offer support to certain 
organizations in the North, through high-cost power, 
diesel-generated power, and support of that, etc. It is expected that 
they would be willing, in fact, to continue a higher level, or the 
same level of power rate in anticipation of reduced rates once the 
capital cost of the new transmission line is recovered. 
 
Who is touched in what way? I don't have that detail with me, but 
it's expected that the ordinary consumer will have a significant 
reduction in power rates the minute that they turn the old diesel 
unit off and go on to the hydro line, as much, in some instances, 
75 per cent reduction. Now I know you understand that that's not 
right across the board, but certainly some will be impacted to hat 
extent. 
 
As to the detail of who will be touched to what degree and who is 
expected to pay at the old, if you like, diesel rate, I can get that 
detail for the member, but I don't have it here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
could you indicate if there will be any preference given to northern 
bids for the clearing and the construction of the power line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. It's our intention . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — They don't take bids. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I don't know if we're going to take 
bids or not in the North. It's our intention to use . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I know that the member from Athabasca is 
interested in hearing the answer, Mr. Speaker, but his wingers 
won't extend him the courtesy to hear the answer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — His left wingers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — His left wingers, is right. Now, to answer 
your question, Mr. Member from Athabasca, it is the intention of 
Power to use northern people to clear the transmission cut-lines in 
the North. 
 

Cost of Advertising in the Saskatchewan Report 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, yesterday I asked you a 
question about how much provincial government departments, 
agencies, and Crown corporations are spending for advertising in 
Bill Hunter's Saskatchewan Report magazine. Do you have that 
information with you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I expect to have it tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1723 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 
will be looking forward to that. Can I also ask you, Mr. Minister, 
that while you're undertaking to provide that information, would 
you also undertake to provide me an answer to a second question, 
and that is: will you give me the total cost of government 
advertising in the Saskatchewan Report magazine; when you give 
me that information, in the magazine, will you provide the 
comparable figure for the Saskatoon Star Phoenix newspaper and 
the magazine Saskatchewan Business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, I have no objection to providing that 
information. I'm not so sure that I can have it all tomorrow, but I'll 
get it to you as soon as possible. 
 

Inquiry into Saskatchewan Bingo Industry 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs. It deals, Madam Minister, with 
your government's complete inability to act on any concerns raised 
by the Saskatchewan people. It's now, Madam Minister, been a 
year since you first announced the public inquiry into the 
commercial bingo industry in this province, and it has been five 
full months since the three-member board of inquiry gave you its 
final report. 
 
Can the minister explain why you're taking so long to act on the 
recommendations of the board of inquiry whose study, you said, in 
the midst of the Pioneer Trust fiasco, was urgently needed? More 
urgently, apparently, than an inquiry into the affairs of Pioneer 
Trust. Since it was that urgent that it transcended all else, will you 
tell us when you'll be announcing changes to the legislation or the 
regulations governing commercial bingo industry. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that very shortly I 
will be making a statement in the House. In fact I'm just going 
over the final thing of it this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I'm not so interested in 
what you're going over, but if you want to forward a copy of it I'll 
certainly read it. I'm interested, Madam Minister, in whether or not 
you'll be announcing changes to the regulations or the legislation 
which will be coming before this session. I say by way of 
background, madam Minister, that we have been told by any 
number of ministers, that is on my desk and will be coming forth 
immediately, and that's months before we hear anything about it. 
So I'd like, Madam Minister, to know not what's on your desk, but 
when you're going to be dealing with a problem which does 
appear to be urgent. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member, in due course the Assembly will be informed of the 
findings and the recommendations and whatever will flow from it. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax    
           Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you. I move first reading of a Bill, An 
Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  

(No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

MLA/Press Ball Game 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would 
like to report on the annual ball game between the Legislative 
Assembly members and the press members. The competition has 
been going on for approximately seven years, and the trophy was 
named after a legislative reporter who is now deceased. The series 
is in its seventh year. The series is now four games for the press 
and three games for the MLAs. It seems like on the even years the 
press wins, and on the odd years the MLAs win. The press won 
last night's game 16 to 10, if you consider the seven innings. But if 
you consider only six innings, the MLAs won 8 to 7. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Joe "around the bases" Ralko scored three runs 
and drove in the majority of the runs for the press. On the other 
side of the coin, Danny O. Field lived up this name. He was the 
first batter out, the last batter out, and the only person to go out 
twice in one inning. I noticed his name-plate in his office this 
morning is being changed to Danny O for 5. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Centre is still bending and practising 
to catch the balls as they come across the ground. The 
Star-Phoenix ace, Danny — here we go — Zakreski, robbed the 
member from Moose Jaw North from a sure home run with a 
titillating catch at the backfield. 
 
Social Service minister was very unsociable last night, snagging 
all balls driven his way, including one directed right at his eyes, so 
that he may open them, as well as his ears, for question period. 
 
The media's secret import, Don Rennie from the Premier's office, 
was four for four, and played brilliant in short stop, even with 
sun-glasses on. 
 
The dazzling second base person, or should I say base woman, 
imported from Manitoba on her charging quarter-horse, showed 
that she will be a threat in years to come. 
 
And the MLA from Saskatoon, who stood on the home plate to hit 
the ball, even made a three bagger. 
 
The Minister of Environment, who couldn't get his mind off the 
environment instead of the ball, was called out on strikes and 
demanded a fourth strike, the same as they have on the lottery ads. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, let us talk about the pitcher, Mr. Dale 
"Scoop" Eisler, who seemed to never know where the plate was 
and, without a lot of assistance from the MLAs, would have lost 
the game. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1724 
 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, once again, the umpire was totally 
neutral, as is always. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 48 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and govern its activities and 
to provide for an appeal board with respect to certain 
assessment matters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, in my 
capacity as Minister of Urban Affairs, to move second reading of 
Bill 48, a Bill to both establish the Saskatchewan assessment 
management agency and to continue the Saskatchewan assessment 
appeal board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since taking office four years ago, a concern of this 
government has been the property and business assessment system 
in our province. This system was inherited from the previous 
government which held office for 11 years, and which passed 
various pieces of assessment legislation, but never really came to 
grips with the deep-seated assessment problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, property assessment forms the base for one of the 
largest tax sources in our province, the property tax, and it is 
estimated that in 1985 over $600 million was collected as property 
taxes and grants in lieu of taxes by local governments. This 
amount of revenue is comparable only to revenue raised from 
personal income taxes and oil revenues. The magnitude of 
property tax revenue, in comparison with other sources, makes 
issues associated with the property tax and the assessment system 
very important indeed. 
 
Given this importance, it is very difficult for me to understand 
why the former administration indeed neglected the assessment 
system as it was. It is difficult to understand how they could stand 
by and not address the problems, particularly as the full adverse 
impacts of the most recent general assessment unfolded across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government wanted to know specifically what 
the problems with assessment are and were. And one of the best 
ways to find out, of course, is to talk to those affected by it; to 
consult with local governments, with SUMA, with SARM, and the 
property taxpayers themselves. 
 
In May of 1984 the government established a Local Government 
Finance commission. This commission was given a two-year 
mandate to inquire into a broad range of issues relating to the 
financing of local government and to identify options for 
addressing those issues. 
 
One of the issues was assessment principles and processes. In 
September of '85 the commission released a pair of interim 
reports. One of these dealt with the Saskatchewan assessment 
system. this report confirmed  

many of the things which had been expressed to government 
members about assessment. It took into account a broad range of 
local government input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may read from the commission's interim report: 
 

There has been an unfortunate loss of confidence in the 
assessment system. Many people are concerned that the 
assessment system is bringing about unfair distributions of the 
local tax load. Some believe that inequities are an inherent 
feature of the property tax, while others believe that the main 
problems are improperly derived assessments. Some are 
concerned with the governance of the assessment function and 
how major policy decisions on assessment are determined. 
Others are concerned about the level of expertise and diligence 
with which the assessment of individual properties are 
undertaken. Others question the validity of the manuals used by 
the appraisers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to continue: 
 

The commission's review has confirmed that there are a number 
of serious problems with the assessment function, and that some 
major corrective action is required, and that this must be taken 
before the commencement of the next round of general 
reassessments throughout the province. 

 
The commission's report went on to review how different 
categories of properties are valued, an commented on the current 
system of assessment as well. The current governance of the 
assessment function was identified as a major weakness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to that problem. During the months 
since the commission's interim report on assessment was released, 
the government has undertaken consultations with both SUMA 
and SARM to obtain their views respecting the Local Government 
Finance Commission's recommendations, and on assessment in 
general. 
 
We have discussed with them the basic outline of the proposals 
contained in this Bill. Representatives of respective provincial 
departments have met with the executives of these organizations to 
do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we felt it was important to allow some time for the 
parties involved to give the commission's report full consideration 
rather than rushing into a precipitous arrangement. 
 
As a result of the feedback and consultations, we have concluded 
that the commission's recommendation to establish an independent 
assessment agency has general support among municipal 
organizations. We have accepted some of the more detailed 
recommendations, modified others, and decided not to pursue 
some. 
 
This Bill, then, establishes an independent assessment agency to 
be known as the Saskatchewan assessment  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1725 
 

management agency. This new agency will replace the existing 
Saskatchewan Assessment Authority. The new agency, like the 
authority, will be responsible for carrying out evaluations of 
property and business, and for supervising the administration for 
the assessment provision in various municipal statutes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the responsibilities of the new agency will 
go well beyond these. This new agency will determine methods of 
valuation for various classes of property; it will prepare new 
assessment manuals; it will review and make recommendations to 
the provincial government on changes to municipal legislation 
relating to both principles and procedures of property and business 
assessment, assessment appeals, and any other matter respecting 
assessment; it will determine the timing of general re-assessments; 
it will undertake increased research and evaluation and shifts in 
taxation. 
 
The agency will establish and maintain two separate committees 
to review policies and practices pertaining to urban and rural 
assessment matters, and make recommendations on these to its 
board of directors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in short, the new agency will be able to undertake 
much expanded policy analysis and research in the area of 
assessment. It will have the authority to independently establish 
policy and procedures for assessment. It will be responsible for 
proposing changes to current legislation to address problems in 
this area. 
 
The new agency will be established as a corporation separate from 
the Crown. The agency will be under the direction of a board of 
directors consisting of two representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, two nominees of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, two provincial 
appointees, and a chairman selected by the province in 
consultation with SUMA and SARM. 
 
The Bill provides that one of the two SUMA representatives on 
the board shall be nominated for appointment only after 
consultation by SUMA with Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 
Prince Albert. This recognizes the proportion of assessment in 
Saskatchewan which these cities account for, as well as the present 
practice regarding who carries out their valuations. It gives them 
input into the policies and assessment manuals which they will be 
required to follow in carrying out their valuations. 
 
As is now the case, the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
and Prince Albert will continue to be responsible for carrying out 
their own property and business valuations. These cities will have 
the option, as provided in this Bill, to enter into agreements to 
have the new agency carry out these instead. 
 
If they choose this option, these cities will be expected to 
contribute financially to the cost of the operation of the agency, 
just like other municipalities. If they continue to do their own 
valuations, these will be based on the assessment manuals and 
other policies put into place by the agency, so their assessments 
will be consistent with those of other municipalities. 
 

The new agency will employ staff or consultants as required. 
Existing employees of the Saskatchewan Assessment Authority 
will be transferred to the new agency. Members opposite will note 
that this will be considered a transfer within the meaning of The 
Trade Union Act, thus continuing the employee's membership in 
the existing union. 
 
The new assessment management agency will be financed jointly 
by the provincial government and by municipalities. The province 
will continue its existing financial commitment of $5.5 million, 
based on the assessment authority's 1985-86 budget, plus 
additional costs related to it but not covered by its appropriation. 
The provincial and urban, rural, and northern municipalities will 
finance additional costs over and above this on a 50-50 basis. 
 
It is important to note that for the first time municipalities will 
have a major say in assessment policy and procedures through 
their majority membership on the new agency's board. It is 
municipalities which rely on property and business assessment for 
their tax base, so naturally it is municipalities which have one of 
the strongest interests in assessment policies and procedures. 
Municipalities already have significant responsibilities under 
present municipal statutes respecting appointing an assessor, 
maintaining the assessment roll, local appeal procedures for the 
board of revision, and other aspects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe this new approach will be much more 
responsive to municipalities' needs and offers them a significant 
opportunity to determine future policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also continues the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Appeal board with some changes. The appeal board 
continues as an independent, provincially funded and appointed 
appeal body. It will not be tied to the new assessment management 
agency as originally proposed by the Local Government Finance 
Commission. This was one area in which we did not agree with 
the commission, and felt that the appeal body should be separate 
from the new agency. 
 
The appeal board's formal duties are expanded to include hearing 
appeals regarding tax exemptions; appeals from municipalities 
relating to equalized assessment set by the new agency; and 
appeals of assessment manuals and other orders prepared by the 
new agency. This will be in addition to the appeal boards' current 
responsibility for hearing assessment appeals under various 
statutes. 
 
This Bill does not fundamentally alter the overall assessment 
appeal process, including local assessment appeal provisions 
through local boards or courts of revision which are now in place 
under the various municipal statutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be up to the new Saskatchewan assessment 
management agency to pursue many of the other positive 
recommendations and suggestion made by the Local Government 
Finance Commission pertaining to assessment. This is considered 
to be part of its policy mandate. 
 
The agency will have challenging responsibilities to  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1726 
 
 

review the assessment system in this province. This will not occur 
overnight, but we are making a substantial start with this Bill. 
 
(1445) 
 
I would urge the members of this House to support this important 
piece of legislation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that Bill 48 which 
deals with the Saskatchewan assessment management agency and 
the subsequential amendments, Bill 49 which we'll deal with — I 
will be moving that we adjourn the debate on them so my 
colleague from Regina Centre will have an opportunity to review 
the minister's remarks and then make his remarks at a future day. 
 
But in listening to the minister I find it difficult to know what will 
be different with this Bill than what was on the books previous to 
this Bill being introduced. There will be those who will believe 
that what is happening here is a bit of a smoke-screen being set up 
by the Conservative government to take away from the fact that 
property taxes have increased dramatically as a result of the 
property improvement grant being removed by the Devine 
government. And basically I believe that's what's happening here 
to try to indicate to the public that somehow this government is not 
in favour of massive tax increases which they have been going 
ahead with helter-skelter in every area. 
 
And when it comes to property assessment what we know this 
government does, regardless of what they say they do, is 
dramatically increase property taxes. And we saw that again with 
the removal of the property improvement grant. 
 
We have indicated clearly where we stand on property 
improvement grant. We would bring it back very quickly, and will 
bring it back after the next election. I will want to have a number 
of questions to ask the minister in committee. But because my 
colleague from Regina Centre will want to make some comments 
on this Bill further, I now beg leave to adjourn the debate on Bill 
48 and will be doing the same with Bill 49. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment of 
The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of bill NO. 49, a Bill to implement consequential 
amendments arising from The Assessment Management Agency 
Act. These amendments relate to four separate statues: The 
Education Act, The Northern Municipalities Act, The Rural 
Municipality Act, and The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 
 
This Bill brings the provisions of these statutes into line  

with the new approach represented by the creation of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment management Agency. I would urge all 
members to support this particular Bill pertaining to consequential 
changes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I indicated earlier, I will ask for leave to 
adjourn the debate because my colleague will want to make some 
comments on this as well. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Before we begin I would ask the minister to 
please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be 
pleased to do that. Directly beside me, the chairman of the Public 
Service Commission, Mr. Stan Sojonky; behind me, Ms. Jane 
Eibner, director of administration; and then seated beside her, Mr. 
Jim Armstrong, associate chairman; to his right, Mr. Len 
Posyniak, assistant to the chairman; and directly in front of Mr. 
Posyniak, Mr. Mike Roberts, director of employee relations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate a list of your 
personal staff and salaries, and the amount of any increase granted 
to them for whatever reason over the last 12 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have no personal staff in my 
office paid out of the appropriation for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I gather no secretaries either who are in 
the Public Service Commission. I would then appreciate a 
statement of the salary of the senior officers of the Public Service 
Commission and the amounts of any increase granted to them 
within the last 12 months. If you would prefer, you could give it to 
me in writing, although I see that the media are all absent. But if 
you prefer, Mr. Minister, you can give it to me in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I have before me the names, 
positions, and if the member would listen, the member from 
Regina Centre . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry, Mr. 
Chairman, I was attempting to communicate with the member 
from Regina Centre, okay? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I believe that early on in this 
afternoon's proceedings I should draw attention to the fact that the 
noise level is already going up, and to ask all members to please 
refrain from unnecessary interruptions to allow the minister to 
make a reasoned explanation of the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — To the member from Regina Centre, I have 
before me the names, positions, and salary as of today of these 
individuals, plus their qualifications. I  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1727 
 

don't have the increases here, but we can get those to you and send 
that to you if that's adequate for your purposes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I assume you will be giving those to the 
pages, who are not now in the Chamber, actually. Perhaps the 
page by the government caucus door could bring those to me 
because I want to see them. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give me the percentage increases in the 
salary of the senior staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We will provide the salary increases to you, 
as I indicated. I don't have the salary increase information there. 
We can provide that for you as soon as we pull it together. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I honestly have some difficulty believing that 
the Public Service Commission do not have the details of their 
own salary increases. That is a little difficult to believe, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would ask the member from 
Quill Lakes to please allow your colleague to ask a question so the 
minister can answer it. I'd just like you to please refrain from 
making any noise. You have been talking from your seat from the 
minute you've come into the House, and I ask you to stop talking 
from your seat to allow the order of this House to proceed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I, Mr. Minister, have the greatest difficulty 
believing that the Public Service Commission do not know the 
increases in their own salaries. I really have trouble believing that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to ask those officials to give you that 
information so that you may give it to us. I darkly suspect that it's 
more than 3 per cent. I don't know that, but I darkly suspect that. 
 
I am not, Mr. Minister . . . I want it known, Mr. Chairman, that I 
am not casting any aspersions on the integrity or the sense of 
responsibility of the members of the Public Service Commission. I 
am saying, Mr. Minister, that I suspect that your pay policies are 
grossly unfair, and the place to start . . . And it has been so alleged 
by a number of people, some in this Chamber; some of the 
allegations have been made outside the Chamber. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, to start by allaying any suspicions that 
there may be any element of unfairness with respect to the pay 
increases of members of the Public Service Commission and give 
us the information. It is enormously difficult to believe you don't 
have it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just provided the 
member opposite with the salary figures for the senior staff of the 
Public Service Commission. I indicated to him that I would be 
providing the additional information that he requested, and I will 
certainly endeavour to do that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want the information 
now. I don't want it after the election. I'll be very blunt with you. 
I'll be perfectly candid with you. 
 
It may be of some assistance to give the minister some kind of an 
idea of what function this legislature serves.  

One of its primary functions is to give the opposition an 
opportunity to question the government, to criticize the 
government, and to provide an alternative for the public. There 
isn't much point, Mr. Minister, in us trying to fulfil that 
responsibility if everything is going to settle into . . . take form and 
shape after the election. 
 
I want that information now. I don't believe you haven't got it. But 
if you haven't got it, it's nothing more than a telephone call away. 
So I ask you to give us that information, Mr. Minister. 
 
I honestly had not expected that these estimates were going to take 
very long. But if you're going to start by stonewalling on 
something as sensitive as pay increases, then I think we're going to 
have a longer time at this than what you thought. 
 
So I suggest you start by giving us those pay increases. If there is 
nothing untoward about it, then tell us, and we'll go on to the next 
issue because there are plenty of issues of substance here that need 
to be discussed. I'd expected this would take 30 seconds. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that other ministers have given it 
to us. We've asked other ministers for the pay increases, and 
they've given it to us. I don't understand why, with this particular 
agency, where it is so sensitive, you're stonewalling, Mr. Minister. 
I think you have the information. If you haven't it's a quick phone 
call away. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, if you'll just reach around, take the sheet of 
paper behind you, give us that information, we'll probably go on to 
the next estimate. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member 
opposite that we have provided him with the annual salaries of the 
senior officials in the Public Service Commission. He is, if he 
wishes, quite free to make that information public. And I will be 
providing to him the increases for salaries for senior officials. And 
I endeavour to do that, and I will provide that to him. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Right after the election, when you are safely 
beyond the reach of the public — probably because of an election 
defeat. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find it absolutely unbelievable you don't have the 
information. If you won't give me the information, will you tell me 
why you won't give me the information? And you've never said 
you haven't got it. You just say, and I'm not giving it to you. Well I 
think something more than that is required. 
 
So if you insist on stonewalling, then at least try to justify your 
behaviour. It is not satisfactory to say, I'll send it to you, because I 
want it now. If it's available now and you have it, I say, Mr. 
Minister, give it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will read to the 
member opposite last year's list, which was sent to him last year. 
And if he had prepared for the estimates, then he certainly would 
have been able to have that list here. But I  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1728 
 
 

will take the time of the Assembly to read that information. 
 
Last year there was Mr. Sojonky, who was chairman, and the 
salary was 72,400 per annum; there was one Trevor Roadhouse, 
assistant chairman, MS1, with a salary at 61,944 per annum; there 
was one Bill Duncan, the director of staff training and 
development branch, MS3, 46,500 per annum; there was one 
Murray Bender, director of administration branch, AO5, 43,692 
per annum; there was one Dave Argue, executive director, 
employee relations branch, MS2, 62,508 per annum; there was 
one Jim Armstrong, executive director, senior management 
resourcing, MS1, 65,004 per annum. 
 
Those were last year's senior management positions with their 
salary. I have given you this year's senior management positions 
with their salaries. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It appears what has happened, Mr. Minister, 
is that the people seem to have changed, with two exceptions; the 
positions have been given new descriptions, and there have then 
appeared to have been some very healthy increases in the salaries 
paid to people who work there. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I'm wrong I would like to be informed of that. 
There are plenty of problem sin the public service of 
Saskatchewan without us attempting to create any more. And any 
suspicion that the Public Service Commission isn't playing by the 
rules of the game is going to do little for the morale of the Public 
Service Commission; it's already plenty bad enough. 
 
So if I'm misreading this, I would like to be informed of that. But 
it very much appears that, while Mr. Sojonky's salary has not 
increased inordinately, Mr. Armstrong's appears to have gone up 
by about 10 per cent, if I've got that right; the rest appear to be 
new people basically doing the same positions at 10, 12, $14,000 
more money in most cases — 10 to $15,000 is too much. You 
gave it to me in not quite the right order. But there appear to have 
been one or two positions for which the increases were fairly 
substantial. 
 
So I'd like you to comment on the nature of those increases, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, last year, Messrs. Roadhouse, Duncan, 
Argue, and Bender were with the commission. They are not with 
the commission, so we can exclude those for comparison 
purposes. You have indicated that Mr. Sojonky's salary was 
modestly increased, not inappropriately, so we are left with the 
discussion then about Mr. Armstrong's salary. 
 
Last year he was in the position of executive director, senior 
management resourcing, MS1. This year his duties have been 
substantially increased, and of course one knows that when one 
assumes new responsibilities, a larger orbit of activity and 
responsibility that you have to deal with — and he is so doing in 
his position today as associate chairman of the Public Service 
Commission — that naturally there is going to be an appropriate 
salary offered commensurate with those duties. 
 

Now it seems to me that last year, and perhaps even again this year 
when I went through some other estimates in my various 
responsibilities, the member challenged me that somehow, 
individuals who did not take on new responsibilities should not be 
receiving commensurate salary. And I related to him that at one 
time I was involved in the profession of education as a school 
teacher and received a certain salary. When my responsibilities 
were increased and I was given the title of vice-principal of a 
school, the salary was increased accordingly. When my 
responsibilities were again increased and I was given the title of 
school principal, there was a commensurate increase in the salary. 
 
I'm sure the member opposite would not object to the principle of 
paying people in accordance with the duties that they are asked to 
provide on behalf of the public. That is in fact what has transpired. 
In the case of Mr. Armstrong, it is, I'm sure, a principle that the 
member opposite would want adhered to very strongly in the 
Public Service Commission. Because if we are going to receive 
the best possible service from public servants here in the province, 
I'm sure he would agree it is important that we pay them in 
accordance with the responsibilities that they are shouldering on 
behalf of the taxpayer. 
 
That is in fact what has happened in the case of Mr. Armstrong. It 
is a principle that I uphold very strongly. I'm sure that the member 
opposite who has asked the questions would also want to reiterate 
his support for that very important principle. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What increases have been awarded to the 
public service generally, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well of course the salary increases for 
unionized personnel would be in accord with the negotiated salary 
increase, the collective bargaining agreement, and for out-of-scope 
people it was around 3 per cent, I understand. However, for any 
individual who was in scope or out of scope who assumed new 
responsibilities greater or larger than they previously had, they 
naturally would have received a commensurate increase in salary 
in accord with that particular position. 
 
So anybody in the Public Service Commission, whether they are 
senior staff within the Public Service Commission, whether they 
are out-of-scope people, or whether they are in-scope, unionized 
personnel, if they received a promotion, then naturally they would 
receive the salary that should go along with that particular 
promotion. I'm sure the member opposite doesn't agree with that 
principle, does he? Or does he disagree with it? What is he getting 
at? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, we might, Mr. Chairman, give the 
minister some assistance. There are opportunities for asking the 
opposition party questions. But the estimates are not one of them, 
and given the premium on time in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, we 
might stick to the business at hand, which is to call the 
government to account. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't intend to dwell on this. I would like to know 
when Lorne Koback, Michael Roberts, and Jane  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1729 
 

Eibner, when were they hired? When did they come on board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For Mr. Koback, appointment June '85; for 
Mr. Roberts, appointment February '86; for Ms. Eibner, 
appointment January '86. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I intend to leave the matter of the pay 
increases. They're a delicate thing to deal with and a difficult thing 
to deal with without more information. This doesn't quite seem 
like the forum to be doing it. 
 
Suffice it to say that one or two of these increases, Mr. Minister, 
have not been explained. They appear to be somewhat large. 
 
I think this is a very poor example . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Which one? Well, Mr. Armstrong's and Miss Eibner's. Miss 
Eibner's appears to be a 6 per cent increase over the salary paid to 
the previous incumbent. There may be some explanation for that. 
And Mr. Armstrong's appears to be a considerable increase over 
what he was paid previously, and over what the previous assistant 
chairman was paid previously, I should add, more to the point. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well my comment in the case of Miss 
Eibner, that she was appointed to this position coming from 
Manitoba — the Public Service Commission in Manitoba — 
appointed to this position. So one has to be careful here what 
you're saying. 
 
Secondly, I indicated, in the case of Mr. Armstrong, that his duties 
have been substantially increased from his position formerly to his 
present position of associate chairman, and that his duties as 
associate chairman are different from those today than those of 
whoever occupied formerly the positions known as the assistant 
chairman. 
 
So I'm sorry that the member opposite does not want to put on the 
record his support for the principle that civil servants should be 
paid in accordance with the duties that they are asked to perform. 
And if a servant of the public in this province is requested to take 
on additional duties, then certainly members on this side of the 
government believe that they should be paid in accordance with 
those increased duties. Whether it's in the field of education, 
whether it's in the field of health care, whether it's in the field of 
housing, whether it's in the private sector, it makes no difference. 
One should be paid in accordance with the duties that you are 
performing. 
 
And I would reiterate for the record again, I'm sorry that the 
member opposite does not want to place on the record his support 
for that principle, because I believe that it is fundamentally 
important if we are to have a public service in this province which 
feels good about the duties that they are performing, and to create 
the kind of positive environment here in which public servants can 
work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder, with leave, if  

I could introduce a group of students. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. On 
behalf of my colleague, the member for Cumberland, I would like 
to introduce 14 grade 8 students who are sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery, accompanied by their teacher, Stephen Davidson; 
chaperons, Dorothy Davidson, and their bus driver, Ralph Stark. 
 
This group of students, Mr. Chairman, are from the Keethanow 
School in Stanley Mission, and they're down here on an 
educational tour. And I want to, on behalf of all members, ask all 
members to welcome them to the legislature. And we wish you a 
safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate knowing 
what your policy is with respect to agencies of a government 
which are moved from one location to another. What is the policy 
with respect to transfer of employees? Are they free to refuse the 
relocation and move into other departments? What's the position 
of an employee where an agency of government has moved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the Premier 
indicated, with the transfer of employees pertaining to the 
agricultural credit corporation and crop insurance and the 
Department of Science and Technology to various locations in the 
province outside of Regina, that those particular employees have 
been assured that, if for one reason or another they were not able 
to make the particular move, that they would be offered 
appropriate employment within the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There was a great deal of concern expressed, 
Mr. Minister, by some employees when the crop insurance board 
and the Agdevco was transferred . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Who? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think it was Agdevco — was it not? — was 
transferred from Regina to Melfort, or do I have the name wrong? 
I'm not wrong about crop insurance. When those Crown 
corporations were transferred to Swift Current and Melville, there 
was a great deal of concern expressed by some employees who 
were not in a position to move and who had been told they either 
take the move or quit. And I was unable to understand the 
rationale of a government for being so harsh. I could see nothing 
wrong with allowing those employees of those Crown 
corporations to move into other areas of government and allow 
some local people in Melville and Swift Current the opportunity to 
take the jobs. So I could not, Mr. Minister, understand why the 
government would want to be so  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1730 
 
 

harsh. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just indicated. For the 
benefit of the member opposite and for his edification, I will 
provide him again with this information: that employees who for 
good reasons are unable to move to another locality with their 
present position, they will be offered another position at an 
equivalent level in their present location. That commitment has 
been made on numerous occasions in many ways, I believe in 
writing from the Premier. And certainly that commitment is a very 
firm, substantial, reasonable commitment — not harsh but, on the 
contrary, very humane. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then the first communications which those 
employees had was later rendered inoperative by subsequent 
instructions. Do I take it that what they were told, at the time, they 
were told that the agencies were being transferred was in fact later 
rescinded? — because they were told in unmistakable terms to 
either take the transfer or quit. The fact that they might be married 
women with a husband who couldn't find a job in Swift Current, 
with children who couldn't move, didn't cut any ice at all. They 
were told to either take it or quit. 
 
Do I take it then that that's just another example of how poorly this 
government thinks out what it does, and that you later, after some 
scrambling, did and made the appropriate decision which you 
should have made in the first place? So then I take it, Mr. Minister, 
once again you blundered into a hastily conceived action; later you 
cleaned up the mess by rescinding earlier communications made 
to those employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I simply want to clarify for 
the member opposite that, as far as I'm aware, at no time was it 
suggested to anyone that you either move or you lose your job — 
not so. Not so. It may have been that at the very outset of the 
process there may have been some uncertainties as to the details. 
But I want you to know that our commitment has been very firm 
to those particular employees, and I have stated that in general to 
the member opposite. And I would simply read for him the letter 
which has been sent to those particular employees: 
 

As you know, Dr. Jim Armstrong, associate chairman, Public 
Service Commission, was requested to speak to the staff of 
Saskatoon Science and Technology on Friday, March 21, 1986, 
to clarify with you my intentions to assist you fully in making 
your move to Saskatoon, or in facilitating your transfer to 
another position here in Regina. 
 
I would like to confirm my commitment to you personally. In 
making this move I am concerned that both the interests of the 
public we serve and your interests as an employee are well met. 
Any employee who for good reasons cannot make the move 
will be offered equivalent level employment in the public 
service. 
 
I have instructed the management of Science and Technology to 
draw up plans for relocation that  

will ensure continued excellent service to the public, as well as 
meeting your needs. I have also instructed my officials to offer 
their resources to you in helping you to make this decision. 
 
If you decide to relocate, you will receive generous assistance. 
If you are unable to move, you will be reassigned to an 
equivalent level of employment. An experienced personnel 
manager, Ms. Bechard, has been assigned to work with you and 
your colleagues on this matter. You will find her very helpful in 
this matter. 

 
Thank you for your co-operation. 
 

And the same letter was sent to all affected employees. I think that 
very clearly indicates our humane concern to the employees. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some students. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to introduce to 
you 70 bright, shiny faces from the beautiful town of Esterhazy in 
my constituency. They're from the P. J. Gillen school and they're 
grade 5 students. They're in the west gallery, incidentally, and they 
have with them today their teachers: Mrs. Linda Nett, Mrs. Doreen 
Haubrick, and Mr. Schramm, Randy Schramm. 
 
(1530) 
 
The chaperons along with them today is Mr. Ross Seman, Mrs. 
Margaret Cook, Lorne Thompson, Mrs. Carol Tucker, Wendy 
Gyug, and Mrs. Christine Busch. Their bus drivers today are 
Rodney Irvine, and I think we should commend both of them — 
and Sharon Gelowitz — because they drive 70 grade 5 children 
from Esterhazy, which is 150 miles east of here, to Regina — and 
the tolerance of all the chaperons. I'm sure they'll have a quieter 
trip home then they had on the way up. 
 
They kind of left at 6 o'clock this morning, so I imagine they'll be 
slightly more tired going home. But I think I've met a few 
ringleaders already because I've had drinks with them and pictures 
taken with them, and there's some pretty live wires in the group, 
Mr. Chairman. So I wanted to bring them into the Chamber and 
introduce them in the proper manner to my colleagues and our 
colleagues in the Chamber. I just wish them having a safe trip 
home when they've finished the tour of the Legislative buildings. 
 
So I'd ask the members to welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 

  



 
June 5, 1986 

1731 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is one Dan Stephens employed in the Public 
Service Commission anywhere now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It's my understanding that he is not part of 
the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The name appears in the Public Accounts for 
the year ending March 31, 1985. Could you tell me when he left? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We'll provide the member with that particular 
information. I don't have it right here at my fingertips. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you must have the 
information with you. I can't believe that you don't. Every time we 
get into a sensitive area, you're going to send me the information. 
If the practice of these ministers had been to send that information 
promptly, we wouldn't be squawking so much. We know from 
experience that a year will go by before we get it. Frankly, by May 
of 1987 nobody is going to care where Dan Stephens is — May of 
'87. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can just check around and see if 
you can find out when he left. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the information of the member opposite, 
there are hundreds of individuals in the Public Service 
Commission who regularly leave a department and go to another 
department, or leave the Public Service Commission and move to 
some other employment with some other employer. If he expects 
that I'm going to carry around in my head the names and dates and 
times that literally hundreds of employees are coming and going in 
the Public Service Commission, then he is sadly mistaken. 
 
Now I indicated to him that we will provide him with that 
information as soon as we can. I don't have any problem providing 
that information to the member opposite. I will get it for him as 
soon as we can. We don't happen to have it here right now. And I 
have requested that my officials will provide me with that 
information as soon as they are able to get it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, to refresh your memory, Dan 
Stephens was in the Public Service Commission, ran as the 
Conservative candidate in Regina West, set a record is so doing. 
No Conservative candidate has trailed as far behind Mr. Les 
Benjamin in his entire 20-year career as Dan Stephens did. So he 
set a record. He's someone to be remembered . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It's the truth. The man set a record. He's one of a 
kind, and we ought to recognize his peculiar talents. Les Benjamin 
never beat anyone by 8,000 votes except Dan Stephens. Then he 
winds up in the year ending March 31, 1985 working for the 
Public Service Commission. I now see him, I believe, in Executive 
Council. I believe he's now a personal aide to the Premier. When I 
see the Premier, in public, I often see Dan Stephens with him. So I 
suspect he hasn't totally forgotten what the Conservative Party is. I 
see the member of SGI nodding his head. He agrees with me. He 
probably remembers. 
 

So, Mr. Minister, I can't believe that you can't give me the month. 
Give me the month when Dan Stephens left. I can't believe you 
don't know that. He is obviously a senior operator in the 
government, and you must know when he left. I just don't believe 
that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I indicated to the member opposite that 
I would provide him with that information. I didn't have it at my 
fingertips. I instructed the officials to locate it for me and they 
have done so. 
 
Dan Stephens worked for two periods. He worked from April to 
June of 1984 and from October to December of 1984. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The salary then would have been 42,000 a 
year — worked for six months and he was paid 21,500, if my 
memory serves me correctly. Did he get any severance in '85 or 
was he severed; or did he simply go to a different branch of the 
government? This was the individual who's so gracious in defeat, 
having set a record for having lost by the most number of votes, 
then wished an early death might overtake his successful opponent 
so that he might get a chance to run the by-election. This is this 
man's diplomacy. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe that the member is 
introducing arguments which are foreign to the debate under 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don't know that that comment is necessary 
to the question. I just was giving some background to his 
diplomatic skills and his sense of decorum. I was just trying to 
give the minister a complete picture of the man so that we could 
discuss him. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, just so 
we could get an idea of how he earned his 42,000. How did he 
earn the 43,000? What services, apart from placing curses, trying 
to place curses on his opponent, did he serve any other purpose 
when he was with the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated to the member, Mr. Stephens 
worked for two periods — from April to June, '84; from October 
to December, '84. The salary was 3,584 per month and no 
severance pay was provided to Mr. Stephens. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is that because he didn't leave the 
Government of Saskatchewan, but only transferred to a different 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If the individual in question is still working 
for the government in some particular capacity, then naturally 
severance pay would not be involved. I don't know if he is 
working for some aspect of the Saskatchewan government, so I'm 
not sure the exact reasons why there was no severance. There 
could be a variety of reasons. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I believe he is working for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I believe he's working in Executive Council. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, is he not working in Executive Council now, 
the same individual? 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1732 
 
 

I also want to know what his duties were. I want to know what it 
was about his diplomacy and charm that inspired this government 
to pay him 43,000 a year. What were his duties, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated previously, I'm not certain if 
Mr. Stephens is presently employed in the government. He is not 
employed with the Public Service Commission. He may be 
employed in some other particular branch of agency of 
government. It may be Executive Council, and you would have to 
ask the appropriate minister when you get to various estimates to 
find out if the particular individual is, in fact, employed under a 
particular ministry. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to raise the issue of 
the politicization of the public service and the decentralization of 
hiring. 
 
I listened with some interest to the announced plans of the 
government to decentralize hiring. Mr. Minister, decentralized 
hiring used to be the norm in government. It resulted in patronage, 
and appointments by patronage almost to the exclusion of all else. 
Because if the central body does not do the hiring, then there's no 
accountability. But if the deputy does the hiring, and the deputy's 
job depends on the whim of the minister, then the minister 
controls the hiring, and that results in a public service which is 
hired on the basis of patronage. 
 
Professional public services in England and Canada, and much 
later in Saskatchewan after the people had the sense to get rid of 
the Conservative government, resulted from . . . the mechanism by 
which that was achieved was centralized hiring under a public 
service. You, Mr. Minister, wish to roll back the clock 50 years to 
the day when ministers, and accordingly . . . when deputies, and 
accordingly ministers, hired the employees. That is a straight 
system for patronage; it's nothing more. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that's not acceptable; nor is it possible to run 
a government that is as complex and large as governments today 
with a group of amateurish hacks, and that's what you get with 
patronage. Patronage is an enormously expensive way to run a 
government because you hire (a) more than you need; (b) you hire 
people who aren't qualified. The resulting confusion, mistakes, and 
duplication, is a very expensive way to run a government. 
 
People ask me, Mr. Minister, how it can be that this government is 
spending 45 per cent more during a period of time when inflation 
has gone up by 21 per cent and it's cut back so many services. The 
response, I think, Mr. Minister, is that, to repeat myself, patronage 
is a very expensive way to run a government. It's inefficient; there 
are duplications; and services inevitably deteriorate. A public 
which is used to a high calibre, professional public service are not 
going to accept the confusion, the discourtesy, and the lack of 
direction and assistance which inevitably results from a public 
service hired by patronage. 
 
(1545) 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you will not recant this whole 
backward-looking, foolish attempt to "decentralize"  

hiring and, I say, appoint people to the public service through 
patronage — that's all appointment by ministers will ever be. 
 
The whole function of the Public Service Commission, as 
conceived in Britain and as adopted by the Mackenzie King 
government and later Douglas government in this province, was to 
professionalize the public service. By decentralizing hiring, you're 
rolling back the clock. That's not acceptable to the public because 
they know it isn't fair; moreover, isn't workable. 
 
You cannot hire a bunch of amateurish hacks to run a government 
as large and complex as governments are today. That might have 
worked at the turn of the century, but it will not work today. 
Governments are much too big and much too complex, and the 
public are far too demanding to accept the kind of thing which you 
are trying to introduce in this province, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
There's no requirement. I say to the member from Moosomin, who 
has been here as long as I have, and I'm surprised doesn't know the 
rules any better than he does; there was no onus on me to ever ask 
a question. I could carry on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm 
making eminent good sense. I'm making eminent sense . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member from Moosomin asked me to make some sense. I say 
in my own defence that, while the Tories are in trouble across the 
province, they are in deep, deep trouble in this city. The cause of 
that is the public service. I have never seen the mood of the public 
service as raw or as unhappy or as demoralized as they are right 
now. I have never seen anything like it, and I have maintained 
close contacts with the public service for going on 17 years. Most 
of my working life I have, in one way or another, been connected 
with the public service. I remember the public service in the dying 
days of the Thatcher government, and it was . . . the morale was 
super compared to what it is now. So, Mr. Minister, what you are 
attempting to do to the public service is not acceptable to the 
public service. 
 
The results in North East might indicate something to you. The 
patronage which you're introducing is not acceptable to the public; 
and it will not work, as demonstrated by these spending estimates 
— a 45 per cent increase during the period of 27 per cent inflation, 
with cuts in services. That, Mr. Minister, is because you can't run 
the government — you can't run the government. One of the 
reason you can't run the government is because you have too darn 
much patronage in it. And that is a central problem with this 
government which underpins so many of the problems you people 
think you have. 
 
Mr. Minister, many of the problems, many of the mistakes, many 
of the screw-ups, which I'm sure infuriate you ministers, because 
you wonder why they can't get it straight — I'll tell you what it 
comes from It comes from a public service which is deeply 
unhappy, which lacks direction, which is demoralized, and which 
is going to cut this government off as soon as you have the nerve 
to call an election. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1733 
 

The minister may smile — I'm surprised the minister can smile. 
The minister is unfortunate enough to be running in this city, and 
all your hard work may go for nought. And the primary reason, 
Mr. Minister, will be because you have tried, you have attempted 
to undo the professionalism of the public service. That's hurt you 
very, very badly. It's hurt your ability to run programs. It has hurt 
you in this city particularly. 
 
I listen to the member from Lakeview muttering and sputtering 
away, chewing gum or candy or whatever it is that he's trying to 
keep himself awake with. I say that . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — That's a cruel statement. He just came back 
from dinner. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I say to the . . .it may be cruel. He may be 
chewing his cud; I don't know what he's chewing. But I say, Mr. 
Minister, that the member from Lakeview has got some serious 
political problems, and they stem directly from your . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I think that if we stay with the 
item at hand that we will be able to progress much more quickly, 
and let's get on with the estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would like you to comment 
on the decentralization of hiring and the consequence of 
politicization of the public service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I would be delighted, absolutely 
delighted, to respond to the comments of the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first association with the public service was as a 
young boy. My father was a member of the public service, and he 
served the people of this province and of this country for many 
years as a public servant. And he taught me the importance of the 
public service here in this country and in this province, of a 
professional public service, of an efficient public service. And it 
was in those early days that I developed a very sound respect for 
the public service in this province and in this country. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, I want to say that during the 11 years that the 
former government was in power, they wrote the book on 
patronage and politicizing the civil service. And Mr. Chairman, 
I'm going to back those statements up in a few minutes, to the 
shame and the embarrassment of the members opposite. But 
before I do that, Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate exactly how 
professional we are today in our approach to the staffing and the 
administration of the Public Service Commission. 
 
First of all, Mr. Chairman, I would like to indicate that we have 
today, for the first time ever in this province, we have today a 
statement on the mission of the Saskatchewan Public Service 
Commission which the former government never had. Because 
I'm afraid your purpose was to politicize and to patronize. Our 
purpose is to provide a professional civil service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And here is the mission of the Public Service 
Commission, and I will be happy to provide the member opposite 
with a copy of this when I'm finished. 
 

Our mission is to represent the public interest by providing 
professional human resource services in an effective and ethical 
manner. And our goals: we believe employees want to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan to the best of their abilities, and that their 
full potential can be achieved if our services ensure that 
appointment is based on merit; offer opportunities for employees 
to develop their knowledge and skills; promote a participative 
work environment that will enhance employee performance and 
development; ensure that employees receive recognition based on 
performance; demonstrate leadership and innovation in improving 
human resource management; provide fair treatment and equal 
opportunity for all individuals; anticipate and meet service 
requirements in a timely, responsive, and cost-effective manner; 
respond to challenging employee needs and government priorities. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that is the mission of the Public Service 
Commission. Those are the goals of the Public Service 
Commission. This is what we believe in. The former NDP 
administration did not believe in this. Did they ever provide the 
public and the civil service here in this province with this kind of a 
statement of missions and goals? Never. And I would ask that this 
particular document be transmitted to the members opposite in 
order that they might edify themselves about how a Public Service 
Commission should be run in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate that I am surprised that the member is not aware 
that we do have a fully centralized employment service here in the 
Public Service Commission in accordance with The Public 
Service Act. 
 
Now the member opposite has made certain allegations and cast 
certain aspersions upon people in the Public Service Commission. 
And I want, therefore, Mr. Chairman, to indicate to the members 
of the Assembly, and to the members of the Saskatchewan public 
who may be watching this afternoon, that we believe that it is 
important to ensure fair and equitable treatment of all candidates 
for positions in the Public Service Commission, and to ensure 
merit in appointment. 
 
And accordingly, Mr. Chairman, I want to take some time to read 
for the member opposite the exact steps that we take to ensure a 
professional civil service here. 
 

The Public Service Commission is responsible for the staffing 
of all permanent classified service positions, and ensures that all 
appointments are on the basis of merit. The staffing of 
non-permanent or unclassified service position, orders in 
councils, temporaries and part-times is the responsibility, of 
course, of the department. 
 
Now the process observed is as follows: Re-employment list. 
Upon receipt of the staffing request from the department, and 
prior to advertising, the re-employment list is checked. This 
allows for the placement of individuals who may have been 
subject to lay-off or return from indefinite leave. 
 
Advertising. The position is advertised in the  

  



 
June 5, 1986 

1734 
 
 

appropriate media, the selection of which for in-scope positions 
may be affected by contractual obligations. All advertisements 
comply with equal opportunities legislation. then we have a 
preliminary screening panel. After the competition closing date, 
a preliminary panel meets to finalize the knowledge, skills, and 
abilities required for the position. This panel consists of a Public 
Service Commission representative, a department 
representative, and for in-scope positions a union observer is 
present. 

 
All applications are reviewed against the critical knowledge, 
skills, and abilities, and the best applicants are invited for 
interview. Then there is a selection panel, and of course the 
interview guide. An interview guide is developed to evaluate 
fairly each candidate's ability to meet the required knowledge, 
skills, and abilities. The selection panel then interviews and 
rates each candidate. 
 
For in-scope positions, Mr. Chairman, the union is invited to 
participate as an observer to further ensure consistent and 
equitable treatment of candidates. The union may grieve any 
suspected discrepancies. 

 
What about reference checks and certification. 
 

Reference checks are completed on the most meritorious 
candidates. A maximum of three candidates are certified on the 
basis of merit. Certification means the candidate is fully 
qualified to perform the duties of the position. 
 
Candidate selection. A contractual requirement for in-scope 
positions is that the most senior certified candidate must be 
offered the position. If there are no certified candidates with 
seniority, or if the position is out of scope, the department is 
able to select freely from the list of certified candidates. 

 
So there, Mr. Chairman, we have a very detailed, very clear, 
equitable and fair approach to the hiring of people in the 
permanent classified Public Service Commission in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe very strongly, Mr. Chairman, that we have likely one of 
the best — if not the best — public service in Canada. And I say 
that, Mr. Chairman, because I have, in my various capacities, 
travelled across the country, and I have at various times sat in on 
various conferences and forums where I have seen people from 
other provinces. And I have remarked on many occasions when I 
have returned that the civil servants who work for the public here 
in the province of Saskatchewan have acquitted themselves most 
admirably. And I think we can be very proud of the people that 
serve the public of Saskatchewan. I want to ensure that we 
continue to have the kind of fair and equitable treatment in the 
selection and hiring of candidates that we presently do. 
 
And I want to contrast that, Mr. Chairman, I want to contrast that 
now with the approach of the former  

government. I want to contrast that for the members opposite who 
are here today, for the members of the government side who may 
not be aware of this information, and I want the public of 
Saskatchewan to contrast what I just described as the present 
practice of this particular government with the practice of the 
former administration. 
 
And I happen to have with me today, Mr. Chairman, a list, a list of 
some of the individuals that were hired by the former NDP 
administration. And I want to say at the outset, Mr. Chairman, that 
I was shocked, I was shocked when I first was made aware of the 
extent of patronage and of blatant politicizing that took place 
under the former administration — not only the politicization and 
the patronizing that went on with regards to friends of the former 
NDP administration, but many close relatives. And you will find 
when I read this list that nepotism was rife under the former NDP 
government. 
 
I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if we have time to read the entire list. 
It is a long one. But I want to begin. 
 
(1600) 
 
First of all, Mr. Chairman, there was one Harvey Abells, former 
organizer for T.C. Douglas and the CCF, an OC appointment in 
Revenue, formerly government services, as director of purchasing. 
This gentleman was the son-in-law to Auburn Pepper, former 
NDP MLA in Weyburn. 
 
Then there was a Janet Abells, who was appointed secretary to the 
minister of northern Saskatchewan, who happened to be the 
daughter of Auburn Pepper, former NDP MLA. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Chairman, as I go through this list, that it 
may very well be that these individuals may have been competent 
people. I have no way of measuring or judging that. I have no way 
of measuring or judging that, but I do know, Mr. Chairman, that 
these individuals were not hired through what we would call the 
normal, equitable, fair, apolitical, neutral, non-politicized approach 
to the civil service that I just read. 
 
Then there was one individual, Doug Archer, former executive 
assistant to cabinet minister Brockelbank, who was appointed the 
director of administration in government services. His wife Gloria 
was the sister to Bill Knight, who happened to be one of the higher 
echelon types in the NDP party. Then there was one Pat Atkinson, 
who I understand today happens to be an NDP candidate, who was 
at one time the vice-president for the provincial NDP, who was 
appointed as an investigator in the Office of the Rentalsman in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Then there was one Chris Banman, former NDP candidate in 
Rosthern. Then there was one Myrna Barclay. Then there was one 
Curtis Bowerman, a garage attendant in the Highway Traffic 
Board, happened to be son of Ted Bowerman, former NDP 
cabinet minister. 
 
Then there was Faye Boyle, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) board member; Janis Boyle, wife of Patrick, rentalsman 
office. And then there was Patrick 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1735 
 

Boyle, son, who happened to be executive assistant to the former 
Mr. Cody. 
 
Now then, there was a Frank Buck, former executive assistant to 
Mr. Elwood Cowley, cabinet minister under your administration, 
who then becomes administration officer 4 in mineral resources, 
and then resigned from government and was granted an SGI 
agency in Regina. Certainly, I don't believe politics was involved 
in that. 
 
Then there was one George Burton, transportation agency; one 
John Burton, former NDP MLA, who happened to be appointed 
admin. analyst 1 in the Department of Finance. Then there was 
one Zenny Burton, wife of John S. Burton, former NDP MP, 
appointed to the Highway Traffic Board. Then there was Eric 
Kline. Now Eric Kline was a defeated NDP candidate in 1978, 
who happened to be appointed a Crown solicitor 1 to the Law 
Reform Commission. 
 
Then there was one Don Cody. Don Cody was an MLA under 
your government 1971 to 1975; was defeated in 1975 and was 
given a senior position in SGI. Then there was one W. Cameron 
Cooper here, one of Margorie Cooper-Hunt, former NDP MLA, 
special assistant to the minister of transportation, executive 
assistant to the minister of Education. Then there was one Ray 
Funk, who sought the nomination for the Federal NDP, lost it and 
was latter assigned to the community college in Prince Albert, in 
1981. 
 
Now I still have a fairly lengthy list here. The member opposite 
seems to be interested in hearing the rest of the list. There was one 
Ted Glover. Ted Glover was appointed special assistant to Hon. E. 
Kaeding, Rural Affairs minister, and he happened to be an NDP 
candidate at one time. Then there was a Glenn Hagel, NDP 
candidate from Moose Jaw North in '82, who received an 
honorarium of $5,700 from the Department of Education. Then 
there was one David Henley, NDP candidate for the federal 
election in Moose Jaw in 1980, who was given a job with Saskoil, 
and happened to be an executive assistant to a variety of NDP 
minister. One Gren Jones, later was given a management position 
with Sask Housing, and his son, Dennis Jones, was executive 
assistant to Mr. Cody, who happened to be one of your cabinet 
ministers. Don Keith was a defeated NDP candidate who was 
appointed general manager for the Saskatchewan development 
fund. Connie Kinzel. There was a Bill Knight, former NDP MP, 
who was appointed as assistant principal secretary. This list goes 
on and on. 
 
I will skip this list for a moment to move down to the Koskie 
family. And I think it's important — I think it's important — for 
the members opposite, for the public, for the members who are 
here today, and for the public service, to understand exactly what 
the approach of the former NDP government was when it came to 
directing, or shall I say running, perhaps politicizing, the civil 
service. 
 
There was one Deanna Koskie, wife of Morley Koskie, who 
worked in the Attorney General's department as an administration 
officer 3. She happened to be the sister-in-law to Murray Koskie, 
who was a former NDP cabinet minister. That's one. 
 

Then there was Linda Koskie, who was clerk-steno 4, an OC 
(order in council) appointment to the provincial secretary, 
sister-in-law to Murray Koskie, former NDP cabinet minister. 
 
Then there was one Morley Koskie, vice-president of SGI, brother 
to Murray Koskie, former NDP cabinet minister. Then there was 
one Ted Koskie, appointed executive assistant to the minister of 
Consumer Affairs, the brother of Murray Koskie, former NDP 
cabinet minister. 
 
Then there was one Barrie Hicks, who was married to Mr. 
Koskie's sister, and he happened to be involved as a chief liquor 
inspector. Then I understand there was one Marlene Giles, sister of 
Murray Koskie, who evidently worked in the Department of 
Health. 
 
Now I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if, in all the years that I have 
lived in the province of Saskatchewan, that I have ever heard 
before, nor do I hope that I shall ever have to hear again, that there 
was a government in power that had six relatives of a cabinet 
minister employed by the government of the day at the same time. 
And it sure wasn't a Progressive Conservative government that 
was guilty of that crass nepotism. It was an NDP government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the list goes on. The list goes on. It's a lengthy list. 
And if the member opposite wants to continue to talk about 
patronage, then fine. There is more of the list to read. 
 
I have read for him the mission and the goals of the Public Service 
Commission as it is today. I have stated my commitment to the 
maintenance, the establishment, the ongoing direction of a 
professional Public Service Commission in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have read for him the hiring practice of the Public Service 
Commission today. And I have no hesitation in saying 
whatsoever, that today in the province of Saskatchewan we have a 
Public Service Commission that is far more fair, far more 
equitable than it ever was under the former NDP administration. 
And I apologize to the member opposite if I happened to miss one 
of the Koskie's that were employed under the former 
administration. 
 
I indicated earlier, Mr. Chairman, that I was shocked to come 
upon this list to read through the names of the individuals that 
were employed. As competent as they may have been as 
individuals, it was not right, it was not right for the former 
administration to so politicize the public service here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might just share one or two personal anecdotes, which 
would support the contentions that I have just made. Prior to my 
running for government, my wife happened to work for the Public 
Service Commission in one of the departments, and she indicated 
to me on various occasions that the Public Service Commission 
under the NDP was so politicized that it was shameful, shameful. 
That's exactly what happened, exactly what happened. And I'm 
sure that there are many other individuals who would support that 
same contention. 
 
Mr. Chairman, my approach has been to ensure that we  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1736 
 
 

have a professional public service. I think I could cite for you 
example after example of what this government has done to 
elevate people within the Public Service Commission, to bring 
people from the private sector to the Public Service Commission, 
to bring people from out of province to assume certain positions in 
the Public Service Commission, and to provide a fair and equitable 
approach to serving the people of Saskatchewan in the 
non-politicized, neutral, equitable, and fair way that the public 
want. That has been my goal; that will continue to be my goal. 
And I can assure the members of this Assembly that as long as I 
am minister in charge of the Public Service Commission, we won't 
have a list of six members of any member of this side of the 
government working for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest to the 
minister rant and rave about people who were connected with the 
New Democratic Party who also worked for the government, and I 
don't think one should find it surprising that in the civil service, in 
the Crowns and in the departments, which runs now in the area of 
20,000 to 25,000, that there would be Conservatives, and NDP, 
and Liberals who work for the government. Obviously there will 
be, and obviously there are a number of Conservatives from your 
families who are now in cabinet who work for the government. 
 
René Archambault is the brother-in-law to the Premier, words for 
the government. He gets a big wage down in Gravelbourg. You 
know that, I know that. For you to stand here and sanctimoniously 
say that the NDP hired NDP and that's all, or that you hire, and 
that you're clean and don't hire your relatives. The Premier's own 
family. I'm glad you raised it, because we weren't going to raise 
the fact the René Archambault who is the brother-in-law . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, we weren't. We weren't going to 
raise it. But the minister sanctimoniously stands here and says that 
the NDP shouldn't have hired anyone associated with the NDP, is 
ludicrous. Obviously there will be times when people like Martin 
Pederson, the former leader of the Conservative Party, who now 
works for your government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He's a good man. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, he is a good man, but for the minister 
to sanctimoniously say that NDP governments only hired NDP 
and the Conservative government doesn't hire any political people, 
is ridiculous. I mean, it shows what a phoney you are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Remember the name Paul Rousseau. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Paul Rousseau, who is a sitting member 
appointed to a position in London, how can you say to the public 
that you're clean on this one. And there are many others. But I 
want to tell you that at the time that the NDP were in government, 
we also hired family members of Conservative candidates. 
 
Now for you, Mr. Minister, to stand there and sanctimoniously say 
that we're unfair to Conservative candidates, your wife worked for 
me when you were a candidate. Your wife worked in the 
Department of Social Services when you were a Tory candidate. 
In fact at that time she even worked in my office as a secretary in 
the Department of Social  

Services. And I never worried a great deal about it because I 
believe that she was a competent and fair person. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Unlike her husband. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I say unlike her husband, because you 
are not telling the truth when you talk about the record of our 
government. Yes, we hired Conservative candidates' family 
members, and we didn't dismiss them when the Minister of Social 
Services and the minister in charge of the Public Service 
Commission, when you became a candidate. We didn't fire her. 
She continued on in the Department of Social Services and did a 
good job. And I congratulate you on the one side for having the 
good judgement, because there are many, many cases that I could 
cite . . .  
 
I'm not going to take the time to talk about Terry Leier and the 
Dan Stephens, and all the people that you have hired. But I'll tell 
you, for you to stand here and sanctimoniously say that you're 
squeaky clean, and that the NDP government didn't hire people 
associated with the Conservative party when you, Mr. Minister, 
your wife was working for my department when I was a minister 
and you were a candidate, shows how phoney you are. And I think 
the public is beginning to see through you. 
 
(1615) 
 
I think the public is beginning to see through you at every turn, 
because I'll tell you, the list that you read out, yes, included a good 
number of people associated with the NDP party. But if you were 
fair, you would read out a similar list, and there is a list to be had 
of people who were associated with the Conservative Party who 
worked for our government as well. And at the top of the list, your 
wife's name would appear because she worked in a minister's 
office — not at some lowly level of checking the oil in trucks, like 
you were reading out there — but she worked in the minister's 
office from time to time. 
 
And I just say that your reading out a selective list show how 
phoney you are. And that's all I'm going to say. I'm sorry I got into 
this because my colleague was doing a very able job. 
 
I know that the member from Saskatoon has some students to 
introduce and I wonder if we could have leave to do that now. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I ask for leave to introduce some students. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like leave of the committee 
if I could introduce a group of students who are visiting us. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It's my 
privilege today on behalf of my friend and colleague, the MLA for 
Turtleford and the Minister of Parks of Renewable Resources, to 
introduce to the Assembly a group of 24 students from the 
Turtleford  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1737 
 

school in Turtleford and from Livelong School in Livelong. They 
are seated, as you'll notice, in the Speaker's gallery, as well as a 
couple of visitors on the floor of the Assembly today. They are 
accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Bill Kresowaty; as well 
as chaperons, Marilyn McDonald, Marilyn Roney, Lynn Nordell, 
and Peggy Wooff. 
 
I will have the pleasure of going for pictures with them and, as 
well, meeting with them in the members' lounge later on. So I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me on behalf 
of the member for Turtleford in welcoming this group here today. 
And we hope you enjoy your visit to Regina and of course to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I do want to comment, Mr. Chairman, in 
response to the statements of the member from Shaunavon, who 
evidently is not here to hear my comments now. Mr. Chairman, he 
suggested that somehow this particular government was involved 
in patronage to the extent that the former NDP government was. 
Well I can assure you the former NDP government was grossly 
involved in patronage, and here is the evidence. 
 
I want to assure you, Mr. Chairman, and the members opposite, 
that right today there are people working for this government that 
are members of the NDP party, that happen to be former NDP 
candidates. That is not surprising. I'm sure when they were in 
power that, as the member from Shaunavon indicated, there were 
sympathizers of to her parties than the NDP working. That's not 
uncommon. 
 
What is uncommon is the extent of patronage. And as I indicated 
before, I am not aware ever in my living memory of six members 
of one particular cabinet minister's family being hired by the 
government. Surely, member from Regina Centre, that is 
uncommon. Surely that is extreme in terms of patronage. 
 
Now the member opposite made reference to my wife having 
happened to work in the Department of Social Services, and 
indeed she worked as a professional civil servant for a number of 
years here in the province before I ever had any inclinations to get 
involved in political life. And she happened to be working in the 
Department of Social Services at the time that I decided to run for 
office. That is correct. 
 
What is most interesting, however, and what the NDP member 
from Shaunavon failed to tell the Assembly, is that the suggestion 
was made subtly — subtly, but it was very clear that perhaps she 
should resign once her husband decided to get involved in politics. 
Was it because the members opposite were concerned that  

somehow someone of a different political stripe was somehow 
now involved in government and they didn't want that to happen. 
She can remember civil servants selling NDP memberships out of 
their offices. Now that's not a professional civil service. That goes 
directly contrary to an apolitical, neutral, professional civil service. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite wants to move on to some 
different topic of discussion, I certainly am willing to continue 
talking about this particular issue. But I make the point very clear 
to the members of the public who may be watching, to those who 
are here visiting today, to the members of the Assembly, the extent 
of patronage under the former NDP administration was gross; it 
was odious. After 11 years it's no wonder that people said that they 
had enough and they had wanted to throw the rascals out. And 
that's exactly what happened. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But did so a great deal less in Regina than 
they did throughout the rest of the province. I point out to the 
members opposite that before the last election we held all but one 
urban seat in the province of Saskatchewan; after the election we 
held two but they were both in Regina. So perhaps our relationship 
with the public service wasn't quite as bad as the member makes 
out. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, we will let the public decide. I think they 
spoke with some eloquence in Regina North East and when this 
government gets the nerve to call an election, when you get the 
nerve to write your exams, the public service are going to speak 
again, as the rest of Regina will, the rest of Saskatchewan will. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the ways you have politicized . . . I want to 
say one other thing, Mr. Minister. A great many of the names you 
read out were public servants first and then got involved in the 
NDP. A very large number of them were first involved with the 
public service and then with the NDP — that happened. It 
happened because we were fair and honourable with the public 
service, and many of them decided that they wanted to continue 
serving the public through elected office. But they did that because 
they were impressed with the competence and fairness of the 
former administration. 
 
Mr. Minister, another of the ways you have publicized the public 
service is you have increased the number of OC appointments and 
you've increased the number of out-of-scope appointments. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would give us those figures for this 
year, for the past year; and I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister, if 
you could give us those figures for the 1984-85 year as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The statistic: March 1982, there were 627 
OC positions; March 1986, 605 OC positions. There are fewer OC 
positions today than there were when your government was still in 
power. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, are executive assistants, 
ministerial assistants, and those sort of things, now excluded from 
OC appointments? 
 
(1630) 
 
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1738 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The '86 figure does not include executive 
assistants. For comparative purposes we don't know exactly what 
the NDP were doing back in 1982 in terms of all of their executive 
assistants or ministerial assistants, or who was buried in what 
particular department or was doing what for what particular 
purposes. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I do want to thank the members opposite for 
their questioning. I'm sure we were able to provide them with at 
least some answers that were satisfying to them. And I certainly 
want to thank the officials who have assisted me and are an 
example of the professionalism that we do enjoy here in 
Saskatchewan in the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister I think provided us with very 
few answers and a lot of weak excuses. I do nevertheless want to 
thank the minister and his officials for participating in these 
estimates. We will hope, Mr. Minister, that this is the last time we 
have your estimates and that before the estimates come before this 
session again, there'll be a new broom in office cleaning up this 
mess. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 
 
Mr. Chairman: — As I said previously, we will be dealing with 
the estimates for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
However, before we do that, I will ask the minister to please 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce Larry 
Boyes, executive director, financial services, behind me; to his 
immediate right, Ron Styles, director, policy development; Larry 
Dybvig, regional director, Prince Albert regional office; and the 
president, Mr. Calder Hart, will be with me as well. Mr. Chairman, 
there's also Glenn Silliphant, vice-president of programs, who will 
be assisting me today as well. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I'm somewhat confused as to where your 
officials are. You introduced one more official than I see, actually. 
I see three and you introduced four. Okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to know what has been the take-up under the 
PC's home buyer's grant? What's been the take-up of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As of May 26th, 500 applications received, 
341 committed — that's as of May 26th. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is it fair to say that you would 
have received a much larger volume of  

applications in the spring than you'll get later on — they'll peter 
out as the spring goes on? Houses in this country are generally 
built in the summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We are going to have to adjourn for the 
pantry parade over here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would suggest that 500, in what has . . . it has been 
now almost two months — three months — it's now going on 
three months since your program was announced. I would suggest, 
Mr. Minister, that 500 in 3 months is not exactly a runaway 
success. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would care to admit that 
your housing program was too paltry and too niggardly to do 
much good. I wonder if you'll admit now that you might have been 
a bit more generous, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Which dictionary do you have in front of you 
this afternoon? 
 
Well I would like to comment just momentarily for the member 
opposite. In fact, housing starts are up substantially in the province 
this year, and I think we can all be very encouraged by that. The 
single-family starts, 1985, to April 30 — in that particular year 
there were 416 starts, Mr. Chairman. This year we are at 639, a 54 
per cent increase in single-family housing starts in urban 
Saskatchewan. I think that is indicative of a very strong economy 
as it relates to housing starts, a very keen interest in the housing 
program which we have introduced. 
 
We naturally are concerned that when you introduce some kind of 
a stimulative program that you do it with discretion in order that 
you don't draw forward all of the demand into one particular 
narrow time frame and throw the market entirely out of whack. I 
don't believe that would be a prudent thing to do. 
 
We chose through this particular program to provide some 
measure of modest stimulation to assist those people who would 
be buying homes for the first time. And we find that in fact a large 
number of the people that are applying for he grant are first-time 
home buyers, of course, and that the program is in fact crating jobs 
here in the province. And that was naturally one of the motivations 
behind the particular announcement. So I'm sure the member 
opposite will want to join with me in expressing his satisfaction at 
the significant and the substantial increase in housing starts in the 
province of Saskatchewan this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What the government has is a housing 
program which is much lower than it has been. The housing 
program is running at record-low levels. When this government 
came into office in 1982, I recall suggesting to your predecessor in 
office that your programs were too niggardly, that you were not 
going to be able to sustain an adequate level of housing with such 
programs. What I got was a silly song and dance about how you 
had the mortgage interest reduction plan and that's all you needed. 
 
That's what your predecessors . . . The minister is not  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1739 
 

listening. That's what your predecessors in office said. That's what 
your predecessors in office said. And we said it was too niggardly 
and it wouldn't work. So it didn't work. You have now, Mr. 
Minister, housing starts which have fallen from 10-12,000 in the 
'70s; and late '80s, to 4-5-6,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, the housing starts are the lowest they've been in 
years. And your program simply isn't providing an adequate level 
of support. Mr. Minister, I believe I am the first person since the 
throne speech to mention the PC housing incentive program. I 
don't think a soul opposite has mentioned it. I wonder why, Mr. 
Chairman, none of the conservative members have mentioned it. 
 
This province has been subjected to a blizzard of advertising. 
yesterday, in front of a microphone, I complained that this 
government was advertising programs which aren't yet in 
existence. There is no pension plan in existence, no way of us or 
the public ever finding out what a pension plan, what the proposed 
pension plan . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. The pension plan 
or any advertising or anything else which you allege, has nothing 
to do with Sask Housing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I'll tie it in. You have a bewildering amount 
of advertising. You're advertising programs you don't yet have. I 
will not, Mr. Chairman, repeat the fact that they're advertising a 
home owners' pension. I won't repeat it. I said I wouldn't repeat it, 
and I'm trying to follow the chairman's dictates, and I think he's 
being difficult with me for no good reason. 
 
The advertising extends so far. There's one particular program 
which you're not going to have until September. It's the coding 
program for video cassettes. But you advertised it last winter. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I once more ask the member to 
please direct his questions directly to the issue of Sask Housing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I won't mention again the fact that we have 
advertising programs. But what you don't have, though, is any 
advertising programs which deal with the PC housing program. 
None at all. 
 
You have advertised every other conceivable program, a number 
of which you don't have yet. I mentioned two of them. I won't 
mention again the home owners' program and the video cassette 
program. But you've been advertising all of those programs, but 
not the PC housing program — never mentioned it. I wonder why. 
Why? Because you are ashamed of it. You are ashamed of the 
program. It has been a success. 
 
(1645) 
 
One of the things, Mr. Minister, that has happened is that people 
have been comparing it with our housing program, and the 
comparison, Mr. Minister, shows your housing program to be a 
cheap, shoddy, niggardly affair. It is not worth worrying about. It 
is just not worth considering. And I note that there's been no 
advertising  

program — been no advertising program at all. 
 
Mr. Minister, compare it if you will with the NDP housing 
program — a program which provides $7,000 grant for first-time 
home builders; it provides $7,000 for the grant to build a house; 
and $7,000 for rehabilitating older houses; provides 7 per cent 
mortgages for mortgages up to $70,000 for seven years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you're prepared to admit that the reason 
why nobody has mentioned your housing program, least of all 
Conservative elected members, is because your housing program 
is an embarrassment to you. It is so cheap, so shoddy, and so 
ineffective, Mr. Minister, that you aren't mentioning it. You are 
not mentioning it. And I say that's why we haven't heard about it, 
Mr. Chairman, haven't heard about it because members opposite 
are embarrassed about it. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if members 
opposite would care to bring forth a housing program that doesn't 
embarrass themselves. 
 
We have brought forth a housing program which has stirred up a 
very considerable interest. I do not recall receiving as many 
requests about any campaign promise the NDP has unveiled as we 
have about the housing program. And the questions invariably, 
Mr. Chairman, are along the same vein. They will say: now I've 
got a basement with a crack in the wall and it's going to cost me 
$10,000; do I qualify? Or I'm going to do this, and this; and do I 
qualify? My circumstances are such; do I qualify? What we are 
witnessing is an unparalleled interest in a good housing program. 
 
We have again, Mr. Chairman, not a $3,000 grant which is likely 
to disappear as soon as the election's over with; it's only going to 
last nine months at most. We have a program which will provide 
$7,000 grants to people who want to buy, build new homes, and 
that will be available for three years. 
 
So there won't be the big bubble that there was in 1983 which 
caused enormous dislocation. It stretched the housing industry to 
the limit. It meant that they often wound up paying premium 
prices for labour and materials during that period in 1983, and thus 
their businesses were distorted. When it was over, then they were 
left with nothing to do, and businesses which had been 
over-extended. 
 
As for home owners, I think many of them were rushed into 
buying houses. Some of them were rushed into buying houses at a 
time when it might have been premature for them. It might have 
been better off for them to wait for a few months, perhaps a couple 
years. They were all rushed into it. 
 
The staff of the land titles office were just swamped. Both Moose 
Jaw and Regina ran six weeks behind time. It caused very serious 
problem sin closing transactions. Conservative members went into 
a great hue and cry when the land titles office went on strike. They 
caused a delay which was in many ways more serious than that 
with that ill-thought-out housing programs. 
 
Well you haven't made the same mistake twice, I must  
  



 
June 5, 1986 

1740 
 
 

say. Nobody is going to accuse you of overheating the housing 
market with this silly program. Nobody is going to accuse you of 
making the same mistake twice. It's one of the engaging features 
of members opposite. You can always find a new mistake to 
make. Just when people think you've made all the mistakes, and 
there's none left to make, you find some new ones. You find some 
new ones. 
 
In 1983 you people brought in a housing program which distorted 
the market and distorted it badly and accomplished very little. 
Now you bring in a housing program which certainly hasn't 
distorted the market. It hasn't even caused a ripple on the market. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They're waiting for an election. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — They are waiting for an election. My 
colleague from Shaunavon says they're waiting for an election. 
That's right. That's what they are doing. 
 
I was talking to one young women who said to me, she asked me: 
I have a basement with a crack in the wall, and I want to know if 
the program will apply. So I answered the question as best I could. 
And that was when the program was announced in, I think it was, 
April. I ran into her about a week ago and I said to her, how's the 
basement, half in a facetious tone of voice. She said, with a heavy 
tone of voice, I couldn't wait, I'm afraid; do you think it'll be 
retroactive? I said, I don't know, quite frankly, I don't know. 
 
Maybe we should. Maybe if this government doesn't call an 
election when they should have called an election, which was 
April, failing that, in June, perhaps because of this unnatural 
disaster that befalls us with this government which won't call an 
election, perhaps we ought to make it retroactive. perhaps that's 
fair — perhaps that's fair. Perhaps that's fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We haven't since the last Tory government, had a government 
which has stayed in office this long. And we see, Mr. Minister, 
what his government is trying to perpetuate itself in office through 
unnatural means, because you don't have any policies or programs. 
I don't know what you thought you were going to accomplish with 
this housing program. I honestly don't. I just don't know what was 
going through the minds of the members opposite with a $3,000 
housing program. 
 
Let us review for a moment the housing program that you had in 
1983, which was successful but too much so because it distorted 
the market. I want to say, as well, that our caucus met with the real 
estate industry. This was after the announcement of the housing 
program had been made. And they said to us: listen, we had a bad 
experience with that housing program in 1983; please don't give us 
another one of those; we've still got the hangover from that. 
 
So we explained our program, that grants are available for three 
years; mortgage interest reduction is available for seven years; and 
it's available for rehabilitation of older homes; and a $7,000 grant 
for remodelling as well for older homes. 
 
When they had hear that, the mood changed. They were  

much less hostile to our program, because I think they saw that the 
preconceived notions with which they entered the room for the 
meeting might not have been valid. I think we turned a number of 
doubting real estate agents and real estate developers into believers 
that our program was going to work. I even thought I saw a tinge 
of excitement in some of those people who saw a housing market 
finally pick up steam, something it really hasn't done in the four 
years you people have been in office. 
 
You people came into office saying you were not going to 
participate in the recession. You participated very fully. It's the 
recovery that you people have decided you don't want to 
participate in because . . .I will keep that in mind, but I will . . .I 
somehow or other have to give the House Leader an opportunity 
to adjourn the House for the day. So I will sit down before 5 
o'clock and give the House Leader, whoever that may be — it's 
not obvious who is the House Leader today. The attendance of 
cabinet ministers is so brief and so few, we never know who the 
House Leader . . .  
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 
 


