


















































April 14, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 14, 1986 
 
 

559 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to this Assembly, 25 students from St. 
Henry’s Junior High School in Melville, Saskatchewan, 
together with their teacher, Mr. Garth Gleisinger, and their bus 
driver, Mr. Philip Hack. They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I wish them a pleasant stay here. I know they are at the age in 
grade 8 where they will understand the proceedings and get a 
lot out of it. I recall that I attended their school in grade 9, and I 
was very interested in what was happening in politics at that 
time, and I’m sure they will get a lot out of the proceedings 
here. And I ask you to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Police Investigation of Cabinet Minister 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to 
the Premier. I ask the Premier: can you in fact confirm to the 
assembly whether or not any member of your cabinet has been 
subject of a police investigation and, if so, which minister is 
under an investigation as reported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not appropriate for me 
to make any comment on newspaper reports, and I believe that 
the hon. member would understand that, given the nature of the 
report. And I would just let it go at that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I’m going to ask you then, forgetting 
about the report, Mr. Premier, can you confirm whether or not, 
to your knowledge, a member of your cabinet — and if so, who 
— is under police investigation at the present time, or was in 
the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the hon. 
member can read the newspaper report as well as anybody, and 
it’s not my position, and it’s not appropriate for me to comment 
on these reports at this time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I’m asking you specifically: are 
you or other members of your cabinet aware of any police 
investigation pertaining to any one of the members of the 
cabinet? And if you are aware, would you indicate which 
cabinet minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
it’s not appropriate for me to comment on police investigations. 
He’s quite aware of that. I am in no position to comment at this 
time, and I won’t be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the Minister of Justice: Mr. 
Minister of Justice, has any investigation of the city police 
pertaining to any member of your cabinet colleagues been 
brought to your attention, an investigation by the  

Regina city police? Has the investigation pertaining to any 
member of the cabinet been brought to your attention, to your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Minister, the member knows 
perfectly well that if there is a police investigation, it would be 
highly improper and inappropriate to comment on that 
particular investigation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I recall to your mind the actions of the 
Hon. Marcel Masse, who resigned as the federal Minister of 
Communications on September 25, 1985. 
 
The day Mr. Masse resigned from the federal cabinet, no 
complaint or charge had been lodged against him. He, however, 
told the House of Commons that he made the decision to resign 
from cabinet since the prospect of a complaint might cast doubt 
on his integrity, which would reflect on the government. 
 
I am now quoting: “I am convinced that upon completion of the 
investigation my innocence will be established.” That was the 
position taken by Mr. Masse. I think it was an honourable and 
appropriate position. In the end, no charges were laid. 
 
Can you advise, Mr. Premier, whether or not you conduct your 
cabinet under the same rules that Mr. Masse enunciated, or is 
there some other rule which applies if any member of your 
cabinet comes under investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m advised by justice that 
there is nothing, nothing in the allegations, that prevent the 
minister from carrying on his normal responsibilities. And 
beyond that I have no more to add. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. 
Obviously, Mr. Premier, you know something of the allegations 
since you have referred to them. Mr. Premier, you will be aware 
that a course of action whereby a minister of the Crown, when 
under investigation and before charge, if any — this produced a 
resignation recently in British Columbia of the Hon. Mr. 
Rogers, and in Nova Scotia of the Hon. Mr. MacLean. 
 
I ask you again: do the rules which have been enunciated by 
Mr. Masse and applied in British Columbia in the Rogers case 
and in Nova Scotia in the MacLean case apply to your cabinet? 
Or do you say that if a cabinet minister is under investigation, 
there is no reason to suggest that he might resign during the 
course of the investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only reiterate that I am 
advised by Justice that there is nothing — nothing — in the 
allegations, that prevent the Minister from carrying on his 
normal responsibilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Are you 
then conceding, Mr. Premier, that there are investigations 
concerning one of your cabinet colleagues and that that cabinet 
colleague — he or she — retained their position in cabinet 
while the investigations were proceeding? Is that what you’re 
telling us? 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

560 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat what I’ve 
said before, that I have no comments; that I will say that I have 
been informed by Justice that there’s nothing in the allegations 
that would prevent the minister from carrying on his normal 
responsibilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. You have 
been so informed by Justice. Did this information come to you 
from the Minister of Justice or from officials of the Department 
of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said I was informed by my 
Justice officials, and informed by Justice, and that’s all I can 
add to it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
obviously as the Premier of this province, when an investigation 
has in fact taken place by the police, when in fact that 
information has been referred to the Justice department, you 
obviously are aware of the nature of the allegations in respect to 
that. 
 
And what I ask you, Mr. Premier: when did you first become 
aware of the fact that one of your ministers was indeed under 
investigation by the city police; and can you confirm whether 
the initiated through the Department of Social Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t comment on that, 
and I won’t. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I ask you further: do you think the 
people of this province are entitled to know what details you 
know in respect to any particular allegations or investigations 
pertaining to any of your ministers? Do you think it’s 
reasonable that the public should know whether you have 
knowledge in respect to investigation of your ministers, and 
what actions you took or did not take? Do you think that’s a 
reasonable inquiry on behalf of the people of the province who 
you administer this government on behalf of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the people of 
Saskatchewan will know. The people of Saskatchewan also 
know that people are innocent until proven otherwise. And I 
have no other comment to make with respect to the issue, and 
I’m sure the hon. member, from his previous profession, would 
understand that. So I can’t make any more comment; I wouldn’t 
serve the public, or justice or anybody else. It’s not in the best 
interest for me to comment further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier, and I want to underline the fact that I am not 
discussing the merits, if any, of the investigation, I am asking 
about the manner in which you conduct your government if, as, 
and when, a minister of the Crown is under police investigation. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I have tried to instance cases, recent cases in 
Canada, where particular courses of action have been taken by 
the Government of British Columbia, the Government of Nova 
Scotia, and the Government of Canada. I ask you, sir: during 
what period of time have you been aware that a police 
investigation was under way  

with respect to a minister of the Crown, and during that period 
of time did you ask for any action by that minister of the Crown 
by way of resignation or otherwise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only reiterate my 
previous sentence, and I’m sure the hon. member can take from 
there. I am advised by my Justice officials that there is nothing 
in the allegations that prevent the minister from carrying on his 
normal functions. And I can’t add any more than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, we’re clearly not meeting 
in mind. You are not, I take it, asserting that Justice advised you 
of that at the commencement of the investigation, but at the end 
of the investigation. 
 
I am asking what happened during the course of the 
investigation. And I hope you’re not telling me that during the 
course of the investigation that they knew there was no 
substance in it. I am asking you what course of action you took 
during the period of the investigation. Did you take any steps to 
suggest that the minister of the Crown might absent himself 
from the cabinet table, or might offer his resignation, as was 
done by the three ministers that I have outlined in my previous 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, it is 
improper for me to make any further comment on this at this 
time. And I can only add, and I’ll repeat once more, that my 
advice from Justice is that there’s nothing in the allegations that 
would prevent the minister from carrying on his normal 
responsibilities. And that’s all I can add at this time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, one final supplementary. 
Mr. Premier, I want to ask you whether or not you think it 
appropriate for a minister of the Crown to remain in cabinet 
during the course of a police investigation, even though — 
granting what you say — even though at the end of the 
investigation it is determined that the substance does not 
impinge upon his ability to carry on his duties. I am talking 
about the period during the course of the investigation and 
asking you whether or not it is your practice to have such 
ministers remain in their office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, to be fair to the hon. 
member, I’m sure that we can resolve to his satisfaction the 
answers to questions like that and other questions at a 
subsequent date. At this time — at this time — to be fair to 
everybody, it’s inappropriate for me to comment at all. And I’m 
sure that he can raise questions later, Mr. Speaker, and in 
fairness we will respond to them, and so forth. But at this time 
I’m advised the fairest thing for me to do, for the public, and to 
serve justice, is to say nothing at all. So I’ve said my piece, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you indicate that you have been advised by the Justice 
officials that there is nothing in the allegations which would 
make it impossible for the minister who was under investigation 
to carry on in his duties. I ask you: obviously you had to be 
informed by the officials of Justice at some period in time, I 
suspect, and I was wondering if you would be good enough to 
allude to  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

561 
 

when you, in fact, received this information from Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say, in due 
course I can respond to those questions, and I will. But, Mr. 
Speaker, at this time, and it’s as the hon. member knows, to be 
fair to all concerned, it’s not appropriate for me to say any more 
or to add or to comment. So I will not comment any more. I’ve 
said all I can say, and I believe he knows the law as well as 
most members in the legislature. It’s unfair for me to say 
anything else at this time, and I won’t make any further 
comments. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, further question. Mr. Premier, 
you have made a statement here of findings of the Department 
of Justice which you indicate has exonerated the particular 
individual in question. What I ask you simply is: when were 
you appraised of the facts from the Department of Justice? How 
does that in any way jeopardize anything other than provide us 
with details as to when you had knowledge of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 
member: you may not think that it’s fair, but I believe that it’s 
fair for me not to make any more comments at this time. To be 
fair to the public, to be fair to the individuals, to be fair to 
Justice, I should not make any more comment at this time, and I 
won’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve said, and I can repeat, I was advised by Justice that there is 
nothing in the allegations that would prevent the minister from 
carrying on his normal responsibilities. And I take that as 
exactly what it is, and I have no further comments, Mr. Speaker, 
and nothing that I can add to that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, 
the difficult position that you put us in is that you have in fact 
taken a position. You have taken the stand that you have 
received information from Justice officials exonerating, as you 
indicate — nothing in the allegations which would prevent the 
individual from carrying on. 
 
Now if you can come forward here in the House and lead out 
with that particular amount of information, then surely you can 
indicate to the House when you were appraised of this, and if 
this was the first opportunity that you took to, in fact, bring it to 
the attention of the House, that there was nothing . . . What I’m 
saying is, if the Justice Department knew and told you last week 
and the facts were as you are indicating, that there is nothing in 
the allegations, then is it not incumbent upon you to have come 
to this House last week and not hold off until this week until 
you’re questioned? 
 
So I ask you again: will you indicate to the House and to the 
people when you received the information and the substance of 
what you have said here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat that to be 
fair to the public and to be fair to the individuals, there’s 
nothing more that I can say now. And I’m sure the hon. member 
and the Leader of the Opposition and others can ask me 
questions for days at a later date, but at this time all I can say is 
that I’ve been advised by Justice that there’s nothing in the 
allegations, nothing that prevents the minister from carrying on 
his normal  

responsibilities, and it’s not fair to anybody else for me to add 
any more or any less than simply that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker — The member had asked for a final. We’ll take a 
new question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In view of the position that you are taking 
today in so far as answering the questions, Mr. Premier, can you 
advise whether today or in the very near future the Minister of 
Justice will be, in fact, making a ministerial statement which 
will clear up some of the air in respect to this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I couldn’t comment on that either, Mr. 
Speaker. Everything in due course and we’ll just leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the Minister of justice. I’d like 
to ask the Minister of Justice whether he’s in a position today, 
in view of the reported facts of an investigation of one of the 
ministers of the Crown, and in view of fact that the Premier has 
indicated that the Justice officials have briefed him in respect to 
the matter, I wonder whether the Minister of Justice is in a 
position today to brief the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Premier’s Trip to Ottawa 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on another matter to the 
Premier, I want to refer to his trip last week when he went to 
Ottawa to ask the federal government to push up the price of 
gasoline and diesel fuel, and I say, Mr. Speaker, that many 
farmers and consumers are still shaking their head about that 
one. But, Mr. Premier, following the trip to Ottawa you issued a 
statement which said, and I quote: 
 

I have requested that the federal government remove the 
PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue tax). 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, the Mulroney government has already 
announced plan to remove the PGRT by 1988. Now what I am 
questioning here is what your proposal was. Had you urged 
them to remove it quicker or take longer to remove it? What 
was your proposal to the federal government as it related to the 
PGRT when they had already announced that they were going 
to remove it by 1988? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, when I 
went to Ottawa I was there for two reasons. One, is that I 
wanted to get a very, very large western grain stabilization 
payment out to the provinces and out to Saskatchewan farmers. 
And I’m happy to report today, Mr. Speaker, that the largest 
ever in the history of Canada has been paid out this morning, 
$580 million — up to as high as $11,000 per farmer — will be 
out in the next 10 days as a result of me twisting the arms of 
people in Ottawa. That’s the reason that I was there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

562 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I was down there 
because I was worried, and I am still concerned, Mr. Speaker, 
of the thousands upon thousands and tens of thousands of jobs 
that are at risk as a result of what OPEC is doing to Western 
Canada. And I, Mr. Speaker, asked the federal government to 
remove PGRT as quickly as possible. 
 
Now in the last federal budget, Mr. Speaker, PGRT was worth 
about $1.1 billion — $1.1 billion at $22 a barrel. Now it’s 
probably worth half that, 5 or $600 million. And I want to make 
it very, very clear that the members opposite are in agreement to 
provide 5 to $600 million benefit to the oil companies by 
removing PGRT. Mr. Speaker, I quote the Leader of the 
Opposition April 9th here in the legislature, and he says this: 
 

The Premier suggested that the PGRT should be removed 
rather more rapidly than Mr. Wilson suggests. We would 
heartily endorse that. And we regretted that the two 
Wilson budgets neglected to remove the PGRT, the 
petroleum and gas revenue tax, which is being phased out 
over a period of some years and which we would like to 
see phased out now. 

 
Well, let’s make sure we got things straight here, Mr. Speaker. 
The opposition on one day complains bitterly because there’s a 
$13 million amount of money going to finish some construction 
engineering research — pre-construction, 13 million — and 
they complain bitterly. And the day before they asked to have a 
$600 million grant go to the oil companies, and they agreed 
with it right here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went to Ottawa for two reasons. I went there to 
get help for agriculture, and we got it in spades today — the 
largest payment that you’ve ever seen. Secondly, I said remove 
the PGRT and you can have a balancing effect. Oil prices can 
stabilize and come up a little bit, and gasoline and fuel prices 
will continue to go down. 
 
Nobody in this legislature, in the history of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, let alone when those folks were in power, ever reduced 
the price of farm fuel like we have. We have provided them a 
royalty rebate. We took the tax off, and right now it’s going 
down daily. And Mr. Speaker, I am happy to see the benefit 
going to farmers and to consumers as a result of what we’ve 
been able to do in the last two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Premier, when you went to Ottawa to 
get the western grains stabilization plan, I’m impressed with 
how quickly you changed the federal legislation to allow that 
payment to come out. It’s been written in statute for some time, 
and the phoniness of you, sir, to stand up and say you got the 
payment, is not going unnoticed by farmers. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, is: when you went to Ottawa to call 
for the higher prices for gasoline and diesel fuel, did the 
Mulroney government indicate at that time that  

when they removed the PGRT that they would be looking to 
another source to raise that money? 
 
And did they indicate to you, as reported in the Leader-Post 
today, that, and I quote: 
 

The federal government is negotiating an end to its tax on 
oil and gas production and will replace it with a refinery 
tax of 2 to 3 cents a litre (that’s between 9 and 13.5 cents a 
gallon) that will be passed on to consumers by the end of 
April, the Montreal La Presse says. 

 
Did you encourage the federal government to make that move 
as well — that gasoline and diesel fuel go up by between 9 and 
13.5 cents a gallon? Was that part of your proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we can have a little bit of 
fun in this legislature when the member opposite starts calling 
what we’ve done in agriculture and in energy phoney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t recall ever in the 11 years that the 
former people were in administration — not once was there an 
interim stabilization payment, not once. The first one, Mr. 
Speaker, came . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t want to hear this, Mr. Speaker — the same as they were 
the other day. When I got up to talk about agriculture, all they’ll 
do is holler from their seats. Well I suggest they have enough 
respect for this House that they listen to the answers . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear this. I mean, the students 
that come in here from around the province are all talking about 
the opposition and the noises they make. They can’t stand to 
listen. They can’t stand to talk about agriculture and about 
energy in a reasonable fashion. They’ve got to sit and holler 
from their seats. Mr. Speaker, as long as they’re sitting and 
hollering from their seats, I will speak and I’ll tell them the 
truth. 
 
The truth is, Mr. Speaker, there never was an interim payment 
under the previous administration. It was there last year for the 
first time, and we put it together with the federal government. 
This is the second one, Mr. Speaker, and it’s there, Mr. Speaker, 
because we asked for it. And it’s the largest in the history of 
this country and the history of the western grain stabilization 
program. 
 
With respect to taxes on gasoline, let’s look at the record, Mr. 
Speaker. The largest tax on gasoline is in two provinces that 
you want to find — neighbouring provinces, Mr. Speaker. We 
will look at Manitoba, where the NDP are in power, and they 
tax consumers for gasoline. And they’ve been doing it for years, 
like the NDP did here previously. You go into Ontario and 
you’ve got a Liberal-NDP coalition, and they tax, Mr. Speaker; 
they tax gasoline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have brought gasoline prices down in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ve brought them down for 
farmers. We’ll bring them down for consumers, Mr. Speaker, 
and nobody else, nobody else will see any more effort bringing 
those prices down any place else. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

563 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say they are really 
concerned, really concerned about unemployment. I don’t’ hear 
them saying one solitary thing about the thousands upon 
thousands of people that might lose their jobs in the energy 
business. They’re not concerned about unemployment, Mr. 
Speaker. They speak out of both sides of their mouth. One day 
they’re absolutely against $13 million going on research for 
phase 3 of an upgrader, and the next day they say they’ll give 5 
to $600 million back to the oil patch. They’re on both sides; 
they’re inconsistent. 
 
They’re only consistent on one thing, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
consistent in being negative and whiners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask you some 
questions about reports coming out of Ottawa that deal with 
legislation which will be introduced this week which will 
impact on the province of Saskatchewan in a very serious way, 
that is, a change to the patent life of certain drugs. And I 
wonder if you could at this time outline in some detail your 
knowledge of the changes that are taking place, because I’m 
sure you’ve been consulted and members of your staff have 
been consulted about the changes that will be taking place. 
 
Basically, what is there now, and what will be passed after your 
federal counterparts in Ottawa get done with the Act? What do 
you anticipate coming before the House of Commons this week 
which will change and greatly affect our drug plan here in the 
province, because it will cost a good number more dollars to 
purchase drugs if the legislation is changed as proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, as you’re aware, certainly the 
previous federal government had commissioned the Eastman 
report in which they looked into the period of exclusivity that 
the innovative company should be allowed to have before a 
generic company can actually copy that drug. And as you know, 
the system has been that the generic company pays a royalty to 
the innovator. Eastman, in his studies, recommended that that 
period of exclusivity be four years. 
 
However, I understand that there is some legislation being 
introduced into the House that would look at the period of 10 
years of exclusivity. I don’t know if you were in the discussion 
of estimates when I read out the telegram that I sent to the 
federal minister, indicating our position from Saskatchewan. 
Certainly, with a longer period of exclusivity, it could have a 
very significant  

impact upon drug costs in our province to the drug plan, and 
certainly one would not want to see a significant increase to the 
consumers. 
 
So I have indicated to the federal minister our position that we 
would be doing whatever we can to try and avoid that type of a 
change to the patent protection It goes along in the Eastman 
commission also, the recommendation that perhaps some of the 
revenue . . . that the innovative companies would do some 
manufacturing and development in the provinces, of drugs here 
in Canada. I suppose I’m rather a doubting Thomas in that 
regard. I’d have to have it shown to me pretty plainly that there 
would be benefits going to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So at the initial point is that we have asked for a meeting; other 
ministers are doing the same thing. I’m sure there will be a 
meeting of federal and provincial Health ministers to discuss 
the whole topic, as well as the departments of Consumer and 
Corporate Affairs. Actually it is the federal minister, Mr. Côté, 
that has been doing some of the advance work on this proposed 
change, and he has been in discussion with my colleague, the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I hope that gives you some idea of what the problem per se 
is, and what the stance that we in Saskatchewan will be taking 
towards this. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has, I don’t think, dealt with 
the issue that I wanted to find out, and that is the specific 
changes that are taking place in terms of the length of time. 
Now I may have missed it, but what is the present legislation, 
and what is the proposed legislation in terms of the lifetime of 
the patent? If you would outline that for me, I would follow up 
with some questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The existing situation now is that there is 
no period of exclusivity. It takes four or five years before a 
generic will be able to copy the innovator. So actually there’s 
that period of time. But there’s nothing in legislation. Eastman, 
as I said, recommended four. The discussion that is around at 
this point in time is somewhat in the 10-year period, but I’m 
advising my officials that there has not been legislation 
introduced as of yet, but there’s some discussion of 10 years. 
But certainly our position, as I point out, is that we could not 
support that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The announcements that were coming out 
over the weekend were that the legislation would be introduced 
this week in the House. Have you been given an opportunity to 
see the legislation or to have input into it before it comes before 
the House? Have your colleagues in Ottawa, the Progressive 
Conservative government, have they taken the provincial 
governments aside and said, look, this is what we’re proposing 
to do, and do you have any concerns with it? 
 
I guess this would be the question, is whether or not you have 
made your case with the federal government. Because I think 
once the legislation is before the House, while it can still be 
changed, it seems like an unusual way to do it — to introduce 
the legislation and then start your lobbying if you’re opposed to 
it. But have you seen the legislation, and have you had input 
into it? 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

564 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I expressed last Friday in our 
discussion that at the Health ministers’ conference last fall I put 
this on the agenda and led the discussion for the provincial 
Health ministers, of the problems that we would see if there was 
change brought about. Since that time I’ve been in contact with 
the federal Health minister on different occasions, and as 
recently as the 24th of March sent him a telex which I have read 
into the record. And if you want a copy of it, I would provide 
you with the copy that states very emphatically that, because of 
these increases, could be very damaging to the program and its 
continued success. 
 
And in light of apparent lack of concrete reciprocal 
arrangements, and in the best interest of all Saskatchewan 
residents, I would request a reconsideration of the entire issue 
by the federal government, and may also request that this matter 
be discussed in a full and detailed hearing with all provincial 
governments. So we have been discussing this since last fall, 
and I think my telex indicates our stance quite strongly. 
 
And as I have indicated to you in our discussions previously, 
we will be meeting with Mr. Epp on the 28th. And you know 
how legislatures work. I don’t know . . . I hear the same press 
reports that perhaps that Bill is going to be introduced this 
week. We’ll wait and see if it is. We all know the process, as we 
have it in this Chamber, and as you do in any other legislature 
in Canada, that when it comes to second reading, amendments 
can come in; the House amendments could come in from the 
person who brings in the Bill; opposition can suggest 
amendments, and that’s the democratic process. And certainly 
we will be making our points very plain and straight when we 
meet with Mr. Epp. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister indicated, I believe on 
March 24th he sent the telex. I wonder have you had a response 
as to whether they’re delaying the legislation so that your input 
can be taken into consideration, or have you had a letter back 
from the federal minister saying, I understand your concern and 
I’m listening and I’m not going to go forward. What response 
have you had from the federal government your lobbying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, as you know, my telex is 
to my counterpart, Mr. Epp. I know that other Health ministers 
across Canada have been also contacting Mr. Epp. I don’t know 
what’s been taking place in regard to the Minister Côté, who 
will be heading the Bill through, but certainly as a Health 
minister, I and my colleagues across Canada have been 
expressing our concern to the federal minister. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I may have missed something, but did 
you say you have had a response from your March 24th telex 
saying that they are backing off of the position you are opposed 
to, or have you had any response as result of your fiery telex 
that you sent down there insisting that changes take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I have had a response. I haven’t seen 
any legislation, but I’ve been invited to a meeting with the 
federal minister on February 28th. Excuse me, April 28th. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — And was there any guarantee given that 
the legislation wouldn’t already be through the House before 
the meeting took place? It seems to me a strange time to meet 
after the legislation is before the federal House; and I don’t 
know, maybe some people will have confidence in your ability 
to fight Ottawa, but it seems to me they’re proceeding on this 
issue quite rapidly in spite of the fight you’re putting up against 
it. I would like you to indicate whether or not you have a great 
deal of confidence that you’ll be able to back them off the 
change to the legislation that many of us are concerned about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I certainly have confidence that if I 
go to Ottawa I will express the Saskatchewan position on this in 
the best manner I can. I think from past experiences that will be 
quite well received. I can also give assurance that I believe 
every other Health minister in Canada will be joining with me 
in doing exactly the same thing. What the outcome of that will 
be, who’s to tell at this time? 
 
(1445) 
 
You know, we say, about what time should you do these sort of 
things? I can remember going as the Health minister of 
Saskatchewan to Ottawa on a number of occasions, and also to 
the Senate of Canada; the Health ministers went to the Senate of 
Canada. So I can’t say whether we’ll be successful. I can 
certainly say to you, Mr. Member, that I will outline, very 
succinctly and clearly, the Saskatchewan position. And the 
Saskatchewan position is that we do not want to see a period of 
exclusivity that would put additional costs on to our drug plan. 
 
Secondly, in the whole talk of this reciprocal investment, or 
money coming into the province, I would have to be shown 
very, very distinctly that that would benefit this province before 
I would agree to anything of that nature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister in an earlier comment 
referred to positive things that could come from changes to the 
federal legislation. I believe he said investments, or that type of 
thing. I notice in today’s Toronto Globe and Mail, April 14th, 
on the front page there is, “No investment stipulation in generic 
drug law.” So that argument that the federal government was 
giving to you was not accurate. And in the article they clearly 
outline that changes that would take place would not put any 
demands, or not write into the legislation that any investment 
would have to take place. 
 
If I could, Mr. Chairman, there are couple of quotes in the 
article that I think deserve to be read into the record. In part 
they say: 
 

The changes are likely to be accompanied by assurances 
from the federal Government that brand-name producers 
will be required to reinvest part of their earnings in 
research and manufacturing in Canada. But such 
requirements are not spelled out in the expected 
legislation, except in very limited circumstances.  

  



 
April 14, 1986 

565 
 

This could mean that Ottawa has worked out a political 
deal with the brand-name producers under which they 
reinvest in Canada, but the deal would not have the force 
of law. 

 
Now I just say, when you’re dealing with very large 
multinationals that are based outside of the country, that these 
kind of arguments, that we have a federal government that is 
going to insist that they invest in Saskatchewan or Alberta, that 
if you were serious about that . . . I’m not say that in any way 
we should be moving towards it. But obviously even that part of 
reinvestment is not taken seriously by the federal government 
because they’re not writing it into the legislation. 
 
I would like to find out from you as well whether the 
department . . . And I’m sure they have done appraisals or 
estimates on the amount of money that it would mean to the 
drug plan if we were to move in this wrong-headed fashion — 
not to the drug plan, but the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And 
the other day we were talking about cut-backs in federal 
funding for certain programs. And here again we have an even 
more ridiculous move being made by the federal government, 
where the increased costs of the drug plan will not go to the 
federal government and then hopefully cut our federal taxes, but 
will go to the drug companies in Germany or the United States 
or some foreign country. 
 
I wonder if you could outline at this time what it will mean in 
terms of increased payments that will have to be made by the 
drug plan in the purchase of non-generic drugs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I read the same 
article in the Globe and Mail earlier this morning. But I prefer 
to deal with the minister, minister to minister, rather than just 
going on newspaper quotations that can or cannot be correct. As 
far as the investment in Saskatchewan and to Canada, as I said 
earlier — and I stand by that — I am sceptical as to how much 
of that would be received in Saskatchewan, and certainly we’ll 
be putting that point forward. 
 
The member opposite wants to know the approximate cost as 
our best estimate of what this could do regarding the 
Saskatchewan drug plan. And I suppose, again I’ll go back to 
my telex where I inform the federal minister of this. I say 
additional cost to our drug plan could reach $15 million 
annually or nearly 20 per cent. 
 
So certainly it’s on that basis, Mr. Chairman, that I will be 
opposing the legislation as it appears to be coming now. But 
again until — and any legislator realizes this — until you see 
legislation, until it is in its final form and presented to the 
House, newspaper reports may often not be that accurate. So I 
will wait to see the legislation and then, with that in hand, 
certainly enter into discussion with the federal minister putting 
forth our position of opposition. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, just to pursue this topic for 
a little while longer. You say that your estimates show that the 
cost to Saskatchewan, the drug plan with the change in this 
legislation, would be $15 million. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I said it could be. I think that would be 
the worse case scenario. You know, until you see exactly 
what’s going to be happening and what exclusivity, if any — if 
it’s 10 years, or do they go back to . . . (inaudible) . . . I think 
the member opposite realizes until one sees the legislation you 
don’t know the actual impact. But our best estimate is about 
$15 million at the worst. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree it would be helpful to see that 
legislation, but nevertheless in my experience and, I think, in 
yours, you would agree that usually when a Government of 
Saskatchewan makes an estimate on this kind of a cost 
situation, usually it ends up being greater. I think experience 
will show you that. And you would not want to suggest that the 
pharmaceutical manufacturers would not want, and would not 
indeed try their darndest to get the most that they could out of 
this. 
 
Let us assume that $15 million is the figure. Okay? If you apply 
that across Canada, Mr. Minister, that would probably be in 
total something like $300 million. That would be $300 million 
of cost which would guarantee no extra jobs, which would 
guarantee no extra revenues to Canada in taxation purposes — 
simply about $300 million which would go to the drug 
manufacturers who are doing very well already, thank you very 
much. 
 
I really am concerned that unless some very aggressive effort is 
made to stop the federal government in their proposed 
legislation that the Canadian consumer, and in our case the 
Saskatchewan consumer, is going to have to dish out an awful 
lot more money for drugs, simply because the federal 
government wants to do the bidding of the pharmaceutical 
manufacturers. Don’t you agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In our discussions starting last fall about 
this, and this was a point I put forth in the first discussions, was 
that, you know, you may talk about the flow back to research or 
to investment or to development or to industry — I would want 
to see it. I would want to find out in very specific terms what 
that would be to Saskatchewan, both in the ways of industrial 
development, or research money to our university. I have said 
that I am somewhat sceptical about that. 
 
You mentioned that it may be a loss, a complete loss to Canada, 
extrapolating from our figures. We don’t know that. You see, 
until we find out exactly what’s in there . . . I mean, it may well 
be that there may be some inflow of research and investment 
money. Those things are the questions I want to ask because it’s 
important to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I see it at this point in time, and the stance that I’ve 
articulated, is that I am doubtful of that. But I see that an 
increase in protection will bring about an increase in cost of the 
drug plan. And I resist that. I think we have a very good drug 
plan. I think it’s one that I want to protect, and I’m sure you’d 
want to protect it also. 
 
So that’s the stance I’m taking down to Ottawa. And as far as 
consultation and discussions, I have not met with the Minister 
of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, but my deputy has met 
with him on two occasions, as well as my  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

566 
 

colleague, the Hon. Mrs. Duncan, who has met with him also. 
 
So the Saskatchewan position has been well-explained and 
well-articulated. And as I say, on the 28th it will be done again. 
Until we see the legislation, I guess, and have that meeting, it’s 
pretty hard for me to say just what the impact will be. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree. Certainly we would want to see 
it, or in our case you would want to see it before you made any 
final conclusions, although I think there are some final 
conclusions which we can all draw. And that is that at the 
present time the federal government seems pretty firm in that it 
is going to introduce the legislation. I mean, they have 
announced it; they’ve indicated that they are going to introduce 
it. And that is good cause for all of us to be somewhat 
concerned. 
 
As it applies to the potential research and other benefits that 
may be available in certain provinces because of this proposed 
change in the legislation, did I hear you say that if you are 
convinced by the federal officials that there might be some 
research done in Saskatchewan, you then might be interested in 
agreeing to the legislation to proceed? Is that what you have 
been saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I think you’ve misinterpreted a bit 
there. I would have to have it spelled out very, very clearly to 
me that out of this whole change that we would benefit as a 
province. I don’t see us benefiting as a province. I would want 
someone to indicate in hard, cold figures that Saskatchewan 
would accrue these types of benefits. 
 
Now we can still look at a hypothetical. Say somebody said we 
are going to build a huge plant with a lot of . . . 500 jobs or 
something of this nature. I guess it would really . . . We have 
the right to take a look at that. But I’m not holding my breath, 
thinking that someone is going to do that. 
 
So at this point in time I am saying I’m going to protect the 
Saskatchewan consumer the best way I can, the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer the best we can, by resisting any change that’s going 
to put additional heavy expenses upon our drug plan. But, as I 
say, one goes down; there’s talk of this other thing. I don’t think 
it would be fair to rule it out before I go and discuss it, and 
we’re not going to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear you say 
that you’re not holding your breath, because I’d hate to see us 
lose you because of suffocation, because I’m afraid that’s what 
may very well be the case in this situation, and that’s why my 
colleague and I are concerned about the process that has taken 
place here. 
 
Now you did indicate that your Minister of Consumer Affairs 
and your deputy have met with federal officials to discuss the 
proposals. Are you meaning to say by that that they have met to 
discuss the proposed legislation? Has there been consultation on 
the proposed legislation by either your officials with federal 
government officials or the Minister of Consumer Affairs and 
the federal Minister of Consumer Affairs? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, the discussions that . . . I’ll go over 
them again The discussions that have taken place was at the 
Health ministers’ conference in Ottawa where Saskatchewan 
put it on the agenda, and I led the discussion indicating to the 
federal Minister of Health the concerns that Saskatchewan 
would have. 
 
Since that period of time the Minister of Consumer and 
Corporate Affairs has visited Saskatchewan and other provinces 
at least two times. The discussions with my deputy and with my 
colleague were with that minister and, as my deputy who 
attended there indicated to me, he made it very emphatic at that 
discussion that: look at, what about these accrued benefits? 
Let’s see them Let’s see what you’re talking about. 
 
We haven’t had any indication that there are any of them 
coming. So the next step, as it will come along, is that I will be 
meeting with the federal Minister of Health, along with all the 
other Health ministers in Canada, to explain our provincial 
positions. My colleague — you’ll have to ask her in her 
estimates — may be meeting with the Minister of Consumer 
and Corporate Affairs, also. I’m not apprised of any such 
meeting at this time. But certainly that’s the steps it’s gone 
through. We have never seen anything that looks like legislation 
at this point in time. If the press reports are true, I’m sure I’ll 
receive a copy of it within this week if it’s introduced into the 
House. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s just this indication by your 
government and by your officials and maybe by your Minister 
of Consumer Affairs to the federal government, that you might 
be interested if they were to talk about accrued benefits. I think, 
Mr. Minister, that may have reduced your bargaining position 
immensely because the first principle — and maybe that’s what 
you’re saying that you have done, although I have to be assured 
of that — the first point that should have been made without 
any equivocation with the federal government is that we, as a 
province and your government, are unequivocally opposed to 
changes in legislation which would cause the consumer of 
Saskatchewan to pay a large amount more for prescription 
drugs, because that’s what would be the effect of this 
legislation. 
 
The minute you started saying, well, that is so but we want to 
look at the accrued benefits — knowing full well that likely any 
accrued benefits would not accrue to Saskatchewan — you have 
given the federal government an argument which then they can 
come back to you and say: look, over here in Ontario this is 
what pharmaceutical company X is going to invest. They’re 
going to build this plant or whatever they’re going to do, and 
therefore, you, yourself, Mr. Minister, have said to the federal 
government: hey, you’ve got a good point here. 
 
Now you shake your head. I hope that maybe you will correct 
that because I really think that you have, in presenting that 
argument, weakened your position with the federal government. 
And that is good reason to be concerned because they are now 
able to say to you: there are accrued benefits. Oh, they’re not 
going to be accrued in Saskatchewan, but they’re going to be 
accruing to all Canadians because we’re going to get, at the 
federal government level, increased tax revenue, and therefore  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

567 
 

we’re going to benefit Saskatchewan taxpayers even though 
they’re cutting the EPF (established program of financing) 
payments by $2 billion or over that in the next five years or so. 
Now can you clarify this for me in the event that I’m wrong in 
my assumption? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me get one thing extremely clear with 
you. I guess I’m fortunate in having been the Health minister 
for almost four years for this province and one of the senior 
Health ministers in Canada. I will certainly be putting forth our 
position; and our position, as it is in agriculture, as it is in any 
other aspect, we’re here for the benefit of Saskatchewan. 
 
So for you to even think, even think that because someone 
might say: well there’s a benefit to Ontario or to British 
Columbia or even to Manitoba, that I would say: well look, this 
sounds good, let’s go for it. I will go there and I will give you 
this commitment, and I’ll give it to the people of Saskatchewan 
that when I go to Ottawa to talk about health, there’s one thing 
that leads every statement, and that is, it’s got to be good for 
Saskatchewan. That’s my responsibility. That’s the mandate 
that I’m charged with, and that’s what we’ll be taking there. I 
think it’s only reasonable though, if there were to be some side 
benefits come to Saskatchewan, that I don’t say, oh I’m not 
even interested in discussing these. I’m interested in going there 
and carving out the best possible deal for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I look forward to doing that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad you have 
helped clarify that, although I am not comforted by it very 
much, because if your achievements in making your arguments 
with the federal government, or your government’s 
achievements — I don’t want to get personal with you — are as 
successful or as great as they have been with your arguments on 
the established program funding — which is clearly in your 
own admission, as I understand on Friday, going to cost 
Saskatchewan an awful lot and many millions of dollars in 
funding for health care. If you are as successful in your 
negotiations in the drug prescription situation as you were with 
EPF, then heaven help us. The Saskatchewan taxpayer is in 
great trouble. 
 
That’s why I am concerned about your sort of soft approach 
like: you’re doing a good job, Brian, or: you’re doing a good 
job, Mr. Epp, or: you’re doing a good job whoever you’re 
dealing with, rather than sort of coming on pretty hard as you 
should as a negotiator and saying: we’re just going to have no 
part of it, and if you’re going to legislate it, you’re legislating it 
over our strong objections. 
 
I am a little concerned that neither your officials nor the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs’ officials — or the ministers, you 
or her — have had an opportunity to talk to the federal 
government about the proposed legislation. It seems to me that 
legislation of this nature should have been discussed by the 
federal government and the provinces so that you — or this 
government in Saskatchewan, and Manitoba and British 
Columbia — could have had some input into it prior to its being 
introduced in the House of Commons. Doing it after they  

have introduced it in the House of Commons, Mr. Minister, is 
like shutting the door of the barn after the horse has escaped. 
 
Once the legislation is there, then the federal government 
clearly has indicated that it’s going ahead, and with their vast 
majority it is well-known that they are quite prepared to 
steamroll over anybody or anything in order to put things in 
place to reward their friends. They have done that. You know 
that, and I know that. And so I’m asking you: have you asked 
strongly of the federal government, or has any other minister in 
your cabinet asked strongly of the federal government, that they 
want to discuss the proposals of this legislation prior to it being 
introduced in the House of Commons, so its not all done after 
the fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You mentioned about our position with 
the federal government, and I would just go back through some 
of the initiatives that Saskatchewan has taken the lead on and 
has been adopted by the federal government. Certainly I think 
you know of the Break Free generation in non-smoking 
initiatives. It’s across Canada. The lead province on 
non-smoking initiatives was Saskatchewan. We started that type 
of movement, and now the federal government have 
co-operated and have adopted it. I indicated to you the other day 
the proposal by the federal minister, Mr. Epp, to the CRTC 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) to adopt Saskatchewan’s policy of educational 
ads for liquor advertising, which will come across the country 
with CRTC. 
 
I mentioned about the idea of an innovative seniors’ fund, a 
seniors’ fund to help bring about innovative ideas and care for 
the elderly, which has been pushed each of four years by 
Saskatchewan, and some indication that the federal government 
are at the present time looking at adopting it. The elimination of 
extra-billing — another area where Saskatchewan was one of 
the first provinces in Canada. I’m not saying the first, but 
certainly one of the first that addressed that, and most recently 
the support and recognition that has been paid to our home care 
program by the national council on ageing. 
 
So certainly, you know, I think it is fair to say that when 
Saskatchewan goes to Health ministers’ conferences and comes 
forward with initiatives, that many of these things have been 
adopted. I think the track record proves that. 
 
In my letter of February 25th to the Hon. Michel Côté — I’ll 
just quote briefly from this to indicate the type of expression we 
had given him. I say, and I quote: 
 

It appears at this time that you may be considering 
extensions of periods of exclusivity substantially longer 
than those recommended in the final report of the 
commission of inquiry on the pharmaceutical industry. 
Because of this apparent position, I want to emphasize 
once again our serious concerns on this matter. As I have 
previously indicated to you, any significant extension of 
the Eastman recommendations in the particular area of 
exclusivity would have very substantial implications for 
our government with regard to funding our universal drug 
program. 

 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

568 
 

So I think we have made it clear to them from the beginning the 
reservations that Saskatchewan would have. And once again I 
say to you that when we meet in Ottawa, we will certainly be 
putting these forward again. 
 
You realize . . . and I hear you cry from the other side of the 
House from time to time for us to table legislation. You say, 
you know, bring in the legislation. The House Leader often 
says, please bring in the legislation so we have time to look at 
it, to contact groups that it may affect, and so on. So the very 
fact that they may be tabling legislation does not in any way, 
shape, or form, mean a fait accompli. 
 
I mean, certainly we understand that the legislation comes forth 
and there should be due process and due opportunity for all 
interested groups. And certainly governments that would be 
affected by any change, to put forth their suggestions and, I 
would hope, be successful in changing the legislation if — if — 
the legislation is as being reported in The Globe and Mail. Until 
we see the legislation, we don’t now if that is fact or fiction. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I know that you have, 
several times in this House, mentioned your non-smoking 
initiatives, educational ads on liquor ads — even though they 
makeup 15 per cent of the ads, whereas liquor advertising is 85 
per cent of the ads, promoting people to drink — innovative . . . 
(inaudible) . . . for seniors, and all of those things. 
 
Granted, you may say that as many times as you want. You also 
indicate elimination of extra-billing. Well I might add and 
remind you that the only reason you have eliminated 
extra-billing is because the federal government passed 
legislation, which compelled you to do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Liberals. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And if I may say so, that was even done 
by the Liberal Party before what happened in the federal 
election. So for you to stand up and take credit for that, Mr. 
Minister, although I certainly favour the elimination of 
extra-billing, I think is stretching it a little bit too far. 
 
All I can say, having listed all those so-called initiatives, Mr. 
Minister, I wish you would have taken just as strong an 
initiative as it applies to the question of the generic drug 
situation and the legislation which the federal government is 
preparing to bring in. 
 
You indicate, and you try to make an argument, that legislation 
is brought into the House of Commons or this legislature and 
then people have an opportunity to discuss it and make changes. 
Well I may add to you that even your government — certainly 
our government, when we were the government, and would 
again — brought in major legislation that affected any group of 
people such as municipalities, hospitals’ associations. We made 
sure that there was a consultation process with those people 
before the legislation was brought in, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I simply say that it would have been just as fair of the 
federal government to consult with Saskatchewan and  

Manitoba and Ontario, and the ministers of Health of all the 
provinces of Canada, before they prepared and introduced such 
legislation. I mean, there’s nothing unusual about that. That’s a 
normal way of running a federal government. And I think, in 
order that the federal government is kept on the straight and 
narrow with its huge majority, and is made to operate in the 
normal and acceptable way, it’s almost incumbent on the 
provinces such as Saskatchewan, through our representatives — 
and that is you, Mr. Minister, and the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs, and the Premier — to insist with the federal 
government that that kind of process be undertaken before the 
introduction of the legislation. And so I’m somewhat 
disappointed to hear that that has not happened. 
 
I am glad that on the 28th of April there will be a meeting. I 
will take your word for it that you will press Mr. Epp very 
strongly that this legislation will not be acceptable, because I 
agree with you that there will likely be few benefits to 
Saskatchewan, and that the only effect of it will be increased 
cost to the consumer. 
 
I have no doubt in my mind . . . Maybe in your position you feel 
you have to give the federal government a fair chance to take a 
shot at it. I think once that legislation is there it is going to be 
much more difficult to have any influence on it, because I think 
the federal government will, by that time, have committed itself 
to proceed. 
 
And so I say to you, in my concluding remarks before I move 
on to another item, that we are concerned that the efforts made 
by the Government of Saskatchewan have not been strong 
enough, and therefore I think maybe the horse will be out of the 
barn before somebody tries to shut the door. 
 
Now if I may ask, still under the prescription drug plan, some 
questions on the negotiations as they apply to the fee schedule 
which pharmacists get for the dispensing of drugs. I understand, 
because I have had people phoneme and I have also read 
newspaper articles, that there has been or is a lot of concern by 
pharmacists that the discounting being done by such large 
chains as SuperValu, Mr. Minister, is causing some difficulty, 
particularly for independent pharmaceutical business places. 
 
I’m asking you, what is the status of the negotiations as it 
applies to this matter? Can you tell the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’d just like to mention a couple of things 
on the topic you were on before in regard to extra billing. Of 
course the hon. member knows that you had 11 years to do 
more than just talk about it. I remember reading the reports of 
your party, and every convention you talked about it, but you 
never got around to doing anything. 
 
You indicate that we had an ultimatum by the government of 
the day. As you know, we could have chose to be penalized and 
pay a penalty. Maybe that’s what you feel is the correct way to 
go, that for every dollar extra-billed we could have paid a 
penalty to Ottawa. Our choice was to do different’; we thought 
that that money that we would be penalized could be used for 
other  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

569 
 

health initiatives, as you see is the case today in the new budget 
with 11.6 per cent increase to health care. Certainly that 
couldn’t have happened if we’d have been paying a fee or 
paying a penalty to Ottawa. 
 
And just one other topic, Mr. Chairman. Just as an example, the 
member opposite said, well they always allowed a lot of 
discussion before legislation. There’s just two I would raise, 
and then we’d move on to answer his question, and that is the 
take-over of the potash mines. There wasn’t a great deal of lead 
time on that, let me tell you, or the institution of the land bank. 
So, you know, just to set the record straight. 
 
However, the question that the member opposite asked was the 
status of negotiations with the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association. I can indicate to you that the topic that you raise is 
a concern and has been discussed at negotiations. But 
unfortunately, because there has been no ratification at this 
point in time—and I’m sure you will understand that, having 
dealt with negotiations previously — that it would be improper 
for me to discuss any aspects of what transpired at that 
negotiating table. As soon as there’s a ratification of the 
agreement, then of course what has been completed through the 
negotiation process would be made public. But until that point 
in time, I couldn’t comment on it. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, whether 
you or your officials have received representations from 
pharmacists regarding their concern about the discounting 
practices of businesses like SuperValu, which is causing some 
hardship to a great number of pharmacies in the city and I’m 
sure, in other places as well. Have you received representations 
from pharmacists dealing with that concern of theirs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, most certainly. I think the biggest 
issue here is in Regina at this point in time because of certain 
changes in shopping patterns that seem to be taking place. My 
officials have met with a group of retail Regina pharmacists, 
and further to that my deputy has met with the executive 
director and the president of the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association on that very matter. And of course these meetings 
took place prior to and as negotiations were progressing. But I 
think you understand that I can’t comment on the negotiations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you indicate, Mr. Minister, what the 
position of your government is with respect to the kind of 
discounting that’s taking place. And I know that there always 
has been some discounting, in some cases done by some 
independent pharmacists simply to help senior citizens get 
drugs at a cheaper cost. Many of them would prefer to be able 
to do that. Can I ask you: what is the position of your 
government with respect to the discounting that is taking place, 
particularly in light of the fact of what SuperValu has been 
doing in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly we’re concerned about a 
balance in pharmacy practice. I couldn’t articulate our position 
because that is part of the negotiations. But I can assure you that 
the whole topic was adequately discussed from what I have 
been  

indicated. And I am optimistic that we will get an agreement 
from this round of negotiations that will be acceptable to the 
pharmacists, the smaller pharmacists in this city. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I hope indeed that there is an agreement, 
and I hope that it will be of benefit to the small independent 
pharmacists in the city and anywhere else in Saskatchewan. The 
concern I have, Mr. Minister, because it has been brought to my 
attention as late as this weekend, is that there may be a proposal 
whereas a pharmacy that charged a reduced prescription charge 
would receive a proportionate reduction in the fee subsidy paid 
by the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. If that is the case, 
then what would happen in this situation is that if a pharmacy 
chose to discount its prescription drug plan by 25 cents, the 
prescription drug plan which pays a portion of that fee would in 
turn reduce its portion that it pays to the pharmacist by 25 per 
cent. There is some concern with respect to that kind of a 
proposal being implemented. Can you tell me whether that has 
been discussed or considered by yourself or your officials as a 
new provision to be provided in the new agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can’t discuss that at this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s like the federal 
government’s legislation; you let the horse out of the barn and 
then you shut the door. If you’re not prepared to discuss that at 
this time, then after it is implemented it’s going to be too late. 
So don’t come in here and say you can’t discuss that at this 
time, unless you’re prepared to explain why. 
 
There is concern. This, if implemented, may not cause 
SuperValu any problems at all because, as you know and I 
know, SuperValu works on very large volumes. And because it 
works on very large volumes, and because it uses their drug 
dispensing service as a loss-leader in order to draw customers 
into the store, they might not care if such a proposal is 
implemented. 
 
But the independent pharmacy, whether it’s anywhere in the 
city of Regina or somewhere else, cares a great deal because 
they will be penalized by this proposal to the extent that many 
of them will be hard pressed to be able to survive as they try to 
compete with some of these other establishments. 
 
So I think, because of the implications of this, I would very 
much appreciate if you would be prepared to at least indicate 
whether your government is indeed making such a proposal, 
and if it is, what is the rationale for making it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I cannot comment on the proposals that 
my government is making at the negotiation table. Some of 
these things are at the table now, and some of them may be out 
for ratification in the very near future. I cannot comment on the 
negotiations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s really 
unfortunate because you are saying to independent pharmacies 
that there may be — if indeed there is, and I have information 
that tells me that there is — a proposal in the agreement brought 
forward by your negotiators  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

570 
 

which would say to pharmacies: if you discount, we will 
discount in equal amounts the amount that we pay in the 
government portion of the fee. It has been brought to my 
attention that indeed that is part of the government’s proposal. 
 
Now let me say this, Mr. Minister, that will help SuperValu 
because they don’t care; that will help the Pinders Drugs chain 
because they’re a big operation and also work on volume; that 
will be helpful to the Bi-Rites. But that will not be very helpful 
to the independent who’s operating in Humboldt or in Regina or 
in Saskatoon, or anywhere else. 
 
So I think, in light of the implications of this, Mr. Minister — 
and some independent pharmacists have raised the concern — 
you have an obligation to address it in this House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, I would think in the 
negotiations that take place the future and the benefits to the 
independents is certainly something that is of great concern to 
the pharmaceutical association. And as I say, I think we are 
going to be successful in working out an agreement that they 
will support. Certainly there’s no intention to try and play down 
the role of the small independent pharmacists. 
 
So, as I repeat again, it’s not right for me to be making any 
public statement that would in any way jeopardize the outcome 
of those negotiations. I have told you, and I will tell you again, 
that the issue was raised with my officials; that my deputy met 
with the president and the executive director of the 
pharmaceutical association who, by the way, both of them are 
well associated with Small Town, Saskatchewan. The president 
runs a drug store in Montmartre, Saskatchewan, and the 
executive director is from that town also. So I think they know 
very well the concern of the small independent and have 
articulated it to our government and to me and to my officials. I 
have indicated that certainly that is in the negotiations, but I 
cannot say what the outcomes are at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I just simply ask you to consider, 
Mr. Minister, and speak to the officials who you have doing 
these negotiations, to keep in mind that this proposal will 
jeopardize any pharmacy which happens to be located in a 
predominantly senior citizen area of any city or town, which, as 
a service to the senior citizen, discounts by whatever amount 
they may choose to discount their fee to assist the senior 
citizens. If this is implemented, those pharmacies will no longer 
be able to do that without being penalized. 
 
So the concern here is not only, I think, on the part of some 
independent pharmacies; the concern here will be strongly felt 
by the consumer. In this case . . . and I will argue on behalf of 
the senior citizen who, because the opportunity to be able to go 
to a drug store which may have discounted for senior citizens 
— a practice that’s widely accepted across the province by 
many pharmacies — will no longer be provided for the senior 
citizens, because the minute that pharmacy X discounts a fee 
charge from the senior citizens in that community, that 
pharmacy will be penalized by an equal reduction in the 
government’s portion of the fee. 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you take that into consideration? 
And will you pass it onto your officials and ask them strongly 
to consider the implications of this, because they are not 
significant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m a bit puzzled here. A minute or two 
ago you were rather upset about any kind of discounting, and 
now he seems to want discounting. I don’t know where your 
position is. I can assure you that in our suggestions and 
negotiations and so on that are going on, there is nothing in 
there that will hurt the senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, interesting. In our 
discussion this afternoon, this is first time in which you almost 
raise your voice. That leads me to believe that you’re uneasy 
about something, as is usually your habit in the consideration of 
these estimates. You get a little excited when you’re pressed on 
any particular issue. And I suppose that’s okay because it helps 
to deflect the argument. 
 
Let me remind you, Mr. Minister, that the prescription drug 
plan was implemented prior to 1982, and during that time it was 
agreed that there should be some provision in which the 
competitiveness of the private sector should be able to have 
some room in which to operate. And so the opportunity for 
pharmacists to charge less on fees was permitted and included 
in the agreement. I have no objection to that because I think it’s 
important to have that. 
 
The problem was not created until the very large chains began 
to use the discounting process in order to undermine the 
independent pharmacists in this province. That’s when the 
problem was created. And surely there must be a better way to 
deal with that problem than saying, as apparently is being said 
— and I guess in your position, as you say, with negotiations 
taking place you’re not prepared to comment on it and you 
won’t, so no sense me continuing to press it. 
 
But if indeed there is a process taking place by which all 
pharmacies will be penalized if they discount for things, for 
customers like senior citizens, then I think maybe the 
negotiators that you have negotiating this are being a little 
wrong-headed and have not considered all the implications. 
And I want to put on the record my concern about this on behalf 
of senior citizens, the consumers, and on behalf of some 
independent pharmacists who, I know are also concerned, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, you know, Mr. Chairman, all I can 
say — and I repeat myself again — I cannot give out what is 
happening at negotiations. I can give an assurance to the 
member opposite that I feel confident that the outcome of the 
negotiations is not going to hurt the seniors in one way or the 
other, and certainly it is not going to be detrimental to the small 
pharmacist. 
 
Now this is what he’s been talking about and I give him the 
assurance — and I give you the assurance — that the outcome 
will not be detrimental to senior citizens and will not hurt the 
small pharmacies. So without going any further, I think those 
two assurances should relieve any of  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

571 
 

the concerns that the member has. And I go back again, and I 
would like him to indicate why he at one time stood here three 
minutes ago, against any kind of discounting, and then two 
minutes later turns around and he’s for certain kinds of 
discounting. 
 
So, I mean, let’s get consistent here, and please accept my 
assurances to you that the concerns you have raised will 
certainly be looked at. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just for the record, let me once again 
make it clear that I was not at any time in our deliberations here 
saying I was not in favour of any kind of discounting. I never 
said that, and you know that. 
 
I am prepared to accept your assurance if you are prepared to 
answer the next question. And the question simply is: if 
pharmacies are reluctant to provide discounts for senior citizens 
— and I’m talking about community pharmacies where 
everybody knows everybody and they sort of understand the 
difficulties people face — if pharmacies are not able or not 
prepared to provide the discounting because there may be a 
provision in the agreement that penalizes them because of a 
reduction in the government’s share of the fee, how will you 
protect the senior citizens from not paying a higher price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think if I got into that I would be 
disclosing some of the negotiating stances that have been taking 
place. I’ll just come again and give you the assurance that 
seniors will not be negatively affected. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, as we go through this list 
of different areas — nurses and doctors and chiropractors and 
pharmacists — I think what is becoming very clear, that the 
area the minister is responsible for, there are, indeed, a great 
deal of problems and they don’t seem to be getting a great deal 
better. 
 
(1530) 
 
I want to return for a moment to the area of the drug plan and 
the impact that the legislation being proposed by the federal 
government will have on our drug plan here in the province. 
And my colleague has clearly indicated, as well as a number of 
other people, some of the ironies that are occurring here where 
the federal government is proposing legislation which would 
transfer, from Saskatchewan alone, about $15 million, 
according to your numbers, from the users of the drug plan or, 
if you’re going to pick up the whole cost within the provincial 
government from the taxpayers of the province, to 
pharmaceutical companies outside of the country. 
 
I wanted to ask: in the terms of the lobbying that has gone on — 
and you have referred to lobby groups that push for legislation, 
and we often have pieces brought in that are then changed 
subsequently once they’re introduced — can you give me a list 
of people or groups who are demanding, from within Canada, 
that the changes that are now coming before the House of 
Commons, who is pushing for these changes? 
 
In discussion with the federal government, who are they saying 
is wanting these changes, because I don’t know of  

one Canadian who is asking that these changes occur? You’re 
opposed to them; I’m opposed to them; all the people in the 
province are opposed to them. Can you tell me who’s advising 
your federal colleagues in making these changes? Where is the 
pressure coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I don’t know who all may be pushing 
for it. I know that there’s been a number of groups that have 
lobbied against it. But one would have to ask the federal 
minister where all the people that are lobbying in for the change 
came from. I think a lot of it grew out of the Eastman 
commission. I think it’s been there for a great period of time. 
 
And who the lobby groups may be — there may be a number of 
them — I don’t know. But I know that the government, the 
previous government, set up Eastman to take a look at this, to 
come in with recommendations. And the Eastman commission 
came forward and, obviously, there’s been a considerable 
reaction to it from both sides; from groups that are wanting no 
exclusivity, some groups that favour Eastman, and then some 
who say: no, Eastman is far too restrictive, that we need 
something of a much greater period of exclusivity. So I couldn’t 
tell you who the various groups are that would be lobbying for 
that change. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well here again, in your answer you say 
that some groups are in favour of it, and some groups are 
opposed to it, and then you end up by saying you don’t know 
anyone who’s in favour of it. And I would like you to outline — 
if you know people who are pushing for the federal legislation 
to be changed — if you could outline to the Assembly, and 
perhaps, on behalf of your colleagues in Ottawa, convert some 
of those of us who are opposed to the idea of a 10-year 
exclusive period, outline to us what the positive side is, or some 
of the groups that are in favour of that change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It is very hard for me to do, when I’ve 
said in this House that I’m opposed to it, that I’m going down 
there to argue the Saskatchewan position, that anything that 
brings about increased costs to our drug plan will be opposed. 
So how would I be able to say who is trying to indoctrinate 
who? I have made my stance very clear. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well at your meetings that you’ve had 
with the federal party and with your federal colleagues who are 
Progressive Conservative, what are they telling you the reasons 
are that they want the changes? Obviously they must have 
reasons. And other than to pay off a few of your friends, can 
you explain to us why that change is being proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There has been no such discussion as 
that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So when you meet with your colleagues 
from Ottawa on the drug plan and changes to the federal 
legislation, they don’t give you any reasons why they are 
proposing the change; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me indicate to you that at the last 
Health ministers’ conference — because there was an Eastman 
commission that had been put forward, and  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

572 
 

because it may have some serious effects upon the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan — I instituted at Ottawa 
the discussion of why, as the province of Saskatchewan, we did 
not think a change in exclusivity would benefit this province. 
Many other ministers expressed the same sort of thing. 
 
There was no feedback from the federal government as to why 
they thought there should be a change. That wasn’t brought 
about. It was just mentioned and articulated by the provincial 
ministers that it could have serious implication for the drug 
plans; and secondly, that we wanted the opportunity to sit down 
and discuss it. We’re being afforded that opportunity on April 
28th. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister seems to have two different 
views of the federal government: one, that they listen to the 
provincial governments. When he’s talking about the proposed 
spending cut-backs to provincial health, he says that when that 
comes about he is optimistic that changes will take place, and 
the $9 million they propose to cut out of this year’s transfer 
payments in the area of health won’t occur. But yet when it 
comes to this legislation, you say the federal government hasn’t 
even given you any reasons why they’re bringing the legislation 
forward. And they’re bringing it forward this week and still 
haven’t given you an explanation of why they’re doing that. 
 
And these are two very conflicting views of this Mulroney 
government: one, that they listen to the provinces; and the other 
one, which is much more factual, I would say to you, is the 
legislation that is coming forward, even though all the 
provincial colleagues are opposed to the changes in the 
legislation. And I suppose there are a good number of people in 
the health care area who aren’t convinced that you are going to 
have much headway when you go to Ottawa after the legislation 
is already set in place. 
 
The other point, I guess, that I would make in the area of the 
drug plan in Saskatchewan, and increases that would have to 
take place if this $15 million is taken out of the fund here in the 
province and is given to the large multinational drug 
companies, is that this will impact mostly on senior citizens in 
the province. As one of the main users of prescription drugs, 
which are prescribed by their doctors, they will be the most 
severely affected by changes that occur. 
 
And I wonder whether the minister could outline: within the 
drug plan at the present time, do you have some sort of a 
breakdown by demographics of who actually uses the drug 
plan, by age, the numbers of prescriptions, and number of 
payments that are made on behalf of the drug plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we can provide you with the 
demographic breakdown. It will take a minute or two, but we’ll 
be pleased to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — While you’re doing that, I’m sure the 
minister would be well aware that when he goes to Ottawa to 
make his case with the federal government in opposition to the 
proposed legislation, is that he would take that forward to them, 
as I’m sure he will — that the senior citizens of the province are 
going to be severely  

impacted by changes that would have to take place if the drug 
plan was readjusted to allow for that kind of an increase to take 
place. On the other hand, if it comes out of general revenue, 
then I suppose we’ll all share that massive tax increase equally 
of an extra $15 million in our taxes. 
 
I want to ask about another area while we’re waiting for that 
number, and that deals with the hearing-aid program. And you 
have talked about a nine-month waiting list now for assessment 
and to have hearing-aids properly fitted and assigned. 
 
I wonder, what are your expectations over the coming year? 
Will that number be going up, continuing to go up, because I 
think it’s gone up fairly significantly in the last six months? 
And you’ve talked to me about a fire that occurred and 
problems associated with it. But will you indicate what you 
anticipate over the next year? Because there are many people 
who have seen the increase in waiting list and time period over 
the last number of years, and they’re concerned that by this time 
next year the waiting time period will be a full year. 
 
And I want you to today, if you could, give a commitment that 
we’ll start going in the other direction — because every year 
since you’ve come to office the waiting time period has gotten 
longer and longer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have to 
clear something up from the member’s previous statements in 
trying to indicate, if there was a change to the prescription drug 
plan, that it necessarily would impact upon senior citizens. 
That’s simply not the case. It would not. It may well be that 
there’d be no change whatsoever to senior citizens. And until 
we see what the changes are, it would be not in the best interest 
— and I think it’s not really acceptable by the member opposite 
— to try and mislead and make that allegation, that senior 
citizens would be somehow hurt by this, because that may not 
be the case whatsoever. So certainly I would just like to lay that 
one to rest. 
 
As far as the hearing-aid plan, it isn’t nine months across the 
province. It’s in some situations somewhat less than that. And 
as I explained the other day in our discussions, we are looking 
at using the nurses as doing some of the screening, doing some 
of the screening that would probably allow people to pass 
through quicker than is the case at this time. So I think with that 
new initiative I would hope that the waiting lists for the 
hearing-aid plan would reduce, so that the time that a person 
who is having to wait for a hearing device and a proper 
screening by the audiologist would decrease. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is well aware that when I 
was referring to the changes to the federal legislation on generic 
drugs, what I was saying is that, if the increase were passed on 
through the drug plan, obviously it would have a big impact on 
the senior citizens of the province -–if it were passed on. Now 
you as a government, or whoever takes over from you, will 
have to make that decision. And much better that it be shared, if 
the federal government puts its head down and bullies its way 
through with it, that it would be shared by all taxpayers. But 
what I’m saying is that if you as Minister of Health  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

573 
 

were to pass this increase on through the drug plan, then 
everyone would have to pay more, including senior citizens, 
who are the main users. And I wonder if you have that list ready 
yet of the demographics of who is using the drug plan, if we 
could just have a quick look at that. 
 
Another question that I had in terms of especially senior 
citizens is in the area of eye care, and I wonder if you can 
outline any changes that have taken place in the area of eye care 
when it come to seeing the doctor about having glasses 
changed. Is there any change that has occurred in the last couple 
of years in terms of payment? It’s my understanding that people 
had their check-ups paid for once a year, and that has been 
changed to once every two years. When did that change occur, 
and who is affected by it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There have been some changes that came 
about through negotiations with the optometrists this year in the 
agreement — and I should say on the recommendation of the 
optometrists — who felt that we could improve our plan by 
changing some of the methods of payment and delivery that had 
existed before. So the major change is that now partial 
examinations are insured. They were not insured previously. 
They were not insured, so now they are. So there’s a benefit. 
Test for tonometry, which is the pressure on the eyeball, which 
was never insured and has to be done in many cases, is now an 
insured service. 
 
For the people in the 18 to 64 age group, they have one 
refraction every two years insured, unless for medical reasons 
they need another one. Then that one would be provided free. 
For seniors, 64 and over, or 65, there is no change, and for 
young children up to the age of 18 there is no change. 
 
So basically there have been benefits added to the plan that 
were never there before; new services insured, which the 
optometrists of the province indicate should be done to improve 
the plan; and as I say, if there’s someone in that age group who 
through medical necessity needs a check of their eyes, they 
would get it also. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has stated — and I want to 
get you clear on this — that optometrists were suggesting that 
the change from one examination each year to one examination 
every two years . . . was the optometrists’ suggestion. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. The total package with these 
extended insured services that were not there previously, that 
total package, the optometrists of the province supported that 
and have agreed to that — that that would certainly be an 
improvement to the plan if these things were added. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I asked one specific question. I’m not 
talking about the package now. I’m talking about the change of 
check-ups being changed from one year to two years for people 
between the age of 18 to 64. You implied that that was a 
suggestion of the optometrists in negotiations. I want to get you 
clear on the record that  

that, in fact, was the case, and that’s what you said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You, in your first question, asked me 
about changes to the service of people for optometry. I 
explained the total package. I told you that the optometrists are 
in favour of that total package, and they certainly are. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, now I’m asking you about the issue 
of . . . the one narrow issue of the change that affected people 
between the age of 18 and 64, that being the change of having 
an examination paid for every two years instead of once a year. 
Whose suggestions was that change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It came about through discussion and 
consultation with them, of methods in which we could improve 
optometric service to the province. The total package of these 
added, and I want to repeat again, that the services today that 
were not previously insured are added. There are added services 
in the optometric plan that were not insured previously — the 
test for glaucoma, for one. These are things that were not there 
previously that now are there. Partially insured test. Not always 
that everyone need a complete test; just partial. Those weren’t 
insured before. Now they are insured. 
 
So taking all this together, with the change in the yearly 
refraction to one for every two years, except — let me repeat — 
except for individuals who, because of medical necessity, will 
then also get their refraction on a yearly basis; those services 
and additions, taken all together, are supported by the 
optometrists, and they feel it is a superior package to what 
existed before. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I have talked to a number of those 
optometrists who don’t agree that this was their suggestion or 
their position. And you can be telling them that when you meet 
with them. Because there are many who don’t agree with you 
that that was their suggestion. 
 
The other thing is that as the Minister of Health you will have a 
hard time explaining to the taxpayers of this province how 
changing the formula, where they have to pay for their 
examination every other year if they’re having an examination 
every year, is in the best interest of the health care of the 
province. 
 
Now you may believe that that’s in the best interest of eye care, 
but I can tell you that there are many people out there, who are 
55 or 60 or younger, who need a check-up every year and have 
to pay for the odd year, who don’t agree with you that you 
improved the program when you made the changes. And I think 
to try to put that one onto the back of the optometrists is not 
fair, because I don’t believe that you’re accurate in saying that 
that was their suggestion. 
 
I think that it was on your part, that you were trying to save a 
little bit of money, and you said: look, how about if we delete 
this out of the health care program? And I think it came from 
you, out of your department, and from you yourself, that this 
change took place. At any rate, if you hadn’t been in agreement 
with it . . . Because it does impact on many people in the 
province, where they have to pay more. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

574 
 

Obviously there are a good number of people who think that 
when their families’ eyes are changing on a regular basis, that 
they should be paid for. And I don’t know that there are any 
optometrists who were suggesting this, and I’ll be doing further 
checking to see whether or not you’re accurate in saying that it 
came from the profession. Because the people I talk to in the 
area say that it was a cost-saving measure on your part, and 
when we look at the many areas where you’re wasting money, 
it’s hard to believe that the health of people’s eyes in the 
province would be sacrificed so some of the other expenditures 
you’re making could be carried on. 
 
And I would just say to you that we would let it be known now 
that we were opposed to that change, and that we would look 
seriously at changing it back, because there are many, many 
people who are concerned about the change between 18 and 64 
and the fact that many of the people are not covered when they 
go to get their eyes checked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The overall increasing cost of the 
program is 4.9 per cent this year, so for you to stand and say it’s 
a cost reduction is simply not true. And secondly, the overall 
package was endorsed by the membership of the optometric 
society, strongly endorsed. So I just point those points out to 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wanted to go back to where we left off 
on an issue of funding from the federal government. And when 
we left off last week, you were telling us that you weren’t sure 
about the amount of money that was going to be deleted from 
the transfer payments from the federal government in years to 
come. And I wonder if, over the weekend, you had an 
opportunity to study the numbers or talk to some of your 
colleagues in Ottawa and would be able now to tell us in the 
coming years whether you have found out what the federal 
government is proposing to cut from federal health care 
funding. 
 
You will know that over the last number of years, both with the 
federal Liberal government and the federal Conservative 
government, that the amount being transferred to the provinces 
for health care has gone down, and gone down significantly. If I 
remember correctly, in the early ’70s that number was close to 
50 per cent that was being paid for by the federal government. 
 
I wonder whether the minister could tell us, as of this year, with 
the $9 million that the federal government is planning to cut out 
of their health care budget for Saskatchewan, what percentage 
of our program will now be paid for by the federal government 
— and if you could give me the numbers for the last four or five 
years on what that percentage has been, and how that decrease 
is taking place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think I have the figures that you would 
want here which is EPF as a percentage of health spending, and 
for ’82-83 it was 42.6 per cent; for ’83-84, 36.4; for ’84-85, 
36.6; for ’85-86, 38.2; and for ’86-87, 35 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — For clarification, the ’86-87 number,  

is that with the 9 million deleted that we had talked about last 
day, or with it included? I guess that’s the point that I want to 
make. Have you taken into consideration the fact that the 
federal government is proposing to cut $9 million out of the 
funding formula for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s with the 9 million deleted, but as I 
said the other day, that isn’t a firm figure yet. We’re going to 
see if we can improve that. But for comparison sake and so on, 
that’s with it deleted. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s interesting that 
even though you keep up the brave face of saying that you hope 
that the 9 million isn’t going to be deleted that you’re numbers 
that you’re working on already have taken the 9 million out. 
Now that doesn’t show a great deal of confidence that when you 
go to Ottawa you’re going to be successful in your argument, 
which leads to the next question and where we left off last day. 
 
Given the fact that we are now assuming that the $9 million is 
going to be gone this year, what are we saying and predicting 
that it’s going to be in ’87-88? How many dollars will be lost 
next year in your planning that is going on? And as well, you’re 
saying that the EPF has gone from 42 per cent in ’82, when you 
became minister, down to 35 per cent. What is the total loss in 
that time period from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, as I said, the figure that I 
gave you for estimate’s sake and so on, that it is out of there. 
But I stand on the same position that I did on Friday, is that 
we’re going down there, and if we can negotiate a better deal 
certainly we will do that. We will go there to try to get the best 
deal, not only on the drug plan, but also on EPF funding — the 
best possible deal we can for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that it’s not 
credible that you would stand here in this Assembly and not tell 
the people of the province what cuts have been proposed by the 
federal government for next year. They’ve proposed this to all 
of the provinces for a five-year period, and in the real world 
they’ve announced it. They stated it in their budget. All we’re 
asking you is what it will mean to Saskatchewan if Michael 
Wilson and Brian Mulroney are successful in the cut-backs that 
they talk about. They’ve announced it. They wrote it into their 
budget, and as late as last Friday or Saturday, in talking about 
help for farmers, the Prime Minister was saying that the 
integrity of the budget took precedence over the needs of 
farmers and other people. And I’m sure he’s going to say the 
same thing to you when you go to meet with him. He’s already 
saying it to people. The integrity of his budget which talked 
about a $2 billion cut in transfer payments is sacred, and he’s 
going to go ahead with it. He’s told us that already. 
 
And the question that we’re trying to bring to your attention, 
because obviously you’re not aware of it, is that this is going to 
cause a great deal of problem next year when we do the budget. 
And what we would like to know is: what is the proposal for 
cut-backs in the coming year? You’ve admitted that you’ve 
already factored in a $9 million cut for this year. You’ve just 
given me that number. And what are we talking about when 
we’re  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

575 
 

looking at setting the stage for next year’s budget — which will 
already be starting out in the early stages — and you’re going to 
have to take this fact into consideration: what cut-backs are we 
looking at next year from the federal government? 
 
You simply can’t go on stonewalling the committee by saying 
that it’s not going to happen. While we agree it might not 
happen, but then, again, the world might end. But the simple 
fact is there’s a proposal that the federal government has put 
forward for some major cut-backs. The Manitoba government 
fought an election on these cut-backs, or against them. What we 
want to know is what we’re dealing with here. For the next 
year, the coming year ’87-88, what cut-backs are Michael 
Wilson and the Primer Minister talking about taking from 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again let me restate it to 
the House and to the committee here, the position I put forth on 
Friday. Certainly we are not sure at this point in time that the 9 
million is a hard figure. We’ve put it into our estimates as a 
bench-mark, but we don’t know if that is going to be correct or 
not. I’m going to go down and try my best to have it reduced. 
 
(1600) 
 
This type of speculation for next year . . . I mean, how is one to 
tell? It’s EPF funding. The amounts for post-secondary 
education and for health could change. I don’t know what the 
figure is. They may have a figure in their mind, but certainly 
until we have this year’s figure hammered out firm, then I can’t 
see where there can be any degree of accuracy to make a 
speculation of what the next year’s figure is. I think this is just a 
waste of time. 
 
I think we should be looking at this year’s figure. That’s what 
we’re doing. That’s what I’m going to Ottawa to do. And I 
don’t know for sure if it’s going to be 9 million. I said before, it 
could be less. I hope it is less. I certainly hope it is less. But to 
sit here and try and wonder what it’s going to be in ’88 or ’89, 
when it is EPF funding — that’s established program funding 
between higher education and health care — and to try to get a 
hard and firm figure of what it is for health care, I simply don’t 
know. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re a very naïve 
man. I think we can take two answers to the question: one, 
you’re naïve; or one, you’re not telling the truth. One or the 
other. 
 
Obviously the federal minister has outlined to all of the 
provinces, the Minister of Finance has outlined to all the 
provinces, what they intend to cut back on. They announced it 
in their budget. There are reports floating around of what it is 
going to be, the proposal for cut-backs to health and continuing 
education, and you are the only minister in the whole world, 
obviously, who doesn’t know. Either that or you’re not willing 
to tell the public because you’re embarrassed about the fact that 
your federal Conservative colleague would do something this 
ridiculous so short before your provincial election. 
 
And I get back to the same point as we were on Friday, where I 
believe you have a hidden agenda to cut back on  

health spending, and you’re not going to tell anyone until after 
the election. 
 
Now obviously the five-year plan that Michael Wilson has 
outlined includes a cut-back, very substantial, to the province of 
Saskatchewan. You have already indicated that since 1982 the 
federal government has cut their cost sharing from 42 per cent 
to 35 per cent. The Nielsen report says they’re going to cut it 
altogether, that they’re going to take away all the federal 
funding. And Michael Wilson has said he’s going to take 1.3 
billion out of the health care funding before 1991. 
 
Now the question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how much is going 
to be cut out of the budget, the revenue sharing or the transfer 
payments to the province of Saskatchewan, in ’87-88? Now I 
don’t think that’s an unreasonable question to be asking when 
it’s written into the federal budget that the cut is going to take 
place, when the Prime Minister has said that the budget is going 
to be going forward as it’s written with those cuts in place. And 
for you to close your eyes and ignore it and play naïve, or on 
the other hand not tell the committee — neither of those options 
is good enough. 
 
We’re going to be here a long time on this issue of federal 
funding unless we start getting some answers. Because 
members of the opposition are concerned about cuts that are 
going to take place, and we feel that in order to have a medicare 
system across Canada, that the federal government has to 
remain a major player in the operation. Because I said on 
Friday, if the federal government gets out of their responsibility, 
we’re going to have a medicare system that is irrelevant across 
Canada because some provinces simply won’t be able to afford 
to give a basic health care system. And therefore, we’re going 
to continue on asking you what is the proposal for 
Saskatchewan. What do we intend to lose next year, in ’87-88, 
in terms of cut-back in health care transfers from the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again I’ll go through the 
same answer that I’ve given the member a number of times. It 
seems logical to me. And that is that there’s an estimated figure 
of $13 million EPF for this coming year — estimated figure. 
The Health share of that is approximately $9 million. And I say 
“approximately,” because it has not been decided firm. I think 
it’s important that we go down and try and see what that 
figure’s going to be and get that hammered down. And that’s 
the first thing to do. And until we see how we make out in this 
year’s negotiations . . . And a lot of it will be done by my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, because these transfer 
payments are between Finance departments. Members opposite 
know that. But until that has been established, it would be just 
speculation to look at any other type of figure. I am more intent 
to go and argue this year’s figures and try and carve out for 
Saskatchewan the best deal I can for this coming year. And 
that’s what I intend to do, and I’m sure my colleague intends to 
do likewise. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
as I was looking at the Health budget — and I don’t want to 
pretend I’m an expert on Health in the critic area there that . . . 
My colleague from Shaunavon is doing a good job. But under 
item 13, for example, Mr. Minister,  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

576 
 

mental health services, total this year are going to be 28.9 
million, down from 30.027 million. Mental health services, 
estimated ’86-87 down about $1.5 million. I don’t know if you 
have taken time, Mr. Minister, to read today’s paper, but on 
page A2, on page A2 of today’s Leader-Post, an article 
appearing in the inside top corner says, “Mental health crisis 
reported in farmers.” 
 

Brandon. Anger, despair and depression are reaching crisis 
levels amongst Canadian farmers, says an official of the 
Canadian Mental Health Association. 

 
“The mental health crisis is becoming quite widely felt 
across Canada and the U.S.,” Peter Clutterbuck, a national 
research officersfor the association, told reporters Saturday 
. . . 

 
And I’ll just read major parts of this article here, Mr. Minister: 
 

“Small and medium farmers seem to be particularly 
threatened,” he said. “They face the loss of a family 
tradition and a way of life.” 

 
Clutterbuck noted that a 1985 survey of 85 farm families 
(and this meeting took place in Manitoba, Mr. Minister, 
but if you check the article carefully, you’ll see that) a 
1985 survey of family farms in North Battleford showed 
that farmers are under increased mental stress. 

 
I’m not saying this is necessarily political, but I imagine 
farmers there are under more stress than in the rest of 
Saskatchewan, seeing the good deal Peter Pocklington got 
compared to what we’re getting. 
 
But with that little political pun aside: 
 

The report, entitled Work and Well Being in the 
Agricultural Sector, showed that 88 per cent of the 
respondents reported stress-related symptoms including 
loss of sleep, mental fatigue, depression, anger and 
changes in marital relationships. 

 
And although more than 90 per cent of those surveyed said 
they took pride in their farm work, a similar percentage 
(90 per cent) said they felt that Canadians in general have 
little or no appreciation of the importance of agriculture 
and the problems facing farmers. 
 
Clutterbuck said the report shows there is a need for 
increased mental health services in rural communities. 

 
Increased mental health services in rural communities. 
 
I had the privilege, Mr. Minister, of meeting on several 
occasions with some people that had gone down to a conference 
in the United States, and in particular, one of the candidates’ 
wife from Weyburn is very, very interested and conscious of the 
problems that are caused because of the crisis centre that should 
be established for serving farmers. 
 

And I’m wondering how you read this problem that’s facing 
Saskatchewan rural people and why you would in your budget 
cut that much. I haven’t gone and done the calculation as to 
what percentage of cut it is to go from 28.9 to 30 — you know, 
in last year’s budget was that much for providing mental health 
services. You decided to reduce that number. A note here says 
that part of that could be transferred to Supply and Services. 
I’m wondering if you’re aware of the pressure your agricultural 
policies or the Tory hard times are putting on farmers in 
Saskatchewan, if you’re aware of the increased crisis that 
farmers are facing, and how you expect to respond to it with a 
reduction in the budget under the mental health plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well basically, as I had outlined to you 
previously, and I think you picked up on that, that the transfer 
of maintenance staff and associated costs of Saskatchewan 
Hospital in North Battleford to Supply and Services is a major 
part of that reduction. As you know, Saskatchewan Hospital in 
Battleford now houses some of the young offenders, and so on, 
under the Social Services. So rather than the Health department 
run it as in the past, a lot of the maintenance is now under 
government services. 
 
Certainly we are concerned about mental health services in rural 
Saskatchewan, and we have put on some of these forums or 
discussion groups. And my associate deputy indicates to me 
that, in some situations, the attendance hasn’t been very good. I 
would urge the member opposite, because I think he raises a 
sincere concern and you have my commitment, to see what we 
can do to have people attend these. But I understand there was 
one down and around Assiniboia there where only two farmers 
showed up. 
 
So we’re quite willing to do this, but it may need a little more 
public education, and certainly, I urge you, as a member of the 
legislature, to assist in that type of . . . You know, if you know 
of people, and from your comments obviously you do, I think 
it’s incumbent that you try and bring it to their attention that 
these types of forums or discussions, group therapies or 
whatever one would like to call them are taking place, and if 
people are having these problems then they should come out to 
them. So we’re not cutting back. 
 
I could go through a number of initiatives that we have done in 
mental health services since taking over — wife batterers’ 
programs, things of this nature, and improved resources for 
child and youth programs. There’s a number of them here if you 
would like to hear them, but just simply put it hasn’t been a 
priority. 
 
I think the changing of the name also has had a significance. If 
you noticed, I talk about mental health services. It was 
previously called psychiatric services. I thinking the whole 
thing of looking at it as mental health . . . Because there are 
people who have physical illness and there are people who have 
mental illness. But I think that thrust shows the direction we’re 
going in. I can supply you with a number of things that we have 
been doing as new initiatives in mental health services. 
 
We would also be encouraging the local ag reps to work  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

577 
 

in conjunction with these rural type of forums or seminars. 
They probably know firsthand some of the people who are 
under various types of pressure. So if there’s anything you can 
do to help, I ask you to give me the areas or the names where 
you think there’s a need. And also if we put something on like 
this, I think as rural members, my self included, there’s an onus 
upon us to try and get people out to them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think the area that you mention, that in 
Assiniboia, for example, only two people showed up, I think 
you’re barking up the wrong tree if I may say so, Mr. Minister. 
I feel that if the farmers are under a strain and stress and under a 
special crisis type situation they’re facing, I find they’re very 
reluctant to talk about it. Basically this is why I was concerned 
with a cut-back in the mental health services branch because if 
you take this seminar that was conduced in Brandon, 
Clutterbuck says: 
 

Stress builds up because farmers are generally reluctant to 
talk about their problems and they often view mental 
health services as being urban-oriented and unresponsive 
to their plight. 

 
If through the ag rep’s office you intend to second or make 
available to them special counsellors or a counselling device 
that can meet with and deal with the farmers on a one-to-one 
situation, I think that would be very wise. But I find that in 
talking with this with Mrs. Elder, particularly after she came 
back from that conference, and when she reported to a 
committee I serve in a party function, she pointed this out very 
much so that back in her home state in Iowa, the crisis centres 
that they built up were more in the line of providing a hot-line 
service and advertising that where a farmer in the privacy of his 
own home could talk to a counsellor or get some counselling or 
get some advice and deal with it. 
 
(1615) 
 
I’m basically raising this, Mr. Minister, and I don’t want to 
relate it right across the board — it isn’t always the case — but 
in many, many, many cases that I have personally been 
concerned with, the minute the pressure is really on and a 
farmer or a rural person or even an urban person gets involved 
under that kind of a stress, many times — not all the time, but 
many, many times — they’ll go to another source for solace and 
comfort and bury their sorrows. And I think you know what I’m 
talking about. They seek some solace in a bottle. And they seek 
solace in alcohol. And they seek to take off that edge that’s 
there. 
 
And what I’m critical of . . . And I was listening and I didn’t get 
involved the last two days when this particular problem was 
discussed, but I think when a farmer is sitting down in the 
evening and he’s worried about the pressure he’s under, he’s 
worried about, how am I going to make it do; last year I 
borrowed some money; this year I’m going to get 81 cents a 
bushel less. The pressures are going to get worse. I’m going to 
have to pay a third of my loan back that I borrowed. And the 
pressure is mounting and mounting and mounting, and he’s 
sitting at home there and he’s got his feet up and watching TV 
and bango, what hits him? What hits him? Your sanctioned 
television ad that tells him, look, take some of the bubblies; get 
in  

and have a drink. And they see this advertising of liquor that is 
effective, and it’s generating and exaggerating the problem 
that’s there, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I want you to stand up in this Assembly and say I’m 
wrong. I want you to tell me that that doesn’t have that kind of 
effect. And I think that you have to answer. You have to 
answer, not only for the problem your government is causing in 
not putting up a lobby and not putting up a fight for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan; who would rather put up a fight saying, boy, 
our dear friends in the oil company need more money. 
 
And maybe the chairman thinks I’m relating to a problem here, 
but I’m saying why farmers are facing a stress and why they’re 
under terrible, terrible pressure. And then you have a 
government that has the minister stand up and say, we’re doing 
a wonderful job with liquor advertising because 15 per cent of it 
— 15 per cent of the liquor advertising — in your words, you’re 
saying that that is going to solve all the problems. 
 
Well I want to tell you, I don’t even like the 15 per cent ads. 
Because some of them . . . And I could bring some of the 
advertisings I’ve clipped from the paper. And the difference 
between the 15 per cent ad in the paper and the 85 per cent ad 
was that the 15 per cent ad was a little smaller. 
 
But even the 15 per cent of the money you spent in encouraging 
the moderate use of alcohol, use it in moderation, that is still . . . 
That’s why the companies aren’t reluctant to spend 15 per cent 
on it, because you can’t get that guy to take his 20th drink until 
he’s taken the first one. 
 
So you encourage him with 15 per cent of your advertising to 
take that first drink. It’s great to drink in moderation, you know, 
just use a little bit. And then you come along with a big ad and 
say, boy this is great, this is refreshing, and this is soothing, and 
this’ll solve your problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you, you’re creating a crisis in 
agriculture. You’re creating a mental health crisis that’s out 
there, and you’re watering and helping it flourish with your 
attitude towards advertising. 
 
And the other thing that bothered me an awful lot is the other 
day, the other day when you got into the debate with my 
colleague from the Quill Lakes, and you were trying to tie your 
little red wagon on to my friend, Jake Epp. I’ve known Jake 
Epp longer than I’ve known you, and I’d be terribly surprised if 
Jake Epp would disagree with what I’m saying today. I’d be 
very, very surprised, if he’d have a choice to say, we want to go 
back to Saskatchewan that has no liquor advertising, with the 
kind of attitude that you’ve created here in Saskatchewan, 
where you’ve encouraged and you’ve taken the pay-up from the 
breweries and have given a free rein in liquor advertising. 
 
I would like you to stand up in this House and brag about the 
good job you’re doing in that area of encouragement to farmers. 
I’d suggest you setup a situation where you bring some help 
into our ag reps and give them some  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

578 
 

assistance in counselling, because I think it has to be done on a 
one to one. It has to be done on a one to one. But my sampling 
of what’s happening and my concern with what’s out there, Mr. 
Minister, when they face the crisis and they think of this Tory 
administration, they think of this little Tory operation, maybe 
the only solution is to drown their sorrows and forget about it. 
Maybe that’s the only solution. I don’t know. 
 
But I don’t like either solution, Mr. Minister. I don’t like the 
idea of thinking that the only solution is to bring them together, 
have a little group therapy session where all the neighbours get 
together and try to solve their problems. That’s going to work 
for some of them. I know when my brother-in-law joined the 
AA, it’s done a world of good for him. He’s been off the bottle 
for 13 years, but I’ll tell you, he doesn’t live in Saskatchewan. 
He’s not bombarded by these ads that are out there and the 
encouragement they have. He can sit back and watch his TV 
and know that in his state there’s no liquor advertising. And 
there was when we were in power here in Saskatchewan; in the 
’70s that state had liquor advertising. They don’t today, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I want to tell you, you’ve gone backwards. You haven’t 
followed the trend that’s taking place across many of the states 
in United States where they’ve decided to ban it completely. I 
think you should take the high road. You should admit defeat 
on this one like you have on many of the other areas where 
you’ve made a mistake. And it’s time to take these guys on and 
say, we’re going to wipe it right off; we’re going to do away 
with it; and we’re going to start solving the problem and get to 
the root of the problem — get to the root of it. And let’s do 
away with the Tories, and then we can start solving this crisis 
that’s facing agriculture in -Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I hope the member 
opposite isn’t trying to indicate that all the farmers in 
Saskatchewan have psychological problems. I wonder. Because 
certainly I have a lot of friends that are farmers and I see them 
nightly, and I can indicate to you that they’re well and healthy 
and doing good. They’re telling me, we’ve got a better chance 
right now; we’ve got a government that listens to agriculture 
more than there ever has been in the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what farmer after farmer is telling me. 
 
So to say that there’s a mass problem of psychological 
problems out in rural Saskatchewan amongst farmers, is simply 
not correct. However, certainly there are some individuals that 
are having some psychological problems. There always has 
been. There always has been, and unfortunately, I suppose, 
there always will be some. I believe that by working through 
the ag reps offices that we can find who these people are. 
 
The member opposite, I think, supports this. A group session in 
some cases may be good. Sometimes it’s good in this world to 
hear that there’s other people that have some pressures and 
strains upon them. You mention AA who probably are world 
renowned for this type of group therapy. It doesn’t work in 
every case. Some cases a person wants to speak confidentially 
with another person. I think this type of network that we have 
put out, are developing in Saskatchewan, will do a lot to try and  

help that situation. 
 
I noticed you mentioned that the man was speaking in Brandon. 
From my understanding, certainly we have a far better network 
than Manitoba, and I say that, in a non-partisan way, we have a 
better network in mental health services in Saskatchewan than 
is the case in Manitoba. 
 
You mention Jake Epp. I don’t question how long you know 
Jake. If you know him like I do, you think he’s a very admirable 
fellow. And as I outlined in some detail in Hansard the other 
day, that I think — and I take some satisfaction in the fact that 
Jake would look at the programs of provinces on alcohol, 
educational type of ads, and say the best blueprint is 
Saskatchewan’s, and thereby have approached the CRTC to try 
and bring in what we have in Saskatchewan. I’m not saying it’s 
perfect but it is probably, as Jake is looking at it, the best one. 
In some cases it’s over 15 per cent. I don’t know if you were 
present when I read the letter to Jake where I told Jake: I 
support you and I will do whatever I can to help you bring this 
across, through all the CRTC. 
 
So I would say that I think our positive ads are probably the 
best in Canada. And I think the very fact that the federal 
minister whom we both know has chosen that route to go, lends 
support and credence to the position taken here. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The point I was raising is that, as good as a 
positive ad might be, if the 85 per cent of the ads were cut off 
you’d make both me and Jake Epp a lot happier. That’s the 
point I was making. I was going to tell you, that by trying to tie 
him in to saying that he agrees with alcohol advertising with the 
85 per cent of the ads that are spent encouraging the use and 
consumption — you can call it brand selection or what you 
want — but those kinds of ads don’t sit well with the present 
minister, nationally. I know that. And I wish you’d be on that 
same wavelength, you’d both get involved in saying, let’s spend 
the 15 or 20 per cent on the negative ads; we’ll agree to that. 
 
And we had an excellent Aware program out there. The Aware 
ads, and you’ll have to admit, those Aware ads were excellent 
and they were good, but they were run at a time when they 
didn’t have a competition. They didn’t have any competition 
from the 85 per cent that you have today, when the Aware ads 
were run. There was no interference in the ball games and in the 
hockey games. There was no interference. There was no 
interference by the other ads at that time. 
 
So the point I’m making, Mr. Minister, the medical profession 
are encouraging you to cut and ban liquor advertising. The 
teachers are telling us, ban liquor advertising. Churches all over 
the country have written thousands and thousands of letters and 
yes, you said that Don Faris orchestrated some of that. I 
appreciate the worked the guy did, trying to bring you guys to 
your senses and cut off liquor advertising that you instituted. 
 
But I want to tell you, people right across the piece — and 
when I meet with people that are meeting with the AA and 
when they ask me into talk to them, they’re trying to encourage 
me and saying: can’t you do anything with  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

579 
 

these guys? Can’t you encourage them to ban liquor 
advertising? It’s a concern right across the piece, except 
amongst the 55 of you sitting over here. You seem to be the 
only ones in the whole country that are in favour of liquor 
advertising. I can’t find another person, I can’t find another 
person that’ll write me a letter or indicate to me that it’s a good 
thing to have those 85 per cent of the ads on there. And yet you 
think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The distilleries will write you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Oh, the distilleries say it’s great; I believe so. 
But they know they can sell it to you by giving you a little 
campaign funds and you leave it on the air. And you’ll even 
have all the free-wheeling advertisements they can have. And, 
Mr. Minister, I think you’re going to be accountable for what’s 
happened. You’re accountable for this crisis facing agriculture. 
 
The man I referred to wasn’t from Manitoba. He was speaking 
at a seminar in Brandon, and he referred to a survey that was 
done here in Saskatchewan. He referred to a survey that was 
done on Saskatchewan farmers, and he referred to the 90 per 
cent of the farmers that were surveyed from the North 
Battleford area that were facing those problems. And I think the 
area and the point I want to make with you, that when farmers 
have a problem it’s an individual problem and it’s not 
something they want to share with somebody else. I find that 
when people face . . . are up against it, have their backs to the 
wall, they think they’re the only person that’s in that kind of 
trouble. They don’t realize that that’s a thing that all their 
neighbours or 90 per cent of their neighbours are facing the 
same problem, the same trouble. 
 
But when the ad comes on, that liquor ad, and that enticement 
to enjoy a drink comes on, it affects him more, it affects him 
more than it does the average person that can go right along and 
can afford to have a social drink, pays for it out of funds that he 
has, that doesn’t put him into more serious situations. In many, 
many cases money is spent on liquor that should be spent on 
children’s clothing and on food and on better diets, because of 
the pressure they’re facing and because of the problems they 
have. And you’re adding to that problem by encouraging further 
use. 
 
And I would like to have you respond to me and tell me if there 
are not more people facing problems today in the agriculture 
community than there were five years ago. I would like some 
statistics on that, because I believe in the last four years the 
problem has escalated more than a hundredfold. I believe that 
that problem has gone up in the last years. 
 
(1630) 
 
The crisis centres that have been established . . . I was to a 
meeting in Swift Current with some of the people that are 
involved in working in a crisis centre there and a hot-line 
service they’re providing. And their calls have escalated in the 
last years, more than doubled every year in the last three years 
— the increase in the work-load that’s on them there. And they 
tell me that a big percentage of their calls are from rural areas 
and from farmers around the area. 
 

And I think the problem is growing, the problem is getting 
worse, Mr. Minister, and it isn’t one that’s been around for a 
long, long time. It’s something that is getting worse, and part of 
that happening is because it’s only in the last four years that 
we’ve had liquor advertising. That’s part of the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, again I kind of get the feeling that 
the member opposite thinks that every farmer out there has got 
an alcohol problem, and I rather dispute that. But you know, if 
the devastating effects are such as he outlines, then it would 
seem strange to me, Mr. Chairman, why in the adult per capita 
sales of alcohol in Saskatchewan, they’ve declined over the past 
five years, including a drop of 3 per cent between 1983-84 and 
1984-85. 
 
And I think these figures might be very interesting for the 
House here, because I’m not sure everyone’s aware of this. This 
is the per capita consumption levels, as compared to 11 other 
jurisdictions. And in ’79-80, for spirits, we were the sixth 
lowest. Now in ’83-84 we are the eighth lowest. In beer and 
wine it has remained the same. But here is an interesting 
statistic: in absolute alcohol consumed — this is per capita 
consumptions, comparison of 11 other jurisdictions — in 
1979-80 we were the third lowest. In 1983-84 we were the fifth 
lowest. 
 
So actually the per capita consumption of pure alcohol and of 
spirits is declining, is decreasing in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman, rather than going up, as the member opposite would 
like to indicate. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, if you’d talk about disposable 
income in those two brackets, and you’d take the percentage of 
disposable income that was spent on alcohol and compare it for 
me with the percentage of disposable income that was spent on 
the two years you make — use those two points — what was 
the disposable income for farmers in the years you mentioned in 
the ’70s, compared to the disposable income in the years you 
mentioned in the ’80s? And let’s have that little figure. Give us 
that little number while you’re on your feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know how they use the rest of 
their income. I have no idea. But I can tell you, for spirits we 
were the sixth lowest in ’79-80. But for spirits we were the 
eight lowest . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . for absolute alcohol 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it doesn’t matter how I say 
it. If the person bought another car or another truck, whatever 
he did, this is the consumption of alcohol. That is the point that 
you were raising. It has nothing to do with the disposable 
income. This is how much he drinks . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, it certainly does. Absolute consumption, we were the 
third lowest; now we’re the fifth lowest. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, when you talk about pricing, when 
the price of alcohol goes up, how does it affect consumption? 
Will consumption stay the same if the price of alcohol goes up 
dramatically, or will that affect consumption? Will that affect 
consumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m wondering if the member’s line  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

580 
 

of logic is that he opposes . . . I believe from his logic he 
opposes . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — If we could . . . Gentlemen, if we could stay 
on topic in the debate between the minister and the member, 
please and the rest remain out of it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, the point I’m making, that as the 
price goes up, if the income stays the same, the consumption 
will go down. And the only reason you lost . . . 
The only reason the consumption went down a little bit in those 
two numbers you happened to pick out of the hat is because the 
farmer had about 10 per cent, 10 per cent of the disposable 
income, in the year you gave, compared to what he had in our 
best year in Saskatchewan’s agriculture. 
 
The very best year farmers ever faced was when we were 
getting $7 wheat. That’s the number you used. And they will 
buy more when they have more money to spend. But the point 
I’m making: when the heat is on, the farmer is facing with a 
zero income, that’s when you advertise and get him to spend 
that last little nickel — get his nickel. 
 
You better get some help from your colleagues and not listen to 
me. You better listen to some of these guys because the oil men 
are keeping those numbers up, but they’re the only people. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, your advertising has adversely 
affected the amount of money that’s being spent by people that 
least can afford it. People that can least afford it are the ones 
that are going to get hurt by advertising because they’d like to 
have a drink. They refuse to go and buy some. They refuse to 
spend some money. 
 
But then they sit there and they watch their TV and they see this 
encouragement and they feel the depression that’s on them 
because of your agricultural policies that have taken their 
disposable income away from them. And then when the things 
are tough, they’ll spend a buck. When things are tough they 
spend the money on booze that they should be spending on 
milk. 
 
And I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, the studies that have been 
done and the reports that have been made indicate that there are 
more farmers facing medical stress. It was on page 2. It was on 
the inside page of today’s Leader-Post, right at the top. The 
study that was done indicates that 90 per cent — 90 per cent — 
although more than 90 per cent of those surveyed in North 
Battleford, showed that farmers are under increased . . . 
 
Are you listening, Mr. Minister? Maybe I should wait until you 
listen. He’s sitting there laughing. In this report the study that 
was done, particularly in the North Battleford area, showed that; 
 

. . . 90 per cent of those surveyed said they took pride in 
their farm work, and a similar percentage (90 per cent) 
said they felt that Canadians in general have little or no 
appreciation of the importance of agriculture and the 
problems . . . (that the individual farmers are facing.) 

 

Stress builds up because farmers are generally reluctant to 
talk about their problems and they often view mental 
health services as being urban-oriented and unresponsive 
to their plight . . . (that farmers are facing.) 

 
And the point I’m making, Mr. Minister, is that those people, 
when the heat is on and stress is on, and like Mr. Clutterbuck 
noted, that mental stress relates to mental fatigue, to depression, 
to anger, and to alcohol consumption. And I’m telling you, Mr. 
Minister, that is the problem that develops because of that. 
 
I think you are not aiding those people by allowing your friends 
that are paying for your political campaigns to advertise as 
much as they’d like. That’s the point I’m trying to make. Stand 
up; show us some leadership. Show us you’re the man you are, 
and tell your colleagues that if they want to save your position 
— if they want to save your position — you’ll ban liquor 
advertising before you call this next election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, if there’s somebody that’s 
an expert on mental fatigue, it’s the member opposite. I would 
never dispute and argue that with you. 
 
But he mentioned that I was smiling, I was smiling at the 
inconsistency in his argument. When he rose to speak he said 
the farmers in Saskatchewan are all sitting in front of the TV 
consuming liquor because they’re hard up, things are tough. 
That’s what he said. Then when I indicated to him, Mr. 
Chairman, that the figures indicate that the per cent 
consumption of true spirits is decreased, he said, well, that’s 
because they used to drink more when they had more money. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I’ve taught a lot of kids in my day. But I 
always was able to get rid of those inconsistencies. Now I ask 
you, my friend: which way is it? Do the farmers drink more 
because they’re hard up or do the farmers drink more because 
they have more money? That was your argument. And you can 
look back in Hansard tomorrow, and you will see that. 
 
Now I would like you to stand and say which one is it, because 
I’d like to know which one to address. You said, oh no, when 
they had more money, they bought more; they drank more. 
Then you stood up and said, when they’re broke, they drink 
more. Well goodness gracious, it can’t be both ways. And I 
maintain that a lot of the farmers are out there tonight and 
they’re having supper now and they’re drinking milk, and they 
don’t have a bottle of booze. It may be in the cupboard, and if 
their neighbour comes over, they sit down and have a drink. 
Some of them don’t even touch it. But to stand up here and say, 
they’re all broke, and they’re all sitting in front of the TV with a 
bottle of whiskey in their hand, is simply not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Cheer, boys. I want to tell you the only way that 
former minister of Justice, the present Minister of Finance, is 
going to hold his seat, the only way he’ll hold his seat is if he 
can get you to stand up and say that we’re going to cut liquor 
advertising. Any other way, he won’t  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

581 
 

even win his nomination. And he stands and cheers. He stands 
and cheers here tonight. He stands and cheers here tonight for 
liquor advertising. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to get into a little debate with 
you, but I want to tell you this. Give me a good reason, give me 
a good reason other than to fill your political coffer, give me a 
good reason why you, as Minister of health, support 85 per cent 
of the ads. Why are you supporting them? What’s good about 
them? 
 
If you’re saying it’s not having a negative effect, let’s have a 
little run-down on this liquor ad where you have five or six 
young people who are driving a truck similar to the one Young 
drives from Saskatoon. I’m sorry. What’s his constituency? But 
anyhow, it doesn’t matter. But this little Lincoln truck he’s got 
out here, this old grey one, there’s one just like it, only it’s 
painted orange, on TV. And how these happy guys are pushing 
it to the pub. 
 
I watched them sit there and laugh away. They remind me of 
the same crew that’s pushing the little truck up to the pub, and 
they’re going to forget if this truck starts or not. They’re going 
to have a drink and celebrate. That’s what you do when you’ve 
got trouble. That’s what you do if you can’t afford something 
better to drive. You push it up to a pub and you have a drink. 
You push it up to the pub and you have a drink. You don’t 
bother with battery boosters and battery chargers to try and 
crank that old thing up. It’s an insult to have it parked out in 
front of here, but you don’t solve the problem — you go and get 
drunk, Mr. Minister. That’s what your ads tell these guys to do. 
That’s why they act the way they do when they come back from 
supper. They’ll likely push an old truck around town. 
 
But I’m going to tell you, Mr. Minister — maybe you join 
them, maybe you don’t; I don’t know — but I want to tell you, 
liquor advertising hasn’t solved any problems. Tell me one. It’s 
maybe helped your budget for getting ready for your election 
that you might call sometime in the next year — you might get 
up your nerve to call it. 
 
But I want to tell you, the only good that you get out of liquor 
advertising is the good the Tory party reaps. There is no other 
good, not one reason that’s good for anything in society. It 
doesn’t do anything for society, and the only person in that 
whole caucus that will agree with me is the guy that’s quitting, 
my good friend from Rosthern. He agrees that liquor 
advertising is no good, but he’s about the only one. He’s about 
the only one, because the rest of you think it’s a good thing. The 
rest of you think it’s a good thing. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you: if you want to get elected 
and if the Minister of Finance wants to get elected, cut the ads. 
What is positive about the liquor ads? What good comes of it 
other than filling your coffer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well there’s no relationship between 
coffers and liquor ads. But I just want to indicate to you that 
studies all over the area, across North America, have never been 
able to prove that advertising ups consumption. And all I can do 
is refer to the figures that are here, in that consumption patterns 
in Saskatchewan have gone down. They’ve gone down. I think 
that speaks  

for itself. 
 
Mr. Engel: — So that 15 per cent of negative advertising, you 
say, has cut down. I want to know the positive aspect of the 85 
per cent of the ads. Do the TV companies need it to survive? 
Weren’t they getting along and weren’t they making any 
money? What’s the problem? What is good . . . What’s the 
positive aspect you’re trying to develop from your liquor 
advertising? Why did you decide to allow liquor advertising in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I would think the very fact that the 
Minister of Health for Canada is accepting the Saskatchewan 
model of at least 15 per cent positive — and I believe we’ll 
build in more — certainly that the Saskatchewan situation . . . If 
you look at these, Mr. Chairman, that our model is being 
adopted for all of Canada, take that as one, take that as one 
point. Secondly, take the figure that the consumption is 
decreasing in the province, and take that figure that we’re much 
better off today than we were in 1978-79. Therefore I think the 
policy that we have adopted with those positive ads is certainly 
the best in Canada. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I’ll tell you when it was the best in Canada. 
Up until 1982, prior to your advertising of liquor, Saskatchewan 
had the best model, like we had the model for medicare, like we 
had the models for everything we’ve started and thought of and 
done in Saskatchewan, started here as a model. But the one you 
destroyed was the model we had set up in saying that, in our 
commercial stations that operate and are generated and start in 
Saskatchewan and that are played in Saskatchewan, have zero 
booze ads — zero. 
 
I hear the medical association across Canada saying that the 
only way we’re going to lick the health problem with smokers 
is to stop advertising smoking. Do you agree with that aspect of 
it? And if you want to control the consumption of alcohol, you 
got to stop liquor advertising, like it was before — like it was 
before. 
 
We had a model. We had a model. Now you brag about a model 
— that 15 per cent of the ads is a model. No, that’s not a model 
at all. That’s a failure, because that isn’t something new. We 
had Aware ads that were greater, and had a greater impact, 
because they didn’t have that competition from the other 85 per 
cent. They didn’t have that competition. Aware worked, Mr. 
Minister. Aware was doing its job, and they were good. They 
were powerful ads, and people want them. And maybe some of 
your 15 per cent are coming close. Some of them are coming 
close. 
 
Herman Rolfes did a good job when he introduced the program 
of Aware ads, and Herman Rolfes is going to be back here, be 
back here cutting off the ads on the rest of liquor advertising, 
because you’re too chicken to show some leadership. You’re 
too chicken to stand up and say, the money we got from Peter 
Pocklington, and the money we got from Weyerhaeuser, and the 
money that George Hill’s contributing, we’ve got enough to 
win an election; we don’t need the money from the booze 
people. If you’d have the guts to stand up and have some 
leadership, and if  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

582 
 

you’d stand up to those breweries and say, we don’t need your 
money — sorry, boys; we’re not going to have any more booze 
advertising. We’re going to fill the air waves with our election 
ads anyhow. The television stations and the radio stations will 
get enough advertising money from all these political 
announcements. We won’t need the booze announcements to 
survive. 
 
Have the leadership to stand up and cut the ads off, Mr. 
Minister, like the medical health association is telling you to do 
with smoking ads; like the doctors are asking for the booze ads; 
like the municipal government are asking us; like the people 
that are working in welfare; like the schoolteachers that are 
teaching grade 12 kids; and all the other people that are working 
with young people. The church people, the educators — 
everybody in the country is telling you to cut the ads out except 
the little 55 crowd you’ve got sitting here. They cheer. They 
cheer. 
 
I see the member from Morse cheering when you’re talking 
about booze advertising, but I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, his 
days are numbered. His days are numbered because when Reg 
Gross gets in here he’s going to help me cut off liquor 
advertising. He’s going to help me cut off liquor advertising. He 
doesn’t stand up against liquor advertising. He cheered just a 
minute ago when you thought you had a good one on me. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the last good one I’m going to have on you is 
that if you want to win your seat, stand up and tell us you’re 
going to cut the advertising of liquor. And you’ll have some 
people say, wow, maybe these guys have some leadership;  
maybe they have some guts; maybe they know that they’ve 
made a mistake and they’re doing some wrong; maybe they’ll 
recant and retract on this one. 
 
I think it’s time you show some leadership in the Department of 
Health because that’s the one area that you could show 
leadership and say, our costs, mental health costs, have gone 
down from . . . The support you’ve had from mental health 
services has gone down from 30 million to 28 million. But 
when it comes to drug abuse and booze . . . What item was that 
one? Grants to . . . I saw it was quite an increase here. I’ll find it 
pretty soon here. It went from 6 to 8 million anyhow, and I’m 
trying to find . . . I’ll find it when you answer this question if 
you’re going to show some leadership in the Department of 
Health with the pressure that it’s put on you to cut smoking ads. 
Do you feel that that would reduce the amount of smokers if the 
smoking ads were taken off the air? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it’s interesting that the member 
would ask about the anti-smoking initiatives. Certainly we have 
cut the numbers of smokers in Saskatchewan most drastically, 
and without even doing anything with advertising. I believe that 
the initiatives that we have taken to indicate to young people the 
dangers of smoking have certainly had a fantastic reduction in 
the number. 
 
I’m proud to say that we have the most non-smoking schools in 
Canada, where schools can fly the United Nations flag because 
none of the students smoke and none of the staff smoke in that 
school. I think it’s interesting to see that this year — and I wish 
it would have passed — that a hotly debated resolution at the  

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation annual convention was 
whether to ban smoking in schools. It didn’t pass. I would have 
like to have seen it pass. But the very fact that it was brought on 
the agenda by a provincial organization of the size of the STF 
certainly indicates that here in Saskatchewan we are leading 
with non-smoking initiatives. 
 
So there are many ways that one can encourage and can lead 
with non-smoking initiatives. And I think our track record 
stands very strong in that. 
 
The other thing that I’ll point out to you as far as advertising . . . 
You’ve talked about the Aware programs. The other day I 
indicated to you the immense popularity of the Christmas 
alcohol advertising ads, the strong impact that they’re having 
upon people and their choices. Also the high recognition factor, 
and as well, the complete endorsement by 90 per cent of those 
that were asked the questions, or reviewed, say, run them again. 
So certainly there are some initiatives that are very strong. 
 
Furthermore, I think if you look over the general population and 
the attitude towards drinking and so on that has been displayed 
here, not only in my department but within highway traffic and 
so on where we have considerable crack-down on drinking 
drivers, a reduction of these offences at Christmas because of 
volunteer groups saying, look at, we’ll drive your car and so on, 
I think we’re seeing that the people of Saskatchewan — and I 
give the credit to the people of Saskatchewan — that many of 
them are taking a very conscientious look at life-styles. I go out 
every day here at noon and I see people jogging all through the 
park. Nobody says you have to go out there and jog. These are 
people that are concerned with their life-style. 
 
I see a reduction in the consumption of alcohol, true alcohol 
experience in this province. Nobody is saying, look at, you 
can’t drink. People are deciding of their own volition, and 
certainly non-smoking initiatives have gone a long way to 
reducing the number of smokers. I see that just today in the 
paper in British Columbia, for example. There’s a by-law in 
Vancouver by which the non-smokers are going to have the 
majority rights in the restaurants. That’s a city by-law that’s 
coming forward. So certainly I believe people across this 
country are beginning to realize that they are responsible for 
their own health and to a great extent, that is true. 
 
Certainly one can question advertising. There was cable 
advertising in this province, there was advertising in magazines 
that always had been in here, and that type of stuff that came 
across the line with television — that had always been here. But 
I am pleased to see that the consumption is going down. 
 
So to stand here and make great fanfare about farmers sitting 
out there in front of their TV sets with a bottle of whiskey in 
their hand, I think is misrepresenting the facts. Sure there’s 
some farmers in trouble; there’s people in the city that are in 
trouble; there’s people who have always had some mental 
trouble. There’s always been mental trouble. I can indicate that 
there’s seven or eight fellows across the other side that have a 
bit of political trouble too, if the truth was known. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

583 
 

But, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say to you that I’m pleased to 
see that the consumption is going down. I’m concerned about 
this. The alcohol commission has been monitoring the 
consumption pattern. So certainly I hope that has given some 
answer to the questions raised by the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate what you’re saying. 
But wouldn’t it have been nice if we could start flying some 
flags over a school and saying not one young person in that 
school is using alcohol? Wouldn’t that be a good thing? Would 
you agree that that would be a good thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think again — and I will give 
credit to some of the young people in Saskatchewan because I 
think they are again picking up this initiative — I understand 
that Cochrane High School here in Regina is going to have a 
completely alcohol-free graduation. My colleague, the MLA 
from Shellbrook, told me about Shellbrook, which voted the 
same way — the high school. The children, the kids in the high 
school themselves, said, look at, we’re going to have a Safe 
Grad and there’s going to be no alcohol at this Safe Grad. 
 
I’m concerned about the use of drugs in the high schools. I’ve 
talked to teachers. I’m concerned about this. I’m concerned 
about young children and young adults that are drinking and 
some are drinking to excess. And it is to that extent that I 
commissioned a study on youth, drugs, and alcohol in 
Saskatchewan. I indicated to, I think it was the member from 
Regina North East, last week that that study is in and will soon 
be released to the public. And I’ve promised a copy of that 
study to every member of the opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we’re certainly concerned. I think every 
sincere person in Saskatchewan is concerned. And I just want to 
congratulate those people out there who are taking that concern 
personally — those high schools who are, of their own volition, 
saying, look at, we want to have a grad but we want it to be 
entirely alcohol free. I think those are things we should be 
proud of and I congratulate those people. 
 
Mr. Engel — Mr. Minister, a person listening in just phoned in 
and said that the reasons that the consumption maybe came 
down is that beer-making at home and wine-making maybe has 
contributed to that extra consumption. Part of it is maybe that 
they’re getting involved in swish. And I don’t know. 
 
The question I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, is: aren’t people 
bugging you? Aren’t people phoning in and telling you that you 
should be cutting liquor advertising? Is nobody phoning in and 
telling you that it’s time you changed? Or have they given up 
on you? Have they decided that it doesn’t pay to talk to these 
guys because they’re not going to form the next government 
anyhow? Is that why people aren’t bugging you? Because 
they’re phoning in and they’re telling us that they are finding 
other ways to provide the necessary solace they need to deal 
with this kind of government, when farmers are in stress and 
farmers are facing a crisis and people across the board are 
facing a crisis. 
 

Mr. Minister, like I started to tell you, wouldn’t it be great if 
you’d have a school that could fly a flag and say that there’s no 
alcohol consumed by our young people? And yet you sponsor 
and support ads that are directed at young people — they’re 
directed at the kids. The little guys before they start school 
know the jingles and sing the songs about: “This Bud’s For 
You.” 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that that one item maybe 
doesn’t show up in your polls, but it’s going to come home to 
roost. That is the one item that people are telling me across the 
piece that is going to get you because that’s where it started and 
you really showed your true colours when you knuckled under 
to the pressure from the breweries. 
 
That pressure was on Saskatchewan for years. That pressure has 
been on Saskatchewan for years. They always begged us and 
they’d put on these fancy lobbies and say, it’s coming in on 
cable and it’s coming in in magazines, and it’s here, and it’s 
there and everybody’s doing it. But, Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan didn’t. 
 
Roy Romanow and Herman Rolfes and those guys, they had the 
guts to stand up to them and say, I’m sorry, I’m sorry, I’d like 
to see the rest of Canada not advertise liquor. I’d like to see the 
cable televisions not bring in liquor advertising. And do you 
know, Mr. Minister, since we started that little lobby and since 
we had this little island in Saskatchewan where we didn’t have 
liquor advertising, four states in the United States now don’t 
have liquor advertising. They even eliminate it on the cables 
coming, and the channels that are directed at them are not 
allowing liquor advertising. And the consumption records that 
have come down in those states make it appalling what’s 
happening in Saskatchewan. And they don’t have the reduction 
and the disposable income like we do here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your record on liquor advertising is deplorable. 
You have set an example and you’ve weakened. You’ve 
knuckled under to the pressure that the booze people have put 
on you. And I find that, when we’re talking to people that are 
involved in the medical association, they’re telling me how bad 
it is. When I talk to people that are school administrators, 
they’re saying how that liquor is encouraging their young 
people to get involved. 
 
You can talk to any group you want, Mr. Minister, any group 
across the board that has any clout of any concern for young 
people — the minor court cases that are involved, the young 
people, the lawyers. The bar association passed a resolution 
saying, quit liquor advertising. 
 
What do you guys do? You take their money and you let them 
advertise. You’re bought off. You take the 50 and 60 and $70 
million a year, and you buy a little campaign to think that is’ 
going to try and get you elected. Well I want to tell you, things 
are so tough in Saskatchewan that you can’t be bought. No 
amount of money is going to buy you this time around, to get 
you elected. 
 
And I think my colleagues and the people are aware of  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

584 
 

what I’m trying to say. Nobody is going to be able to believe, 
nobody is going to believe your ads any more when they say 
that you want to be a responsible government. I think that 
actions speak louder than words. 
 
Your actions indicate that you’re more concerned with the 
money and the welfare of the Tory party than you are the 
welfare of our young people than you are in the welfare of our 
people that are facing a mental crisis in Saskatchewan; than you 
are of the welfare of people that least want to drink in excess 
are encouraged to consume and use more alcohol. 
 
I think we’re facing a crisis that is too big to cope with amongst 
rural Saskatchewan, and you haven’t got a solution. You 
haven’t got an answer. You’re saying, oh well, we’ve got a 15 
per cent ad that’s going to do it on that side. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can save face. You can show some 
leadership. You can tell your caucus. And you as Minister of 
Health, the area that is most affected, the budget that is most 
affected, could stand up in this House and say, I’m going to 
press my colleagues, and in tomorrow’s caucus meeting we’re 
going to make a decision and we’re going to cut — we’re going 
to cut liquor advertising. Are you going to do that? No, we’re 
going to try and convince Jake Epp that 15 per cent positive 
advertising is as good as the 85 per cent that encourages 
drinking. Well I want to tell you, it’s not going to work. I tell 
you it’s not going to work because the people of Saskatchewan 
know that you can be bought. The people of Saskatchewan 
know that you’ve got no backbone when it comes to standing 
up to Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They can’t 
afford four more years of this kind of administration. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that I’ve made my case quite adequately, 
that we don’t believe in excess use of consumption. We don’t 
believe that we should have advertising that . . . Why are you 
shutting me down? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being it’s 5 o’clock, this House now 
recesses until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Premier’s Trip to Ottawa
	ORDERS OF THE DAY

