













































December 8, 1986 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 8, 1986 

 

47 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — Today I will take the liberty to be the first. 

I’m very pleased to introduce to the Assembly a group of 17 

grade 11 and 12 students from Dysart High School, seated in 

the Speaker’s gallery. They are here with their teacher, Mr. 

Semie Parmar, and with their chaperon, Mr. John Konecsni. 

 

I might say that Dysart is the next town to my own home town, 

so I know these people very well and I’m very, very pleased to 

have them here this afternoon. I trust they will enjoy question 

period, and I look forward to meeting with them at 

approximately 2:30 for drinks and pictures. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Canada’s Patent Drug Legislation 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier, and it deals with the Mulroney government’s proposals 

to amend Canada’s patent legislation which are about to be 

debated in parliament before a parliamentary committee for 

detailed study shortly. 

 

Mr. Premier, as you know, these changes will increase the 

profits of multinational drug companies and will drive up the 

price of prescription drugs for low-income families and the sick 

and the elderly and for provincial government drug plans. 

 

Can the Premier tell the Saskatchewan people whether his 

government is for or against the Mulroney government’s 

proposed legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, from what I understand 

with respect to the legislation, it does a combination of things. 

One of the more important – and we’ve seen it here in our 

health care system – is that to a large extent Canadians have 

been packagers of health supplies and goods and services that 

go into the health care field, and we obviously spend a great 

deal of money in health care. In this province alone I believe 

it’s $1.2 billion on an annual basis. 

 

If we can manufacture more of the supplies in this country, 

whether it’s in Saskatchewan or whether it’s in Canada, by 

building incentives for the manufacturing and process and 

delivery of those goods and services here, it means more jobs 

for us. In the long run it means lower costs for us because we’re 

not importing it. 

 

I’ve used the same argument with respect to supplies here in the 

health care field. I believe that there’s new health care 

manufacturing near Indian Head or Wolseley, Swift Current, 

and other jurisdictions We wouldn’t have to pay the 

transportation costs from Ontario or from Germany or from 

other places. 

 

So if we can encourage that manufacturing here, it means  

we have the jobs here and we cut the transportation costs. And 

in the long run the intent, obviously is to have better drugs. If 

we have the research going on here so that we can provide 

higher quality and better quality drugs and health care supplies 

to the public, then it’s better than paying somebody else some 

place other than in Canada – say in the United States or Europe 

– to do the research, charge us for that research, bring it into 

this country, and then we have to pay the freight as well as not 

have the jobs with the manufacturing and the research that is 

here. 

 

So I would like to think in the long haul, Mr. Speaker, the 

objective is to manufacture here, to process here, to have the 

jobs here, cut the costs for the consumers here, because you’re 

building it in Canada as opposed to having it built in the United 

States or researched some place else. 

 

Now the hon. member wants to know whether I’m for it or 

against it. I am for . . . I tell you what I’m for. I’m for more 

manufacturing here that would increase the jobs, that would cut 

the costs, and in the long run, provide better quality drugs and 

newer drugs at lower prices to consumers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is clear that 

the Premier is supporting the Mulroney legislation. My question 

to you is this: why are you now supporting the Mulroney 

legislation when your Minister of Health, short months ago, did 

not support the legislation but in fact, in a communication to 

Mr. Epp, asked for a reconsideration of the entire issue by the 

federal government? 

 

Why, Mr. Premier, when your minister in April made very clear 

that he was not in favour of the legislation; why are you now in 

favour of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, my minister argued to have 

that legislation delayed and asked them to have a second look at 

modifying it to make sure that we could get the full benefits, or 

more benefits, to Canadians as we pass that legislation, and 

that’s precisely what they’ve done. 

 

So to the extent – and I’m sure the hon. member would not 

argue against having more manufacturing in the province of 

Saskatchewan, or more manufacturing of health care 

requirements in Canada. Now to do that you have to have some 

incentives to encourage people to do it here as opposed to New 

York or Chicago or Germany or some place else, and that’s 

what we’re looking at. We said, make the incentives as 

reasonable as possible to create that economic activity here 

because we’re paying through the nose. Other research is going 

on in Paris or in London or in Minneapolis, and we’re paying 

for that – not getting the jobs, paying the freight to get it here – 

when this province alone spends over a billion dollars in health 

care. 

 

So we said, take a look at it to make sure it’s as reasonable as 

possible so that we can capture most of the benefits here in this 

country, and that’s precisely what they’ve done. As far as I 

know, when the minister was there under  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

48 

 

my instructions was to take another look at this; we’re not 

satisfied; do it better. And I believe that’s what they’ve done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, supplementary. Your 

minister said, and I quote: 

 

(He had) serious reservations that the province of 

Saskatchewan holds towards proposed changes in (the) 

compulsory licensing provisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t give all the details, 

but I know that there’s been changes with respect to how the 

program will be implemented. There will be cash involved in 

terms of some provinces that may not get as many jobs as some 

other jurisdictions. I believe most of the jobs that we’re looking 

at initially were going to take place in central Canada. 

Obviously, we argued to have more of them here in the west, 

and if we’re not going to get more of the jobs immediately, we 

want the benefits of this research and the jobs and the quality 

manufacturing to show up here one way or another. So that’s 

some of the things that they’re looking at with respect to the 

implementation of this program over some time. 

 

Again I would be surprised if the hon. member is against – 

maybe I shouldn’t be surprised – why most of the public in 

Canada would like to see more of the jobs, more of the 

manufacturing, here as opposed to offshore. Why not have it 

here? And at the same time I’m sure you have to recognize, Mr. 

Speaker, that to have it here you have to provide some 

encouragement to make sure the research takes place in Canada 

as opposed to some place else and us just paying the bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary for me, Mr. 

Speaker. Do you not agree, Mr. Premier, that there has been a 

substantial increase in the manufacturing of drugs in Canada 

since the patent laws were changed, and that in fact there is no 

reason to believe that making patents more restrictive will get 

more manufacturing in Canada, because the experience 

indicates precisely the reverse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, part of them making the 

changes is that there has to be the research money spent in 

Canada. And that’s part of the legislation as I understand it and 

I haven’t been through all the legislation in some detail. But 

they will invest in Canada doing the research or else . . . I mean, 

I think it’s a 10-year protective plan that they have some part of 

that legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously we want to see the research money 

spent here. The members opposite, I mean, to be fair, I can 

understand. They don’t believe that there will be bacon plants; 

they don’t believe that there will be paper plants; they don’t 

believe there will be upgraders;  

they don’t believe that there will be all kinds of building. It’s in 

the private sector. Well, I mean, obviously I have more 

confidence in Canadians building here rather than just 

depending on Americans or somebody else, I am proud to see 

Canadian manufacture. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Premier about a 

policy position that was put forward by the federal Minister of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs, Harvey André, who 

introduced the patent legislation in parliament. Mr. André 

defended the Mulroney government’s position on prescription 

drugs in the Toronto Star by saying: 

 

There is within the country a certain group of people who 

believe it’s improper to have profit motives associated with 

the delivery of health services. That is not a point I share. 

 

Does the Premier agree that the profit motive should be the 

basis for the delivery of health care services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will only say that profit in 

Canada will help people invest money in manufacturing and 

processing to create economic activity and jobs and as a source 

of revenue for provinces and the federal government. If we can 

have more research in Canada on quality drugs – new drugs – 

whether it’s in agriculture chemicals or is another area, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t manufacture agriculture chemicals in 

Saskatchewan or in western Canada. If we can provide 

incentives for people to do that, or if we can manufacture new 

drugs or health care equipment in this province, I believe it’s a 

good idea. And if we can provide economic incentives to have 

that manufacturing, then all the more power to them. 

 

I believe that we could have more manufacturing and 

processing right here in Regina, in Moose Jaw, in Swift 

Current, in Prince Albert, not just in Ontario or Quebec, or not 

just in Germany, or not just in United States, but here. And if 

the profit system and private enterprise will help create that 

economic activity . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

They’re calling order. I’m answering a question that is very, 

very significant for the Saskatchewan people, whether I believe 

that profit is important for building. And yes, it is. And profit is 

important for building new research and new manufacturing 

and new processing that can go into education and health and 

all kinds of other things, Mr. Speaker. Of course. That’s what 

built so many of the things that we have in this great country of 

Canada. 

 

People said, I will leave Europe and I will manufacture and I 

will process right here in Canada. And they did. And that’s the 

reason for a great deal of our wealth today. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe in new research, new manufacturing, and new 

processing based on the profit system, of course. It keeps 

Canada healthy. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I take it the Premier does agree 

that profit should be a motive for the delivery of health care 

services. 

  



 

December 8, 1986 

49 

 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier: isn’t the real reason 

for these changes simply the fact that the Mulroney government 

has caved in again to U.S. demands in free trade negotiations? I 

quote to you from Mr. Jack Kay, director of the Canadian drug 

administration. He says, “There is no net benefit in this Bill for 

Canadians. It’s a sell-out to pressure from the U.S.” Is this not 

the real reason for this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say to the hon. 

member that he may want a bridge to the whole question of 

trade with the United States or with other countries. I obviously 

believe it’s in our best interest to have the best trading 

relationships – without tariff – with the United States and other 

jurisdictions everywhere in the world, and he may not. If we 

can have more manufacturing and processing here, whether it’s 

in the drug business, or whether it’s in paper or in hogs, and 

we’re trading those goods and services with the United States or 

with those around the world, I believe that’s in our best interest 

because that’s where we generate our income and protect our 

jobs. 

 

Now if the hon. member, of course, who is entitled to his view, 

doesn’t agree with that, fair enough. But I believe it’s in 

Canada’s best interest and Saskatchewan’s best interest. 

 

I’ll quote the Leader of the Opposition who said (not verbatim, 

but something like that) that we believe – and he believes – in a 

free trade arrangement in potash between the United States and 

Canada. Well I would think that we have many sectors where 

we could do that right across the piece. And if he believes in it, 

what’s the argument? Why don’t we sit down and say, yes, if 

we can manufacture more drugs here, manufacture more 

supplies, more paper, more bacon, whatever, why don’t we do it 

in Saskatchewan? Why don’t we do it in Ontario and deal with 

Americans and the Chinese and the Japanese? 

 

So he asked me what my views are on trade. I would say, 

manufacture and process in Canada and trade it globally around 

the world. 

 

SaskTel Contracting Telephone Repairs to Alberta Firm 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I took notice of a 

question from the member for Regina Rosemont. One of the 

questions was: are you shipping out jobs to your Tory friends in 

Alberta by virtue of a contract with a company called Palco out 

of Calgary? 

 

Let me put it in perspective that the arrangements and contracts 

between SaskTel and Palco started in the year 1980 – 1980, Mr. 

Speaker – and they have continued each year since, and that 

includes 1981. It includes that portion of 1982 prior to the 

election of the Progressive Conservative government. 

 

Up until March of 1982, Northern Telecom assembled 

Contempra phones in the city of Regina. Three years ago the 

exclusive patent rights for the make-up of the Contempra 

mouldings was acquired by the company named Palco. They 

are the only such manufacturer of the  

mouldings in western Canada. Notwithstanding that Northern 

Telecom got out of the manufacturing of the Contempra 

phones, they are still a very popular phone among the 

Saskatchewan consumers, and in order to service them we must 

obtain the mouldings. 

 

Secondly, the service contract with Palco only comes into play 

in terms of service when SaskTel cannot supply the service, i.e. 

it is fully booked, and secondly, when Northern Telecom repair 

in Regina is fully booked and the consumers are not getting the 

service. 

 

As recently as this morning, for example, the SaskTel repair 

depot was unable to repair one Contempra phone during the 

course of the day. There is now a four-month backlog for the 

Saskatchewan consumer. To move it all, as the hon. member 

requests, to SaskTel would put the four-month backlog 

probably up in the range of eight to nine months for the 

Saskatchewan consumer. Frankly, I find that unacceptable to 

the Saskatchewan consumer. I suggest that the member’s 

allegations and innuendoes of last Friday were totally 

unfounded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fitness Spa Closures 

 

Ms. Smart: — My question is to the Minister of Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs, and it deals with the November 13th 

closure of the four Spa fitness clubs in Saskatchewan – two in 

Saskatoon and two in Regina. These closures left hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people – club members, suppliers, and creditors 

– out in the cold. 

 

Can the minister give the Assembly a status report on this 

situation? Have the RCMP completed their investigation, and 

will charges of fraud be laid against those involved in the Spa 

fitness clubs? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member’s question, I have nothing to report on the status of the 

RCMP investigation and as to whether or not charges of fraud 

will be laid. 

 

With regard to the closure of the Spa itself, both here in 

Saskatoon and in Regina, the bond on the two operations has 

been ceased by the department, and we are waiting people to 

come forward who may or may not have a claim 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary. Can the minister tell us how 

many former club members, creditors and suppliers have 

contacted her department to register a claim, and can she give 

us an estimate of the value of the claims? Are we talking tens of 

thousands of dollars or hundreds of thousands of dollars? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the number 

right at hand. We’re still waiting to receive. We always give 

people ample time to notify the department. I don’t think on the 

basis of what we know now that the claim will run into the tens 

of thousands or the hundreds of thousands of dollars. 

 

I may indicate to the member that in an event like this, whether 

it’s Spa Lady or any other direct seller that is  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

50 

 

bonded by the department, it does put a hardship on those 

consumers who are waiting for the bond because she may or 

may not know that it takes two years for a bond pay-out. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Another supplementary. This is another 

example of a company folding up its tent and disappearing into 

the middle of the night, and it’s giving reputable businesses in 

the province concern that their image as business is being 

tarnished by this sort of activity. Does the provincial 

government have any proposals to tighten up controls on these 

fly-by-night operations, such as larger licensing bonds? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to inform the 

member that since taking on the responsibility of Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs some three and a half years ago, the 

department has become very aggressive in the area of consumer 

education, and we’ve put out numerous pamphlets on how the 

market-place works and what consumers should or should not 

do. I think that’s quite a different stance than was employed by 

the previous government. We hold workshops for consumers 

and business people all over the province and it’s being really 

well received. 

 

Ms. Smart: — That must be why the department folded its 

money management program that was giving so many people 

useful information. And that has to do with my third 

supplemental question. I want to know if the minister’s office 

has taken every possible step to inform former club members of 

their rights. Have you sent out letters to these people urging 

them to file a claim? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, the member is wrong in her 

assumption that the money management has folded because the 

money management program is still in place. With regards to 

those consumers who have club memberships, we have not sent 

out a letter to them. We have issued a few press releases, and 

people are coming forward. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Is the minister aware that people have to have 

that information in order to be able to file a claim? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The department does not have a list of 

the consumers doing business with a now defunct company. 

 

Review of Social Assistance and Income Support Programs 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. the throne speech 

talks about a continuing review of social assistance and income 

support programs, and adds: “Special attention will be given to 

the methods of delivery.” 

 

My question is: does that mean that the provincial government 

is considering, among other options, does that mean the 

provincial government is considering shifting responsibility for 

social assistance programs to local governments? Is that one of 

the options? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’ve only been the minister  

responsible for that department for about three or four weeks. 

We are reviewing everything — I can assure the public of 

Saskatchewan that nothing will be untouched in our review — 

and we will deliver the most efficient method of serving the 

poor and all people of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I point out that the 

options that are being considered are those initiated by the 

government, and I can only assume that delivery by local 

governments is one of the options being considered, Mr. 

Minister. Can the minister give us some assurance that, as you 

review the social assistance and income support programs, that 

you will be giving consideration to increasing social assistance 

payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We will make fair increases wherever 

possible, weighing the ability of society to make the increases 

and the needs as required by society. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. There are 

some 60,000 people, as I’m sure the minister knows, who are 

dependent upon social assistance in Saskatchewan today, and 

this is a particular crisis time in these weeks preceding 

Christmas. Does the minister really think that $115 per week for 

groceries, clothing, and household expenses for a family of four 

is too high? Is that your position? Do you believe that a family 

of four is living high off the hog with $115 per week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I indicated to you that all 

programs would be reviewed. I want to point out to the public 

that at present each of these families can receive $300 per child 

under the child tax credit advance. That will help them to the 

extent of $300 per child before Christmas, and into the new 

year we will continue our review and make changes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. By when can those 

people who are dependent upon social assistance expect a 

review to be completed and to have an increase in their 

allowances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the review will take place as it 

unfolds. We are reviewing everything. And there will be a new 

budget year in the spring, and all these things will be taken into 

account. We will deliver as much money to the poor as society 

can afford. 

 

Crop Insurance Benefits 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier 

in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture. The Premier will 

recall an inquiry that I made last month, to which he replied, 

about crop insurance. And the problem that I raised had to do 

with many farmers’ perceptions that they had, in the spring, 

acquired and paid for insurance coverage based upon a grain 

price in the order of $4 a bushel. But instead, because of falling 

world markets and poor harvest conditions, the actual crop 

value turned out in many cases to be only more like $2 a bushel, 

and all of that without triggering any crop insurance benefits. 

 

I thank the Premier for his previous written reply. But I wonder 

if he has given any consideration to adjustments in the crop 

insurance program to somehow take into  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

51 

 

account that anomaly which is nobody’s fault. It’s just the way, 

unfortunately, 1986 turned out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I did receive a letter 

from the hon. member. And in my reply I pointed out . . . and I 

acknowledged that concern that was raised. What I said at that 

time is that if we had to make up the difference in crop 

insurance in one year, we would be looking at somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of a $400 to $500 million bill. And I just 

pointed out that while the interesting situation developed this 

year, it would be a great deal of money to expect out of crop 

insurance. 

 

At the same time, as I’m sure the hon. member knows, we may 

have to review the whole question of the money in stabilization 

and how it operates; the money in crop insurance and how it 

works; the money in deficiency payments or other mechanisms, 

disaster mechanisms, and look at the whole bailiwick to make 

sure that we have a system of support for production and price 

changes that would indeed protect Saskatchewan or western 

Canadian farmers. And I’m not above looking at any of those, 

and I would obviously look for suggestions from you or from 

other members in the House. 

 

We know crop insurance is based on production, not on price. 

And we know stabilization is based on price, not on production. 

So those two insurance schemes work in tandem or in parallel, 

looking at different conditions. If we cross them, we could 

wreck one and hurt the other, and vice versa. 

 

So what we’re obviously concerned about, as I’m sure you are, 

is some sort of mechanism that protects us from these 

anomalies that come up from time to time. So I don’t think it 

would be fair to ask crop insurance to come up with the money 

because it will be $400 or $500 million, I believe, in 

Saskatchewan alone if we did that. 

 

But that isn’t to say we shouldn’t look at some other 

mechanisms that would help shore that up. I expect that we may 

hear information with respect to a deficiency payment this week 

or very soon which could be the largest cash payment in the 

history of Canada to western Canadian farmers. And if that’s 

the case, I mean, obviously it addresses some of the problems 

you’ve raised as a result of the anomaly associated with prices. 

 

But stabilization is well received because it’s based on price, 

crop insurance on production. And I do believe we should be 

careful if we decide to combine them all of a sudden because 

people have confidence in how crop insurance works and how 

stabilization works. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, while it’s 

entirely possible that several of these questions could well be 

ordered directly, I would just ask the indulgence of the House, 

and I would ask the House to convert items 1 through 16 at this 

juncture in any case, 1 through 16, to motions for returns 

debatable. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, when I spoke on Friday 

last, I had an opportunity to congratulate you on your election 

to the office of Speaker; I had an opportunity to congratulate the 

government on its re-election, and to congratulate new members 

on both sides of the House who are taking their place for the 

first time in this Chamber. 

 

I commented on the fact that the Speech from the Throne had 

failed to deal with some key problems being faced by 

Saskatchewan people — people in northern Saskatchewan and 

southern Saskatchewan. I spoke briefly about the particular 

problems faced by people in northern Saskatchewan. I spoke of 

the fact that the throne speech had not addressed the matter of 

job creation and the urgent need to create more employment in 

this province. I noted the fact that this province, alone among 

the ten provinces, had fewer jobs in November of 1986 than it 

did in November of 1985. 

 

I talked about the fact that the throne speech did not deal with 

the matter of taxation and making our taxation system fairer, 

our system — both federally and provincially — a fairer 

system. And I indicated that I thought that was important 

because I believe that governments both federal and provincial 

were going to be under additional pressure, might well be 

forced to raise taxes, and under those circumstances the fairness 

of the tax system was fundamental to getting public acceptance 

to getting additional public revenues being raised. 

 

And then I talked about the government talking in its Speech 

from the Throne about reorganization. The government has 

promised reorganization again and again and again. Each time it 

has said that somehow they were going to make government 

operations more efficient and more effective. The throne speech 

promised yet another round of this. In fact it promised 

legislation for reorganization. 

 

Now members will know, or at least members who are not new 

members will know, that we don’t need any legislation for 

reorganization. The provisions are there in The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act to create new 

departments. You don’t need legislation. You could go right 

ahead with your reorganization. If you wanted at some later 

time to confirm it all by legislation, fine, but you certainly don’t 

need to fill up a throne speech asking for legislative powers 

which you already have. And the only reason, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government does this is that it does not know what to do. In 

exchange or in lieu of having any policy, it proposes 

reorganization, and in lieu of doing anything about 

reorganization, it’s talking about new legislation for 

reorganization which it does not need. We are here seeing a 

retreat, not only from any attempt to deal with the problems, but 

a retreat even from dealing with the need  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

52 

 

for reorganization which they have indicated in their Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take time today to outline the 

general approach which the New Democratic Party takes to 

many of the problems and the challenges and the opportunities 

facing the people of Saskatchewan; talk a little bit about the 

mining and manufacturing and agriculture and financial 

management and secrecy disclosure, and some other matters of 

concern to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is basically an agricultural 

province. Our greatest resource base is our agricultural land, 

and over any extended period of time, our greatest productive 

asset, and the amount that we produce is represented by 

agricultural land and agricultural production, respectively. But 

the issues facing agriculture in Saskatchewan today are many. I 

think most people would agree that as a province we want 

diversified agriculture. We have, over the decades, seen 

diversification. We have seen diversification from field crops to 

livestock, and we have seen a diversification within field crops 

from wheat to other crops — canola, perhaps, most 

spectacularly — but other crops as well. But this diversification 

in agriculture has been by no means uniform. 

 

When grain prices are low or grain markets are plugged, cattle 

and hog number go up. When grain markets are open, livestock 

numbers go down. Cattle numbers, after rising from 1969 to 

1975, have dropped every year since then. And while we talk 

about diversification, we’re not able to sustain diversification; 

and that, I think, is illustrated by the fact that cattle numbers 

have gone down in every year since 1975. 

 

Hog numbers reached their peak in the grain-glut days of 1971 

when we had over a million hogs. When grain markets opened 

up, the number of hogs dropped sharply, and by 1975 we only 

had half a million. Numbers have begun to increase modestly 

since then, and I would guess that the number of hogs in 1986 

might be 700,000. We have not yet regained, or anything like 

regained, the hog numbers we had in the early 1970’s. 

 

Sheep and lamb numbers have gone down consistently, and 

they’re at their lowest in 60 years at 60,000 head. 

 

New Democrats believe that we need a diversified agriculture, 

and that means that we need livestock production and we need a 

range of field crops — not just wheat but a range of field crops. 

 

Now some individual farmers won’t want to diversify, 

specialized production will be the obvious course of action for 

them. You may ask, well surely this business of diversification 

and specialization, and the merits of each, are faced by other 

industries. What do they do? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, agriculture has some unique features as an 

industry, and agriculture has some special problems in keeping 

its head above water in difficult times. First, there’s the 

weather. For everybody the weather is uncontrollable. But for 

farmers the risks that flow from the fact that the weather is 

uncontrollable are much greater  

than for most other industries. 

 

And second is markets. For many industries, markets are 

uncertain, but for many industries they are not. For many 

industries, much of their marketing is done locally, or at least in 

Canada, and therefore not subject to the sharp fluctuations that 

international markets usually represent. But much of our farm 

production is sold internationally, and that means that we have 

serious problems stemming from the fluctuations in that area. 

 

Many industries have an advantage over agriculture in that they 

are able to introduce some form of supply management. They 

wouldn’t call it that, but that’s what it is. When their cars aren’t 

selling, the car manufacturers don’t keep churning out cars and 

piling them up. They shut down their plants, and unemployment 

insurance pays their work force. 

 

These are not the happy conditions of Saskatchewan farmers. 

They are not able to control their production in that way. Much 

of the product they sell is on international markets. And the fact 

that there are many, many producers of agricultural products 

means that they can’t introduce any form of formal or informal 

supply management, except in the specific areas that we are all 

familiar with, in dairy production, and poultry and egg 

production. We are all familiar with the phenomenon of a 5 per 

cent over-supply meaning a 25 per cent drop in prices. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the risks faced by 

Saskatchewan agriculture, and some of the challenges which are 

faced by governments, if we are to bring stability to 

Saskatchewan agriculture. Now we need some policies. We 

need some policies, federal and provincial, to support 

Saskatchewan and western farmers. Without these policies we 

will see farmers in this business of farming — which is a 

cyclical business — we will see the weaker ones go down when 

the agricultural cycle is at its bottom. And this is a more urgent 

and imminent threat than was true in past times. In previous 

times when farmers had relatively little capital out and had 

relatively lower input costs, when we were on the down cycle, 

the farmer simply tightened his belt and toughed it out through 

the low cycle. But that’s not possible now; it’s not possible 

now. 

 

Other industries have the same problem. Other industries are 

cyclical, particularly resource industries, and when we see the 

down cycle in those resource industries, we see smaller and 

particularly financially weaker producers being absorbed by the 

large producers. And we see fewer and fewer producers in 

many of the resource industries — that’s particularly true in 

wood products; it’s true, by and large, in mining. 

 

That’s what happens in a cyclical industry without support 

prices. We’ve got to ask ourselves: do we want that to happen 

to western farming? as surely it will if we don’t act; just as 

surely as it’s happened in wood production or other cyclical 

industries. When the cycle is at the bottom, the weak producers, 

the financially weak producers are absorbed by the financially 

strong producers, and we have a much smaller number of large 

producers. 

 

  



 

December 8, 1986 

53 

 

It has happened in many industries; it will happen in 

agriculture. And that’s one option, for us to stand by and watch 

this process go on. Or will we put into place programs which 

will protect farmers against the double jeopardy of weather and 

market fluctuations. Help the farmers survive the down cycle 

and keep a relatively large number of farms — the largest 

possible number of viable family farms. Now that’s the other 

option. And those are the ones that are facing us. 

 

New Democrats favour the option of putting into place solid 

support programs and retaining a large number of farmers. Now 

that means, Mr. Speaker, stabilization programs, and what we 

need are not one-shot programs to deal with each crisis. What 

we need are programs that farmers can count on, on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

Now huge strides have been made in the last 15 years; some 

forward-looking moves have been made by the federal 

government and by the provincial government and sometimes 

governments combined. And we all think of what’s happened to 

farming to stabilize it in the last 15 years or so. We’ve had crop 

insurance protection — that was nothing 15 years ago, it is now 

a major program and it’s saved hundreds, and perhaps 

thousands of farmers, from being driven to the wall — we’ve 

had western grain stabilization. This program was introduced 

perhaps 10 years ago, little more, and it’s proving its worth in 

protecting farmers against some of the perils of market 

fluctuation. It has major flaws, as we know, because it’s based 

upon the average price of grains over a period of time, and if we 

have low prices over a longish period, then stabilization 

payments will be low at the very time we need them to be high. 

 

We have the hog stabilization program. This provincial program 

was set up 10 years ago or so, and it has assisted many, many 

hog farmers to stay in business. And the same is true of beef 

stabilization. These have helped farmers. 

 

We need to pick up these programs and prove them. And we 

need to go ahead from where they leave off. 

 

Now what needs to be done? Concerning hog stabilization, I 

think we need to know whether the new program, the tripartite 

program, is going to work. And I think it’s fair to say the jury is 

still out on that. It’s fair to say the jury is still out on that. New 

Democrats believe that this stabilization plan and plans like it 

should be based broadly on costs of production rather than on 

market price as the new hog plan is. It’s based on market price, 

and therefore we don’t know whether it will provide support on 

a down cycle. The jury is still out. We would prefer a program 

based at least partly on costs of production. 

 

Concerning beef stabilization, while we favour in principle a 

national plan, we do not wish to see Saskatchewan producers 

forced to accept the national plan which offers poor protection, 

as we believe the current national plan does. We urge the 

provincial government to press the federal government to 

improve the national beef plan to provide benefits at least equal 

to the current provincial plan, and to provide support based  

upon production costs. 

 

(1445) 

 

Now that’s our position and we hope the government opposite 

has a similar position with respect to beef stabilization. 

 

Concerning crop insurance, I think we all know that this is 

basically a good plan, but it needs constant monitoring as 

circumstances change. 

 

We come now to the biggest immediate problems facing 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

The first one is the disastrously low international grain prices 

due to the trade war between the United States and the 

European Common Market. We’ve all heard of that, perhaps 

heard of it many times. 

 

The second is the great pressure on some farmers caused by 

record real interest rates extending now over several years, 

combined with low commodity prices. In short, the farm 

financing prices. 

 

New Democrats believe that neither of these problems is 

capable of a quick solution, and I want to underline that. We 

don’t believe either of the problems is capable of a quick 

solution. Therefore we believe that governments, federal and 

provincial, should put into place longer term programs in the 

same way that they did for crop insurance and for beef 

stabilization and hog stabilization and the rest. 

 

With respect to international grain prices, I don’t know anybody 

who believes that problem is going to go away in the next 12 

months or 24 months. Therefore we need a longer term 

program. The most direct way is to provide for an ongoing 

program of deficiency payments to allow Saskatchewan farmers 

to compete. The United States and Europe both have similar 

programs. Canadian farmers need a program, not just for 1986, 

not just for 1987, but a program that when the farmers seed next 

spring they know what the situation is. They know 

approximately what they are going to get for their crop in the 

same way that U.S. farmers or European farmers know what 

they can get for their crop. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what we need and I call upon 

the provincial government to press the federal government to 

institute an ongoing program so that farmers may know where 

they stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers are 

entitled to know where they stand and they’re entitled to know 

where their governments stand. American farmers know where 

their government stands. European farmers know where their 

governments stand. It’s not very convincing for the Government 

of Canada, the Mulroney government, to say — as I’ve heard 

some of their ministers say — Mr. Farmer, the federal 

government is not wealthy enough to fight the U.S. treasury or 

fight the European treasury. The federal government is not 

wealthy enough to fight the U.S. treasury, so I’m sorry, Mr. 

Farmer,  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

54 

 

you’re going to have to go out there and fight them yourself. 

That’s what the Mulroney government is saying. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not very convincing and it’s not 

very fair. We need a long-term program that farmers can count 

on and we need it now. We need it announced now. Farmers 

want to know where they stand because they are making 

decisions which are going to affect their lives over the next two, 

three, four years, and they have to know the economic 

framework in which they are making those decisions. 

 

With respect to farm financing, it’s clear that a plan for 

providing long-term farm financing at lower interest rates than 

the 12 per cent and 13 per cent and 14 per cent that some 

farmers are now paying to the Farm Credit Corporation, is 

needed. We have to have plan that allows farmers to have a 

reasonable rate of interest extending over a longer period of 

time so that they can weather this period when interest rates are 

high and commodity prices are low. And I call upon the 

provincial government to press the federal government for a 

realistic long-term farm financing and refinancing program. 

 

This program is . . . or a companion program will be needed to 

address the growing problem of land transfer — the transfer of 

land from one generation to the next — and this has got to be 

addressed because the programs we have had in the past, for 

one reason or another, have dealt with only part of the problem 

— only part of the problem — and we need something which 

will address this problem. We need to know just where people 

are going to get money in order to pass a farm from one 

generation to the next. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been speaking of the short-term 

and mid-term problems of agriculture, but there are other 

challenges, and I want to refer to a few of them. If we want 

diversified agriculture, and I say we do, then we’ve got to have 

more agricultural research. Again, there has been some progress 

in the last 15 years and we acknowledge that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where has it been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, there’s been the veterinary 

college, eight or 10 years old; the veterinary infectious disease 

organization, perhaps five or six years old; the protein oil and 

starch institute, six or seven years old. All of these that took 

place in the 1970’s — and I say that only because members 

opposite are suggesting that the world started in 1982. There’s 

the plant biotechnology institute which was announced by the 

Trudeau government and which is, I guess, getting into place 

about now — and much more. And I’m not suggesting that 

these are the only efforts at agricultural research. They’re not. 

They’re significant ones and we need more. 

 

New Democrats are alarmed by the tendency in Ottawa to down 

play research except if it’s done by the private sector. We need 

fundamental research for long-term purposes as well as applied 

research for market purposes. No one is denying the desirability 

of applied research for market purposes. We are asserting the 

need for fundamental research for long-term purposes. We’re 

not likely to get that out of the private sector; we need  

extended research programs by governments and by the private 

sector. 

 

One area that needs attention is soil and water degradation. 

Many of us have had an opportunity at least to skim Senator 

Sparrow’s committee report and I think it’s generally 

acknowledged to be a good piece of work. Now we need some 

follow-up action. We may have an opportunity now, not one we 

welcome, but there may be market conditions that force or 

make at least desirable, the lowering of grain production. I hope 

that won’t be necessary but if it should be necessary, then we 

ought to seize the opportunity to experiment with methods of 

soil reclamation. Some promising work on soil salinity in other 

areas is being done at the University of Saskatchewan and 

follow-up is needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve touched on a number of matters affecting 

agriculture. I’m sure what needs to be done in this troubled 

sector of our economy would be touched on by many speakers 

because there is general agreement, I believe, on the need for 

diversification in agriculture. I hope there will be agreement 

that this is not going to happen unless we provide some support 

for farmers, at least in dealing with the most pressing problems 

which they’re now facing. And as I’ve tried to indicate to them, 

these must be addressed. 

 

We need diversification within agriculture. We need 

diversification within field crops and I think we need 

diversification beyond agriculture into other areas of our 

economy. And with respect to agriculture, it is the belief of the 

New Democratic Party that the steps should be taken within the 

context of having an agriculture based upon the largest possible 

number of viable family farms — the largest reasonable number 

of family farms. 

 

We know that every farm that’s out there now is not going to 

survive. We have seen the steady reduction in the number of 

farms from about 112,000 in 1951 to 65,000 — or whatever 

number we say is today’s number — and we expect that that 

will continue. But we ought not to accelerate it; we ought to 

decelerate it with the programs of the kind which I have 

outlined. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve touched on agriculture, and I 

want now to turn to mining. 

 

Petroleum and mineral production, I suggest, is going to 

continue in this province and it’s going to continue to be 

cyclical in the future as it has been in the past. New Democrats 

believe that the soundest policy for the industry is to try to get 

the best possible return for the people of Saskatchewan when 

prices are high, and to assist the industries to weather the storm 

when prices are low. 

 

In particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not favour the policy 

of members opposite of saying when prices are high, well we’ll 

leave the money with the mining companies because then 

they’ll have it when prices are low. And I want in a moment to 

illustrate just how that’s worked. Royalty schedules for both 

potash and uranium, which are in place now, reflect the view 

which I suggest that when prices are high, payments to the 

owners of the  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

55 

 

resource, the people of Saskatchewan should be high, and when 

prices are low, the payments should be low. 

 

Concerning petroleum, New Democrats thought it was 

short-sighted when the government opposite slashed the 

effective rate of oil royalties when prices were at an all-time 

high and when profits of the oil companies were at an all-time 

high. We thought that was short-sighted. These policies have 

cost Saskatchewan taxpayers at least $1 billion. I’m talking 

about effective royalties. I hear sometimes people say, oh the 

royalties haven’t changed. That of course is nonsense. Royalty 

levels at some points may not have changed, but when you 

permit wholesale royalty holidays, the effective royalty rate 

drops sharply — and it has. 

 

If effective royalty rates had remained at the level that the PC 

government itself charged in the first year, instead of having 

these wholesale cuts that they inaugurated between 1982 and 

1986, Saskatchewan citizens would have received at least $1 

billion more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The government opposite claimed that 

the royalty holidays would allow the oil companies to create 

thousands of solid long-term jobs. And we heard that story. We 

heard it from many members opposite. We certainly heard it 

from the member for Saskatoon Sutherland as he then was. But 

we’re not hearing that any more. The companies are gone; the 

jobs are gone; and so is the billion dollars. And Saskatchewan 

people will be paying for that folly of the government opposite 

for many decades to come. 

 

Now Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about 

manufacturing because we hear a lot about manufacturing, and 

we hear the Premier talking about the need to manufacture. I 

don’t know why he talks about the need to manufacture. I don’t 

know why he doesn’t talk about the expansion in manufacturing 

since 1982. But he doesn’t talk about that. And on second 

thought, I know why he doesn’t — because there hasn’t been 

any expansion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But it’s been the goal of every 

government in Saskatchewan to diversify our economy and 

particularly to increase manufacturing and processing. And 

everybody can give this speech. The general strategies have 

always been the same — to process more of our raw products 

before they leave our province; to manufacture in Saskatchewan 

more of the things we consume in Saskatchewan; to 

manufacture for general export to the prairie basin market; and 

to manufacture some things for a wider market where we may 

have a special advantage or where freight costs are only a small 

part of the final delivered price. 

 

I am sure that I have given that speech and I have heard the 

Premier give that speech and I’ve heard members opposite give 

that speech. What is disappointing is that so little progress has 

been made in the last four and a half years compared with 

previous periods. 

 

Let’s take the processing of agricultural products. And how 

many times have we heard it said we need to process more of 

our agricultural products? Well no advances have been made in 

flour milling; none whatever in four and a half years. As for 

meat packing and processing, we have plant closures. Intercon 

in Regina was allowed to close without a whimper from 

members opposite. Fewer people are employed in meat packing 

today than was true five years ago. And that fact can’t be 

denied. Oil seed crushing — the same sorry tale. The CSB plant 

in Saskatoon is closed and fewer people are employed in oil 

seed crushing now than was true five years ago. 

 

(1500) 

 

As for manufacturing, many of our major sectors are withering. 

Far from growing, farm machinery manufacturing plants also 

employ fewer people now than five years ago. Metal fabrication 

has seen closures and partial closures. Ipsco is producing 

fitfully. Saskatoon Steel Fabricators is gone and Dominion 

Bridge is gone and Native Metal Industries are gone and many 

others. And so it goes. 

 

While there have been some new jobs added, there have been 

more jobs lost. In the high-tech sector so promising five years 

ago, there’s trouble. Here again the list of departures and 

closures and partial closures is long. There’s been a heartening 

growth in some new small companies, and we’ll acknowledge 

that, but the big employers — Microtel and Northern Telecom 

and SED Systems and others — have either closed or reduced 

their operations. 

 

Now these facts are known and can’t be denied. The facts are 

that there’s been far too little investment in manufacturing. I 

invite members to look at the figures published by the 

Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics. And if we correct for 

inflation, if we measure investment in constant dollars and 

using 1971 as the base, the best year of the last four years for 

investment was 1983; 1982 and 1984 and 1985 are lower. And 

1983, the best year of the last four, is lower than any one, the 

investment, any one of the years 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1979, 

1980, and 1981. The best year under the PCs was lower than 

seven of the last eight years prior to 1982. 

 

Is it any wonder that manufacturing is stagnating? Is it any 

wonder that when the government puts out its economic review 

it shows that manufacturing, labour, employment in 1985, or 

’84 — the last figure I have here — is well below the 1981 

figure? It’s no use talking about diversification unless one is 

going to take positive steps to get diversification, and we 

haven’t seen those positive steps, we haven’t seen the 

investment, and we don’t see the employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There’s no lack of entrepreneurs, no 

lack of energy. There is a lack of economic activity which will 

allow the larger firms to sustain a work-force  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

56 

 

and which will attract substantial investment capital. 

 

StatsCan figures show that the number of people working in 

manufacturing in 1982 and ’83 and ’84 were in every year 

lower than in ’81. And those are the ones published in the 

economic review. And I expect that if I had the 1985 StatsCan 

figures, which will no doubt come out in the economic review 

to be published, I take it, in a week or so, then we would show 

once again lower employment than in 1981. 

 

In the last four years we have seen bad news — bad news for 

Saskatchewan manufacturing and particularly bad news for the 

people who have been working in the manufacturing sector . . . 

or rather have not been working when they would have liked to 

have worked. That is the record of the government opposite. 

 

I, too, share with them the desire for diversification. I share the 

desire for diversification. And something happened in that 

regard in previous years, but not in the last four. We simply had 

not seen the investment of the jobs in manufacturing, and we 

need to see them because our people need some alternative to 

agriculture, which is simply too cyclical an industry on which to 

base a solid economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been saying 

that Saskatchewan needs to diversify. The West needs to 

diversify. What’s true of Saskatchewan is true of Alberta and 

Manitoba to some extent. The West shouldn’t always be subject 

to the boom and bust cycles of a resource economy. There are 

areas where we can be fully competitive, and we ought to have 

the opportunity to compete in those areas. 

 

There are areas where we can be competitive. We don’t ask for 

hothouse industries which have to be supported indefinitely by 

government subsidies. We do ask for the right to have 

manufacturing industry in sectors where we have natural 

advantages. Western Canadians have the right to expect that 

their governments, federal and provincial, will protect that right 

and pursue that goal. That’s why so many people all across the 

West were dismayed and outraged by the Mulroney 

government’s decision to take away a major contract from 

western Canada and give it to a central Canadian firm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The CF-18 contract in aircraft 

maintenance — here’s a sector where we can compete. We have 

been up front in aircraft maintenance. There’s no reason why 

we couldn’t have had this contract in western Canada. The 

western bid met every requirement of the federal government, 

every specification provided for, when the tenders were called. 

It was the low bid. Yet the position of the Prime Minister in his 

native province of Quebec, this contract was taken away from 

western Canada and given to central Canada. The low bid was 

ignored; the contract went to the native province of the Prime 

Minister. 

And I expect that one or more of my colleagues will go into this 

in some more details. I want to talk about the reaction of the 

government opposite to this. The Prime Minister, when pressed 

— and this is the point I want to emphasise — said that the 

contract was given to Montreal because the unemployment 

level was higher in Quebec than it was in Manitoba. Now I 

looked at the figures and they indicated that the unemployment 

figure for Quebec was higher than the unemployment figure for 

Alberta and Saskatchewan and Manitoba in every single year 

since 1966 — in every single year since 1966. And if the Prime 

Minister is to apply that logic, then I say, regardless of any 

economic advantage, no federal government contracts can come 

to the prairies while they can go to Quebec and while Mulroney 

is Prime Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That’s the logic, and that is simply not 

fair. We’re Canadians. If a western bid wins a contract, fair and 

square, based on meeting the specifications of the bid, then the 

contract should come to the West. 

 

You would say, well, that contract was going to go to Manitoba; 

what’s that got to do with Saskatchewan? Well, there are two 

things I want to say to that. There’s no doubt that economic 

activity in Manitoba or Alberta will provide much more 

stimulus to the Saskatchewan economy than it will if that 

economic activity is in the province of Quebec. There’ll be 

some jobs for some of our people because they will go to 

Winnipeg. 

 

But that’s not my main point. My main point is this: the same 

logic which caused the Mulroney government to say no to 

Manitoba and yes to Quebec, would cause them to say no to 

Saskatchewan and yes to Quebec. The logic is the same. Our 

unemployment figures are lower than Quebec, as well. This 

would mean that Saskatchewan manufacturers would equally be 

shut out. Yet the Premier is on record as supporting the 

Mulroney decision. He’s on record as saying, yes, that was all 

right to say no to western Canada, all right to say no to western 

Canada on the grounds that the unemployment rate was lower 

in Manitoba or Saskatchewan than it was in Quebec. 

 

Westerners aren’t asking for any special favours; they’re asking 

for fair play on government contracts. They didn’t get it from 

the Mulroney government. The contract was handled unfairly. 

Who can deny that? And yet the Premier says, keep up the good 

work, Brian. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The position of the Prime Minister and 

the Premier is not acceptable to Saskatchewan and not 

acceptable to western Canada. And I suggest that members 

opposite are going to find that out when they talk to their 

constituents. 

 

Now the Premier has now compounded his support for the 

Mulroney government on this issue by issuing a press release 

calling for western diversification. Now that raises hypocrisy to 

an art form. That raises hypocrisy to an art form when you can 

say, it’s perfectly all right not to have a contract to go to 

Winnipeg, but we want the federal  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

57 

 

government to introduce policies committed to diversification 

of the West. 

 

I want to quote the Premier’s November 20th press release. 

Here’s what he said. 

 

It is time for a federal economic policy clearly committed to 

the diversification of the West. 

 

. . . within days of cheer-leading for Mulroney on the CF-18 

contract. 

 

I’d like to know how we can diversify the West without 

manufacturing and would like to know why manufacturing 

based upon federal government contracts is not important. The 

government opposite calls for diversification but supports the 

federal government policies, the very policies which prevent 

diversification. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It’s a call for diversification, but not if 

it might embarrass Mr. Mulroney. If Mr. Mulroney’s political 

problems are more important than western diversification or fair 

play for western manufacturers, then Saskatchewan people can 

look for very little from those phrases in the Speech from the 

Throne that talked about diversification, or this call in the press 

release that the federal government should act to diversify the 

West. We can expect very little from that if it’s all qualified by 

saying that, of course none of this must embarrass the Prime 

Minister or injure in any way his ability to gain seats in Quebec. 

 

Saskatchewan people won’t be content with these press releases 

or these phrases in the Speech from the Throne. They will 

expect federal action; they’ll expect our federal government to 

support that action and not support the continuation of the very 

policies that led to the concentration of manufacturing power in 

central Canada. 

 

On this issue, Mr. Speaker, the lines are clearly drawn. The 

government opposite favours action by the federal government 

to keep manufacturing concentrated in Ontario and Quebec, and 

New Democrats favour fair play for the West and for 

Saskatchewan in our efforts to diversify our economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have been saying 

that Saskatchewan needs to diversify its economy, we need 

manufacturing to diversify, and what is true of Saskatchewan is 

true of western Canada. 

 

There are areas where we can indeed be fully competitive, and I 

believe that governments at both levels should give every 

encouragement to our manufacturers so that they can take 

advantage of those areas and provide jobs for western Canada 

and provide additional economic activity, particularly to deal 

with the situation of our boom and bust economy when 

agriculture is in a down cycle. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to some other subjects. I  

want to turn particularly to the financial management of this 

province. Never in the history of this province and rarely, if 

ever, in the history of any other province, have we seen a 

collapse of financial management as we have seen in the last 

four and a half years. 

 

I doubt very much, Mr. Speaker, whether any province has ever 

seen a drop in its credit rating of the kind, the magnitude, and 

the speed, which has happened with respect to the credit rating 

of Saskatchewan during the last couple of years. 

 

(1515) 

 

In 1982 the government opposite talked boldly about a new 

direction and new priorities. The member for Kindersley, in his 

budget speeches, spoke in those terms. They rushed into their 

first deficit, apparently believing it would somehow be 

temporary. In 1982 they called it a minimized and manageable 

deficit. It might be manageable, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly 

wasn’t manageable by the government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — In 1983 the then minister of Finance 

talked of a manageable increase in the combined deficit. Now 

that’s a good example of the semantics of the slippery slope — 

a manageable increase in the deficit. And again, if it was 

manageable, it certainly wasn’t manageable by members 

opposite. 

 

Meanwhile they continued their platitudes about the evils of 

deficits. In 1984 the minister of Finance said sternly, we believe 

that all governments must work in concert to reduce budget 

deficits. Each budget after that had a bigger deficit than before, 

but never mind — he said that sternly — we believe that all 

governments must work in concert to reduce budget deficits. 

 

The Premier in 1982 said, deficit budgeting in Canada has to 

end if the country is to be competitive in world markets — and 

this was late 1982, when he was Premier — they have to end if 

we’re to be competitive. Now we have much talk about being 

competitive but no talk about ending government deficits. And 

again, the Premier: deficits are just a deferred tax; they must be 

paid by future generations. 

 

These pronouncements were followed by the five largest 

deficits in the history of Saskatchewan, each one larger than the 

last. 

 

Meanwhile, back at the Department of Finance, the 

mismanagement has proceeded apace. Last March 26 the 

Minister of Finance introduced a budget calling for a deficit of 

$389 million. Now that document was a strong candidate for the 

Governor General’s Award for fiction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Few people believed it then. I doubt 

whether the Minister of Finance believed it then; I don’t know 

anybody who believes it now. During the election campaign the 

Premier is quoted as saying that the deficit this year will be 

$500 million. That statement  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

58 

 

too is a strong effort in the realm of creative fiction. I think it’s 

time the Minister of Finance levelled with the public, and I call 

upon the Minister of Finance during the course of this debate to 

give the Saskatchewan people an update on where we stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I call upon him to tell us what he now 

projects the end of the fiscal year deficit to be and what major 

program additions or cuts, what cuts in services or what 

increases in services, he has built into his services or what 

increases in services, he has built into his prediction. 

Legislature needs and deserves a statement so that this debate 

can proceed on the basis of reality — no point it talking about 

what we should be doing in the next year and in the next four 

years if we have no idea what our current financial situation is. 

 

And I suspect the facts are these: that the accumulated deficit 

will be well over $2 billion; that the income of the government 

for this fiscal year will be less than they had budgeted; that their 

spending will be more than they have budgeted; and the total 

debt of the province, direct and indirect, will have continued to 

skyrocket. 

 

New Democrats say that the government owes the public a full 

and frank disclosure of where we stand in our financial affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about 

the debt. A word on what has happened to the debt in this 

province. What has happened? Well, what has happened to the 

debt, to what we owe, and to what we have guaranteed, is 

almost beyond belief. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has always borrowed money. 

In the early years it borrowed money to build roads and do the 

things which a pioneer society needed. After World War II a 

new policy was adopted; in general, borrowed money was not 

used to build the things which would ordinarily be paid for by 

provincial taxes, wasn’t used to build university buildings or 

highways. Money was borrowed for things like Saskatchewan 

telecommunication, SaskTel, and Sask Power Corporation, that 

would be paid back by utility rates. In this regard the public 

utilities operated like any other public utilities in Canada. There 

were minor exceptions, but these were the general policies. 

 

And as a result, in 1982 there was a debt load of about $3.5 

billion, and 90 per cent of that was owed in respect of Sask 

Power and SaskTel, some more of it was owed in respect of 

other self-liquidating projects, and virtually none of it was owed 

in respect of things which were going to have to be paid for out 

of taxes. 

 

Now that was the situation in 1982. A total of $3.5 billion 

accumulated since 1905 in the course of building a 

province-wide power utility, a province-wide telephone utility, 

a highway system, two universities, schools, hospitals, grid 

roads. Since 1982 that debt has soared from $3.5 billion to $8.7 

billion last March, and I predict that it will be just about $10 

billion by coming March — a far greater increase — almost 

triple the debt which was  

accumulated from 1905 until 1982. 

 

And what have we got to show for it? Do we have a doubled 

power system? Of course, we don’t. Do we have a 

greatly-expanded telephone system? Modest expansion. Do we 

have our university campuses doubled in size or anything like 

it? Well, of course we don’t. Is our highway system improved 

and rebuilt? No. Our few account for the major sell-offs of coal 

mines and potash machinery and pulp mills and highway 

equipment. We don’t own much more than we did in 1982, but 

we owe 5 or $6 billion more in four and one half years and not 

many more assets. 

 

And the figures I use are cautious figures. I was going to say 

they are conservative figures, but when you say conservative 

figures with respect to debt, you mean sky-rocketing figures; 

you don’t mean any sort of caution at all. Now that’s the legacy 

of the monumental mismanagement that this government 

opposite has created. It’s created a financial burden for the 

people of Saskatchewan which I predict will become all too 

apparent in the coming year. 

 

And I ask the government again to tell the public where we 

stand. Tell us what we own. Tell us what we owe. Tell us what 

our situation is now so that we can proceed with a debate based 

upon the facts and not on the hyperbole contained in the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, here! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I said, Mr. Speaker, that if we’re to 

have an intelligent debate we need disclosure on where we 

stand financially. There are other facts that we need to know if 

we’re to debate the situation which this province finds itself in 

and what we ought to do about it. I refer to the major industrial 

projects in which the government is involved, but I want to ask 

the government to tell us where we stand with respect to some 

of these major industrial projects. 

 

Take the NewGrade upgrader — I believe the public are entitled 

to know what the deal is between the government opposite and 

the federal government. I’m not talking about a general 

statement — I’m talking about a copy of the agreement. I saw a 

recent cabinet decision the other day which provided for an 

additional $20 million to be loaned to NewGrade. 

 

My questions to the Premier and the government opposite are 

this. Will you, or the appropriate minister, outline the financial 

deal with respect to NewGrade? Will you, within the next seven 

days, table in this House a copy of the agreement with the 

federal government? 

 

My understanding is, and it’s only an understanding, that the 

Government of Canada and Saskatchewan are assuming 100 per 

cent of the financial risk of the upgrader and that they are 

providing, by way of loan or guarantee, 100 per cent of the cash 

which is being used to build this upgrader. 

 

We’re talking about a great deal of money, Mr. Speaker — 

hundreds of million of dollars. The project is under way. There 

should be no reason for withholding from the  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

59 

 

public the financial details with respect to this upgrader, and I 

call upon the minister to give them to the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — With respect to the Prince Albert Pulp 

Mill, we have now had some details laid before the House — 

three months after they were promised. 

 

In June the minister, the member from Meadow Lake, gave a 

firm and solid commitment to this House, saying that at the date 

of closing, when the final deal is signed, you will get the facts. 

The date of closing was September 8th or 9th. We did not get 

the documents at the date of closing. We did not get the 

documents when the final deal was signed. We got the 

documents only three months later, after a provincial election 

had intervened. 

 

And when I see these documents — and I have just had an 

opportunity to review them in a cursory way — but what I see 

in these documents it makes it very clear to me why they didn’t 

release them before the election, because they wouldn’t defend 

that deal and didn’t want to have to defend that deal prior to the 

election. And that’s why they withheld those facts from the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And it’s time the government levelled 

with the people with respect to Gainers and Peter Pocklington. 

What are Peter Pocklington and Gainers committed to do? Are 

they committed by binding agreement to open a plant in North 

Battleford? And if so, starting when? 

 

It’s a year since this deal was announced, or I suppose it was a 

deal. I don’t know whether it was a deal. We had public 

announcements about start-ups. Yes, we have all read these: 

 

Gainers aiming at July start-up for bacon plant. The building 

is complete, but hiring won’t begin until the operation is 

almost ready to open its doors, possibly by September or 

early October. 

 

Here’s one in late August: 

 

Previous reports indicate the plant is expected to be in 

operation by the end of September. 

 

Bacon plant opening behind schedule. Doug Ford, Gainers’ 

executive director, says the constructed plant will be 

producing bacon before the end of 1986. We were reluctant 

to provide an exact date. 

 

Well this has been going on now for six months anyway. We 

have been promised. . . Any time an election looked like it was 

on the offing we had another announcement that Gainers was 

going to commence production. I think it’s time the government 

levelled with us on that project. 

 

I say this to the Premier — I could read clippings which say that 

hundreds of people have applied for jobs at Gainers, and I don’t 

doubt it. Thousands of people are out of work in this province 

looking for jobs, and they have  

been shabbily dealt with by this government who has promised 

that there would be an early opening of a major plant in North 

Battleford, and then kept saying, no, not now, maybe a few 

months, couple of months, maybe the end of the year. Does 

anyone believe the end of the year? Surely not. 

 

Thousands have trusted the word of the government opposite 

and applied for jobs. They believed they had a deal because the 

deal was announced; yet I don’t know anybody outside the 

government who has ever seen any document bearing the 

signature of Pocklington or Gainers. And I say that these people 

opposite, if there is a deal, have an obligation to tell the people 

of Saskatchewan and those hundreds of people who are lined up 

for jobs, tell them whether there is a deal, and if so, what it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I call upon the government opposite to 

tell us what the deal is, if there is a deal with Peter Pocklington, 

show us a copy. Then we’ll all know, not just the people who 

might profit from inside information, but we’ll all know, and 

we all have a right to know because we’re all paying for it. And 

I don’t know why the government opposite doesn’t tell us what 

their deal is with Peter Pocklington. 

 

I turn now to SaskTel. And I ask: can the government provide 

the public with a statement on the government’s intentions in 

respect to the ownership of SaskTel? And that’s a fair question 

to ask. And if the story is the one that you used during the 

campaign, that SaskTel will continue to be owned by all of the 

people of Saskatchewan through their government, if that’s 

your story, then will somebody give us an explanation, that any 

one would be expected to believe, on just what the Pemberton 

Houston Willoughby report was all about. 

 

Others of my colleagues will be dealing with this on other 

occasions during this legislature, but the facts are pretty simple 

and pretty clear. By a letter of agreement dated April 3, 1985, 

18 months ago, SaskTel engaged Pemberton Houston 

Willoughby, a national investment firm, to examine into and 

report on what would be involved in the government of 

Saskatchewan divesting itself of some or all of its equity in 

SaskTel. Note carefully that we’re talking about equity, not 

debt. Pemberton was not asked to talk about bonds, but about 

equity-ownership, and that’s exactly what they did talk about in 

their report. The report provided financial plans to make 

SaskTel comparable with other investor-owned utilities, other 

investment-owned telephone companies. And elsewhere in the 

report it’s clear that they are identifying these as Bell Canada, 

B.C. Tel, Maritime Tel, and New Brunswick Tel. 

 

This report is known about on the streets. I hear people jokingly 

saying we don’t call it SaskTel now, we call it Sask Bell. But 

what the public is entitled to know is: who arranged for the 

Pemberton report, for what purpose, and on whose instructions. 

  



 

December 8, 1986 

60 

 

 

I call upon the Premier to tell the public of the facts about what 

they intend to do with this public asset which was built up by 

the people of Saskatchewan over a period of 75 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So, Mr. Premier, the time has come for 

you to level with the public, not only about the financial 

condition of this province, but about these major financial 

transactions which you are proposing to enter into, or have 

entered into. We’re entitled to know what the deal is with 

respect to the NewGrade upgrader and what the federal 

government commitments are. We’re entitled to know what the 

deal is with Peter Pocklington and Gainers, entitled to know 

what you have in mind with respect to SaskTel and many other 

proposals you have announced. 

 

No reasonable discussion of what this province should do over 

the next year, or the next four years, can proceed without the 

facts being on the table. The public wants to know; the 

opposition on their behalf wants to know. In times like these 

when we are facing difficult times, there should be public 

discussion and there should be informed public discussion of 

where our province stands, and there cannot be that informed 

public discussion unless we have the facts laid before the 

public. . . not facts which are going to injure anybody’s 

commercial operations, but facts in respect of which there can 

be no justifiable reason for withholding them from the public. 

 

I want to touch on a few other items in the Speech from the 

Throne. I was pleased to hear that the government proposes to 

provide the resources to ensure that excellence is the hallmark 

in our educational system. I would have been even more 

pleased if the government’s past record gave very much 

evidence of that concern. 

 

The government has reduced — not increased — its per student 

commitment to our universities consistently over the last four 

years. The per student contribution of the government has gone 

down. This neglect must be corrected. Money to allow the 

universities to add some more permanent staff, especially in the 

core arts and science areas is urgent. Classes, especially first 

year classes, are crowded to an extent never seen in the history 

of our Saskatchewan universities. And this crowding and 

inability of professors and teaching staff to give any personal 

attention to students is affecting the quality of the education 

offering, and is the reverse of any pursuit of excellence. 

 

And I think we need to get from the government some 

commitment that they are going to remedy those problems, and 

we certainly haven’t got them to date. 

 

Turning to health care, one would be more reassured if after the 

more than four and one-half years of PC administration, waiting 

lists at the major hospitals were not the longest that they’ve 

been in history. But they are. They’re at an all-time high, with a 

consequent deterioration of the quality of health care as seen 

from the patient’s point of view. 

 

Just over the weekend I had a constituent talk to me about the 

conditions in Pasqua Hospital and she told me that she had to 

go over there and look after an aunt who was in that hospital 

because the aunt was not getting sufficient care from the ward 

staff, care of the tender, loving care variety — seeing that her 

water was changed and wasn’t stale, and that her bed was 

fluffed, and those sorts of things which one does to make a 

patient comfortable. Neither she nor her aunt, the patient, laid 

any of the blame on the ward staff. Far from it. They were 

rushed off their feet. And we’ve heard those stories, and you 

can hear them any day of the week in Regina, and I suspect you 

can hear them in Saskatoon. 

 

These problems and others like them — hospital waiting lists of 

record highs, and university classes crowded as never before, 

and nursing home waiting lists the longest in history, and 

line-ups at the welfare offices, and at our new food banks which 

weren’t around four and one-half years ago — all these are 

indications of a government unable or unwilling to deal with the 

pressing needs of the less fortunate. A government which, for 

whatever reason, is failing to uphold the most fundamental tenet 

of Saskatchewan history — that we are a people who help those 

who need help. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on 

another subject briefly which I believe is relevant, although 

members opposite, or at least members who used to be 

opposite, suggested that this was inappropriate when it was 

raised in a previous debate in this Chamber. And I’m’ talking 

about the concern which many of my constituents and many 

people of Saskatchewan have with respect to the nuclear arms 

race. 

 

During World War II mankind developed the atom bomb, and 

in August of 1945 in Hiroshima, Japan, one small bomb killed 

100,000 people outright. Another 100,000 people died from 

ruptured organs and massive burns and radiation disease and the 

like, and a further 200,000 are dying a lingering death. It’s 

estimated that the nuclear devices which are now in the world, 

in the hands of the Soviet Union and the United States, have an 

explosive power of 1,250,000 times the Hiroshima bomb. 

 

The world has built up this arsenal at very great costs to achieve 

security. And yet there has never been a time when the human 

race was in greater danger of being extinguished by a war 

among the major powers. Now what can be done? Suspicions 

are such in the world that unilateral nuclear disarmament is not 

possible, and I think we should acknowledge that. One would 

hope, I suppose, that that might change, but one cannot look for 

that sort of a change in the immediate future. 

 

But some things are possible. A halt to the build-up should be 

possible. A step-by-step dismantling should be possible. And 

with the huge overkill in the hands of both the East and the 

West, there’s no large risk if any one of these steps in the 

step-by-step dismantling was not exactly equal to the 

dismantling on the other side. And that’s an important point 

because if we get into an argument about whether or not this 

dismantling exactly equals that dismantling, we are not going to 

get effective  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

61 

 

dismantling. But if we realize that there is tremendous overkill 

on either side and we can have some step-by-step dismantling 

without anyone feeling that they had stolen a march on the other 

side, then perhaps we can make some progress. 

 

And then there is also widespread agreement that the fewer 

nations that have nuclear weapons, the less likelihood there is of 

an accidental war, so to speak. So that there’s a positive benefit 

for countries in the world to declare themselves to be nuclear 

weapons free. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, this can be 

done without having any measurable effect on the effectiveness 

of a nuclear deterrent on either side. It’s not easy to understand 

the consequences of nuclear war. It’s estimated that a single 

one-megaton bomb – and that’s a sort of a normal bomb these 

days: that’s 50 times the Hiroshima bomb — detonated over 

Toronto, would kill 600,000 people, seriously injure another 

600,000 people. All possibility of medical care would vanish. 

The seriously injured needing intensive care would be greater 

than all the intensive care beds in the world. 

 

So this issue concerns us all. As Canadians, we look primarily 

to our federal government to deal with matters of this kind. But 

when we’re considering the survival of the human species, this 

is no time to deal in niceties of constitutional jurisdiction. 

Therefore provincial legislatures, municipal governments, 

non-government groups, have a role to play in pressing the case 

for having Canada declared a nuclear weapons free zone and for 

having the countries of the world work hand and earnestly at 

reducing the arms buildup, and one would hope, dismantling the 

existing stockpile of arms. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — This is not to embrace unilateral or 

total disarmament; it is to accept the idea that all-out nuclear 

war in defence of anything, human or otherwise, is a 

contradiction in terms. But it’s up to us, along with the other 

people of the world, to recognize the truth of that conclusion 

and to act on it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in our days, change is inevitable but 

progress is not. As we review what kind of Saskatchewan we 

want and what kind of changes we call progress, it’s useful to 

recall what should be our aim. A wise legislator, I believe 

President Roosevelt, said: 

 

The true test of progress is not whether we add more to the 

abundance of those who already have much; it is whether we 

provide enough for those who have too little. 

 

New Democrats believe that that is a true test of progress and is 

a proper test for progress in Saskatchewan, and that if cuts and 

slashes in services fall on the backs of people who have too 

little, at a time when the well-to-do are prospering at taxpayers’ 

expense, such cuts are unfair and unjustified. If there are to be 

cuts in publicly financed education and publicly financed 

health, let there first be cuts in publicly financed hot tubs and 

publicly financed  

jaccuzis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The public will accept the fact that 

financial mismanagement in the past has produced a crisis. No 

one can deny that; they have to accept it. They will not accept 

any plan to deal with this crisis that is not fair, that does not 

distribute the burden fairly, that does not acknowledge that 

those who have prospered from the mismanagement and sill 

prosper, must bear their full share of the burden. 

 

(1545) 

 

The public will also expect the government to level with them, 

to tell the public what deals have been made and with whom; to 

tell the public in a timely way what money has been spent and 

by whom; to disclose the facts so that all who are asked to pay 

know where we are now and what plans the government has to 

deal with the crises facing us. 

 

Because the Speech from the Throne gives no indication that 

the government proposes to lay the facts before the public and 

invite the full discussion of what our options are, because it 

fails even to recognize some of the major problems being faced 

by the people of Saskatchewan, and accordingly totally fails to 

offer any solutions, because of that, Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale, that the following words be added to the motion: 

 

but regrets that the government has failed to commit itself to 

jobs and fair taxation for Saskatchewan people, long-term 

financial security for Saskatchewan farm families, 

compassionate consideration for those most in need, and 

failed to correct the wasteful mismanagement which has 

produced a provincial deficit of more than $2 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate continues concurrently on the 

motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker,, and I would also 

extend my thanks to the Leader of the Opposition for those kind 

words and the history lesson. We now have the Will Rogers of 

the Saskatchewan legislature present right here with us. The 

past is always very interesting, but as with many old historians, 

it’s viewed through rose-coloured glasses. But I thank him for 

his thoughts anyhow. 

 

I’d just like to perhaps include some of the points that he 

missed out. Agriculture was the main focal point of his 

comments to start with. So what is the NDP concept of 

agriculture in Saskatchewan? What was it in the past? Land 

bank. And today we had a number of those items revisited upon 

us. 

 

But I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that suddenly  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

62 

 

we have the Leader of the Opposition very, very interested in 

agriculture, for when they were in government for 11 years 

agriculture suffered badly. We lost 11,000 farmers during their 

reign in our fair province. We talk about programs. We talk 

about support for the farm economy. Well, Mr. Speaker, in 

short-term programs and assistance for farmers, I don’t think 

there has ever been another government in this province who 

has done as much as the government of the present Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Petersen: — The record speaks for itself. The Leader of 

the Opposition spoke of interest rates. Well, Mr. Speaker, where 

was he when I was paying 21 and 22 and 23 percent interest 

rates? He didn’t’ care. He said, its not a provincial problem. It’s 

not a provincial problem. Don’t worry about it young farmers. 

We’ll buy your farms if you can’t make it. He was happy to see 

young farmers go down. It meant the government could grab 

their land from them. That’s where he was, and if he would care 

to stick around for a little longer, I’d love to continue. Thank 

you very much. 

 

We talked about diversification in the province, and 

unfortunately the Leader of the Opposition is under the 

misconception that the province was once upon a time nothing 

but wheat, wall-to-wall, and suddenly diversification came upon 

us in the ’70s. 

 

I mean, let’s take a look at the history in Saskatchewan. The 

mixed farm, the family farm that the Leader of the Opposition 

is so fond of referring to, is the basis of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. We speak of diversification; it’s always been 

here. We speak of diversification in many fields, processing of 

our products. 

 

Well, the Leader of the Opposition would have us believe under 

their particular government it happened all over the place. There 

was diversification, there was new meat packing plants going 

up all over the place regularly. That’s not true, Mr. Speaker. 

Burns closed down in Prince Albert; I could name several 

others. They deride the programs that we’ve tried to put into 

place trying to improve the processing industry. 

 

He went on about Gainers in North Battleford. Well what’s 

wrong with a processing plant in North Battleford? Just because 

they don’t like Peter Pocklington, they’re against it. 

 

We spoke of another area of diversification in our forestry 

industry. The pulp-mill in Prince Albert, the Weyerhaeuser 

deal, which would provide a paper-mill in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, hundreds of new jobs — a paper-mill. And not only 

that, it would provide the infrastructure so that both could be 

viable. A pulp-mill cannot stand alone; it just cannot. You put 

the paper-mill with it, and you’re off and running. but they 

didn’t like that idea. And they spent many, many hours in this 

legislature and many, many taxpayers’ dollars telling us why 

they didn’t like it. 

 

You talk about building, manufacturing. For years, we’ve  

had the Co-op Refinery in Regina. It’s been here. It’s been a 

fact. It’s been a part of our lives, and it’s provided many jobs. 

We were the first government to recognize the potential if 

coupled with an upgrader and in co-operation with the federal 

government. That upgrader is now being built. But what did the 

opposition do? They didn’t look to this particular location. They 

were off courting the big multinationals trying to set up an 

upgrader, those big multinationals whom they hated. But we, in 

conjunction and in co-operation with Co-op and the federal 

government, have brought it into being. It’s a reality; it’s being 

built. And yet the members of the opposition laugh and scoff at 

the record of our particular government. 

 

When we talk about a deficit and credit ratings, the Leader of 

the Opposition said it’s bad, it’s terrible, it’s awful. And then he 

says we should have programs to support people. We’ve got to 

have more programs to support people. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

many of the programs that we have put in place have supported 

people, have supported agriculture, have supported our home 

owners, have supported our working people in the province, and 

it’s had to be done with a deficit. We’ve had to borrow the 

money. And the program that the Leader of the Opposition 

refers to as a deficit is really being put in place to support the 

very people that he supposedly is championing. 

 

Our credit rating was brought into question. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the reasons that our credit rating has been brought into 

question is because of many of these programs being put in 

there and a deficit that was created by it. What should we do? 

Should we do away with these programs so that we can improve 

our credit rating with the big multinationals in New York? The 

opposition only refers to whatever suits their particular point of 

reasoning. The big multinationals are fine. They’re wonderful 

people and they know everything there is to know when it 

comes to the credit rating of the province of Saskatchewan. but 

the big multinationals are nasty, vicious, cruel organisations 

when it comes to dealing with the labour unions. It’s most 

amazing — most amazing. 

 

Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is important, and I’d like to get back 

to that for a moment. When we look at some of the policies that 

this government has implemented and worked with the federal 

government in implementing, we look at the national ag policy, 

the national ag strategy. There hasn’t been one in 26 years, and 

this sudden interest by the Leader of the Opposition in 

agriculture is very heart-warming because I’m sure he’ll 

endorse that because it is a long-term plan. It does have some 

long-term ramifications and addresses many of the issues that 

he spoke of today. 

 

He spoke of the national tripartite programs, hogs and in beef. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I feel that we did the right thing in dealing 

with the national tripartite programs. We went to the producers 

and said, well, do you think we should get involved in this? 

And they said, well, we’ve got to look at both sides of the story 

here. And they took their time and they went out to their 

members and they held meetings and they came back and said, 

yes, we think that you should endorse this program. And so we 

did. 

 

We consult with people. We don’t just slap a program in  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

63 

 

there because we’ve had a brilliant little brainwave in the back 

room. We don’t’ just suddenly institute a land bank program or 

go buy a potash mine because it’s something that we want to 

do. We consult with the people of the province. We listen to 

them and we talk to them. And the pork producers of this 

province agreed with us. We signed the program and we are not 

part of it. 

 

Crop insurance was referred to and it was referred to in what I 

would consider to be favourable terms. And crop insurance had 

been a good program and it still is a good program, and we’ve 

worked with the federal government trying to make it better, 

many times having to listen to the opposition members deride 

us for our efforts. And whenever something happened, it was 

always: too little, too late. They never took the time to say, 

well, that was pretty fair. No matter what this government does, 

the opposition says, oh, too little, too late; or it’s bad; or it’s 

wrong. Mr. Speaker, they’re the party of doom and gloom. 

That’s all we ever hear from them — doom and gloom and the 

past — and they’re doing it again. 

 

And if you want to speak about the past, the nuclear arms race 

was brought up. I’ve heard a number of people speak against 

nuclear arms build-ups and I’m one of the people who is 

definitely against the build-up of nuclear arms. And we talk 

about a nuclear-free zone. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in a nuclear war there is no such thing as a 

nuclear-free zone. Should it ever come to pass, we will be the 

battleground. And I would like to see Canada retain its place in 

NATO and be one of the countries at the table when 

disarmament talks are going on, instead of hiding in some back 

room and saying, disarm, disarm; we aren’t going to be 

involved. We are involved, Mr. Speaker, and we should be at 

that table. 

 

But that’s not what I came here to talk to you about today, Mr. 

Speaker. I just couldn’t resist having a couple of comments 

about the Leader of the Opposition. I came here, Mr. Speaker, 

to talk to you and to the people in this Assembly about my 

constituency, about the major industry, agriculture, and how 

this government has helped us and how this government will 

continue to make agriculture its priority. 

 

The throne speech mentioned manufacture of agriculture 

chemicals, fertilizers, biotechnology. Those will help create 

jobs and reduce costs for farmers. In the past, all of our 

chemicals have been manufactured outside of the province, and 

we’ve had to spend 200 or $300 million in any given year for 

the chemical inputs that we need for our farms — for the 

herbicides and pesticides to fight the grasshoppers and the 

wheat midge, wild oats, and for the fertilizers to help us grow 

our crops that the world needs. And that money all goes out of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. It’s generated here, but none of it 

stays here. It leaves. And today in question period the Premier 

spoke briefly about that very thing. 

 

The chemical manufacturing that he spoke of is quite possible, 

Mr. Speaker. There are a number of people who say it isn’t, and 

there are a number of people who make comments on the 

subject without understanding it, among them the Leader of the 

Opposition. And not to mention leaders of opposition parties, 

the federal  

member for Yorkton-Melville also talks about patent rights and 

speaks about chemical manufacturing, chemical use, and so on 

and so forth, without understanding the whole process of rules 

and regulations involved. It’s a very complicated thing. 

 

(1600) 

 

We have product specific registration which is in place, and I 

have never heard any of the members opposite mention that. 

The Leader of the Opposition certainly did not. He does not 

understand how the chemical industry works; he does not 

understand the rules and regulations, and yet he stands here and 

makes comments on it. And his counterpart, or his successor 

from Yorkton-Melville, does the same in Ottawa. He stands in 

front of the cameras and yells and screams and holds press 

conferences without really understanding the issues. 

 

Neither of those gentlemen have ever been a farmer. I find it 

difficult to understand how they feel that they know what is best 

for farmers. 

 

If you’re looking at our rural areas, and the Leader of the 

Opposition has suddenly become aware that the rural areas are 

very important, we’ve looked at establishing rural development 

corporations to help mobilize their local initiative, capital, and 

talent that we have out in the rural areas. I don’t believe 

everything should be centred in Regina or Saskatoon. I think it 

should be out in the rural areas. They’ve got lots of small towns 

with good supplies of water, good highways, good rail access 

— no end of them. So why shouldn’t we diversify? I think it’s a 

good idea. 

 

We’ve gone that way, Mr. Speaker, in moving the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance headquarters to Melville; 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation was moved to Moose Jaw. . . 

We believe in decentralization and moving out to those rural 

areas. And I think that’s a very important thing to look at. 

 

Among our other programs that we’ve put out into the 

countryside in the areas of agriculture and research are 

programs in conjunction with our ag development fund and our 

Saskatchewan ag research fund. A number of those programs 

have led to major gains in biotechnology, in utilization of much 

of the research that has been done in our universities over the 

years. 

 

Sclerotina in rapeseed, for example, has become a great 

problem, and we have now got the leading research experts on 

that very subject here in the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

know some of the members opposite won’t know that is, but 

I’m sure they’ll be able to look it up. 

 

When we talk about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, I’m 

sorry there is a farmer over there, there is one. I apologize for 

that. 

 

When you look at the educational system that we have in our 

province, it is one that I went though, my children are presently 

involved in, and I’d like to see it made better. I’d like to see it 

be more comprehensive, and if we have to review it and make 

some changes, we will. We’ll make it  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

64 

 

more comprehensive, bring it into line with today’s very, very 

rapidly changing world. 

 

We’ve got people in Saskatchewan who’ve got access to 

excellent training facilities and that will allow them to compete 

nationally and internationally in the future; it’ll allow them to 

help this province compete nationally and internationally, and I 

think we should give them the best that we possibly can. 

 

We’ve talked about protecting people, a lot. Well, I don’t’ think 

that there’s anyone in Saskatchewan who hasn’t heard about our 

mortgage interest protection program. In 1982, it was one of our 

major platforms and we brought it into being — 13 and 

one-quarter at the time. The opposition, or pardon me, the 

government of the day, who is now the opposition with regards 

to home owners said, yes, we don’t’ care what happens to 

interest rates; let them go through the ceiling. We don’t care if 

you don’t have a home, we’ll buy it from you and start a house 

bank. No problem. We’ve got land bank, and house bank, and I 

don’t know what other banks they wanted to have. 

 

But that’s what their answer to those high interest problems 

were. That was their idea of protection — nothing. We have 

now introduced — or will be shortly introducing — legislation 

to hold mortgage interest rates at nine and three-quarter per 

cent. We said we’d do it, and we will do it. We deliver. 

 

We talk about senior citizens and protecting the pioneers. I 

think we’ve gone much, much further in that regard than the 

previous government ever did. Let’s take a look at our nursing 

home situation. There was a moratorium on nursing homes in 

this province when we took office in 1982. And since then 

we’ve rectified that to a great extent — over 1,500 new beds. 

I’ve got 111 in my constituency, and they were badly needed. 

The people in that particular area of Kelvington-Wadena had 

been neglected for a number of years. 

 

And I’ll take you back to a personal story to just show you how 

it can affect families. In 1978 my grandfather was unable to 

continue looking after himself. My grandmother was not in 

good health and couldn’t look after him either, and his 

condition deteriorated to the point where he required level 4 

care. We looked around and there was none. Then we looked a 

little further and there was none. Finally, 85 miles away, there 

was a place for my grandfather, a man who had come to this 

country in 1910, worked and slaved his whole life trying to 

make it a better place for his children and their children; and my 

grandmother had worked alongside of him. And that dear, 

sweet, little old lady, for the next five years until my 

grandfather’s death, had to drive 85 miles, or get someone to 

drive her 85 miles to visit my grandfather at least once a week. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a crime. That’s a crime that we 

couldn’t have had our seniors treated better than that. 

 

And the members opposite sit there and say that they were the 

only people who ever cared about the elderly; they were the 

only people who ever cared about the common working person; 

they were the only people that ever cared about anybody. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that’s merely rhetoric. We put our 

money where our  

mouth is, Mr. Speaker, and we do it because we care about 

people. We care about people like my grandmother. She’s 91 

years old; her birthday was on Sunday. We care about the 

people who are working today. We care about the people who, 

unfortunately, are unemployed. We care about our students. We 

care about our university people. I even care about the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Peterson: — And we will do our best, Mr. Speaker, to 

listen to their positive suggestions, to listen to the good ideas 

that they may have. And I will work with them, Mr. Speaker; I 

will, if they’ll only give me something to work with instead of 

merely criticism. It makes it a bit tough, Mr. Speaker, when you 

stand here and you look at the programs that we’ve brought into 

place and have nothing but doom and gloom preached at you 

from across the floor. It makes it a bit difficult. 

 

And you want to talk about other problems we have in society, 

drug and alcohol abuse. We have just instituted programs to 

have drug and alcohol abuse centres in place — help for those 

people who need it. And that those people who need help didn’t 

just suddenly appear on the scene. They’ve been here for years. 

I’m sure we can all think of someone in our own families who 

has a problem with alcohol or drugs, legal or otherwise. These 

people need some help. But the previous government did 

nothing for them —  did nothing at all. Instead, they made 

alcohol more accessible. In my constituency I have three 

monuments to the previous government. We call them liquor 

board stores. They cost $500,000 each and, while we didn’t 

have nursing homes, we had liquor board stores. Well, thank 

you very much. I really appreciate it, and my people all 

appreciate it too. But they appreciate even more that since I’ve 

been in office we’ve had 111 new nursing home beds built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Peterson: — I mentioned schools earlier and our education 

system. Well in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I would just like 

to list a few of the things we’ve done. The Robert Melrose 

School in Kelvington, $360,000 worth of renovations; The Rose 

Valley School, $221,000 worth of renovations; Elfros 

Elementary, $1,100; Kelvington High School, 92,000; 

Invermay School, 27,000; Wadena Elementary School, 1.47 

million. 

 

Those programs, Mr. Speaker, those particular centres that have 

been built and upgraded are there for the people in my 

constituency to use. They’re there for their children to get a 

good education. Those are the types of things that we believe in 

— help for people, the elderly; interest rate reductions for 

farmers and home owners; education facilities and upgrading of 

educational programs for our students. And those have been 

done, and will continue to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Progressive Conservative government is 

continuing its commitment to agriculture, to jobs, to education, 

economic diversification, government efficiency. I mean, 

what’s wrong with government efficiency? Nothing. I don’t 

think there is. We should  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

65 

 

work towards it — we should work towards it. Yet members 

opposite seem to think it’s a big joke. They seem to think that 

more is always better. Their answer to any problem was, oh, 

hire some more people. Put some more people in. Big 

government. The bigger the better. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that efficiency is the proper thing 

to do. We have had some fairly difficult times over the past four 

and one-half years, and we may have during the next four and 

one-half years, Mr. Speaker. But I think that we will continue to 

do our best to work with the people of Saskatchewan to make 

sure that they’ve got the support they need in these difficult 

times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, job creation was an issue that was brought up. 

Well Saskatchewan’s job creation record, Mr. Speaker, has 

been among the best in Canada. And our unemployment rate 

has been the lowest, and consistently so, since 1982. We’ve 

either been number one or number two. We’ve been holding our 

own. 

 

It’s kind of difficult then for me to understand why the Leader 

of the Opposition would say there’s been no new jobs, there’s 

been nothing created here, nobody’s done anything, nobody’s 

built anything. On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, the figures speak 

for themselves. We have built; we have more people working 

today than there were in 1982. We’ve had an increase in our 

population, and we’ve still managed to keep the lowest 

unemployment figures in the countryside. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, simple mathematics will tell you that those 

other people have got to be doing something, and they’re 

working — they’ve got jobs. And Mr. Speaker, jobs don’t just 

come out of thin air. They come from the manufacturing fields. 

They come from the diversification in agriculture and our 

mining industry and our forestry industries. They come from 

our service industries.     

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t accept the arguments of the Leader 

of the Opposition. I just can’t accept them at all. And again, I 

would suggest that they are merely rhetoric. And I would say 

that with his years and years and years of experience in here, 

he’s become rather good at it, except he doesn’t quite give all of 

the facts when he speaks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, I would just like to say that I 

look forward to the next four and a half years in serving the 

people of Saskatchewan. I look forward to working with 

yourself as the new Speaker of the Assembly. And I look 

forward to working with the members of the opposition in 

trying to work our way through the difficult problems we face 

today. And I wish all the people in Saskatchewan a very, very 

prosperous new year that’s coming up. And I hope that every 

member in this House takes very seriously the role that they 

now play. It’s not just a place to stand up and hear yourself 

speak, make little points one way or the other. You serve the 

people of Saskatchewan, and I think that we should all continue 

to keep that in mind. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of my 

constituents in Regina Lakeview to address some concerns 

respecting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I had an opportunity last week, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate 

you on your appointment. And I’d also like to congratulate all 

the members in this Assembly on their appointment to the 

legislature. And I would like to thank the mover of the motion 

and the seconder — the motion with respect to the throne 

speech. Their task was particularly difficult because the Speech 

from the Throne itself failed to deal with many of the problems 

that are facing us today. And I will respond very directly to 

some of those problems and concerns I believe my constituents 

have with the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The last two-year period, Mr. Speaker, has been the longest 

election campaign in the history of Saskatchewan, I’m sure. But 

I’ve used this time to spend a great deal of time talking with the 

people of Regina Lakeview at their doorsteps and in their 

homes. They have repeatedly told me about their 

disappointment with the policies of the PC government — the 

same old policies we see in this new Speech from the Throne. 

 

I want to take a moment in this debate to thank the people of 

Regina Lakeview for sharing their concern with me. I want to 

thank them for their warmth and their friendliness. I want to 

thank them for their support. I also wish to acknowledge the 

other candidates in Regina Lakeview who conducted excellent 

campaigns and put the issues before the people in Regina 

Lakeview who worked with me during the campaign. The 

people of Regina Lakeview who worked for and supported me 

have my admiration as well. They worked and participated out 

of a fundamental commitment to democracy. Their commitment 

and the commitment of those who worked in every campaign 

for the candidate of their choice is commendable. 

 

It’s a very disturbing fact, however, Mr. Speaker, that not all 

my constituents felt free to exercise their democratic rights. I 

am referring, Mr. Speaker, to the individuals and families who 

told me that they were afraid to participate in the campaign; 

they were afraid to indicate a preference for any political party, 

and they were even afraid to discuss politics at the coffee break 

or over the lunch hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech talks about protecting 

Saskatchewan citizens. Well where is the protection for our 

fundamental democratic rights when people are afraid to take 

part in the democratic process because of the intimidation this 

government has inflicted on our citizens since 1982 — inflicted 

on the public service and on the citizens of Regina. 

 

Many people lost their livelihood because they were suspected 

of the crime of failing to be a supporter of the government in 

power, and where many lost their jobs, many more were afraid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Regina Lakeview is made up 

of individuals and families from many walks of lives. There are 

nurses and labourers, home-makers, and lawyer, tradespeople, 

teachers and retired people; many  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

66 

 

of the voters in Regina Lakeview have made careers in the 

public service. They clean our hospitals, clean our teeth, care 

for our elderly, keep our public accounts, and so on. 

 

These individuals are no more or no less honourable, as a 

group, than any other citizens. They pay their taxes, they 

volunteer their time in their community and make their 

contributions to society, but since 1982 these citizens have 

experienced an erosion of their democratic rights which has no 

precedents in this province or in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — No precedents, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

make that point because the members opposite have tried to 

pretend that their actions are no different than any other 

government in power, and although the throne speech talks 

about putting the interests and needs of people foremost, the 

actions of the government since 1982 indicate otherwise. 

 

And it’s not only public servants that we’re talking about here, 

not only public servants who are affected by the intimidation of 

which I speak, it is people in small business. People who work 

in the private sector whose agencies receive grants from the 

government, and people whose brothers -in-law, or great aunts 

worked in any of the situations I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a lot of people. A lot of people who live in fear of 

this government. 

 

But I cannot believe . . . I can’t believe that the government 

wishes to be feared. I can’t believe that they wish to have their 

programs implemented by a public service that is demoralized. 

And I don’t believe that the government can be pleased with 

this situation, yet the throne speech offers no alternatives, and 

they do not seem to be changing their ways. The firing of a 

long-time public servant, Mr. Don Moroz, without explanation 

from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is the most recent 

example. This type of thing not only damages the effectiveness 

of government, but it breeds fear and distrust. I urge this 

government, Mr. Speaker, to demonstrate their commitment to 

political freedom in a democracy; to demonstrate their 

appreciation for, and trust of their employees; to demonstrate 

their accountability to all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I urge this government to consider their overwhelming defeat in 

Regina seats and consider what this means. The people closest 

to the seat of government, the people who know you best, have 

overwhelmingly spoken out against the practices of this 

government, and they’ve elected representatives who believe in 

the rights and value of all citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — It is frustrating indeed to respond to a throne 

speech which does not address the many concerns that the 

people of Regina Lakeview shared with me during the 

campaign. I cannot help but think that the members opposite 

heard some of the same concerns, but why have they not 

responded? 

 

Let me ask the two women who are members of this Assembly 

on the government side — the member for Swift Current and 

the member for Maple Creek — how they feel about a throne 

speech that makes only one direct reference to women. The one 

reference to women is the statement that the government will 

work to assure women in business have equal access to credit. 

And this is good. We should do that. I’ve heard these concerns 

and I’m pleased to see this response. 

 

But the fact of the matter is this initiative is meaningless to the 

majority of women in this province. There are many concerns to 

women which are not addressed in this throne speech, and I 

suggest that the government add the following to its proposals. 

Let them add a real commitment to an umbrella affirmative 

action program in the public service — a demonstrated 

commitment with an agency to put it into place. 

 

It’s time to put the talents of women to work outside the job 

ghettos to which women are still confined. Where are the 

women in management, the women in trades, the women in 

professions in your government? Where is the commitment to 

equality for women, disabled persons, and native people? Add 

to this a commitment to equal pay for work of equal value and 

the government then would provide leadership to employers 

across the province. 

 

Women are also looking for a commitment to quality and 

accessible day care. They are looking for the help that was 

promised to provide services for battered wives. They are 

looking to a commitment from this government. And I ask the 

member from Swift Current and the member from Maple Creek 

to urge your colleagues to listen and respond. 

 

Another addition to the throne speech which I urge you to make 

is a commitment to accessibility legislation which disabled 

people have been working for. When I spoke to disabled people 

during the election, they wanted to know when the promises of 

this government would be honoured. When they ask for no 

more than the ability to open a door or to get on an elevator to 

be able to compete for a job, how can they be denied? Every 

day that goes by without adequate accessibility legislation 

simply adds to the problem because more and more buildings 

are built that are not accessible. More buildings are built that 

provide a barrier to those with physical disabilities. And I urge 

you to get on with it without more delay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province is 

heard in the media time and time again saying that he is 

listening to the people, and he says he’s listening and he will 

act. Well, I’ve been listening to the people too, and I have heard 

things he apparently has not heard. 

 

If this government is listening to the people, then how can he 

have brought forward a throne speech which does not propose a 

major initiative to deal with the crises of unemployment. I know 

the standard answer, Mr. Speaker, that is trotted out by this 

government time and time again. They don’t see a problem. We 

heard it here  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

67 

 

this afternoon. In fact, they brag about their success in job 

creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people who question that success; 

people who are in despair and take no comfort in statistics. I 

have had people coming to me in tears because they cannot find 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to hear the members opposite brag of 

their success in employment to these individuals. I would like 

them to brag to the young people who are 20 or 25 and have 

never found a steady job, and try talking to the young native 

person, the disabled person, and ask them how you’re doing. I 

can tell you, they’re not so impressed. Talk to the 55-year-old 

who’s not ready or able to retire but has been laid off work. Ask 

them what it’s like looking for work. 

 

These people will tell you that all the platitudes and boosterism 

of this government has not increased their ability to build a 

career in this province. These people have heard all the talk 

about building and they’ve heard all the excuses — problems in 

foreign markets, low commodity prices, and so on. 

 

These people don’t expect miracles from the government, but 

they do expect action. They expect a commitment to keeping 

Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan people and not 

contracting out to Alberta. They expect a commitment to doing 

the jobs that need to be done and putting people’s skills to 

work. They expect an opportunity to teach in schools where 

there are too few teachers and to nurse in hospitals where there 

are too few nurses. They expect you to plant trees for our future 

forest industries and to rebuild our crumbling highways. They 

expect to see what they do not see — a commitment to full 

employment in the throne speech. They expect this to be a 

priority, and I urge you to listen and respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Regina Lakeview repeatedly 

told me they are overburdened with unfair taxation and 

increases in utility rates. They see their dollars dwindling while 

huge give-aways to big business continues. They cannot take 

any more of these heavy tax burdens and utility increases. 

Indeed, they would like to see some of these increases rolled 

back. And it’s time for this government to show some 

leadership and to provide some relief to ordinary citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many omissions in this Speech from the 

Throne, but I will single out one last subject; one last need 

which is not addressed in this speech. No where do I see a 

commitment to address the problems of poverty. Indeed it could 

be argued that the throne speech is a forewarning of worse to 

come for our citizens in greatest need. The members opposite 

would prefer to turn their backs on this subject. They would 

prefer to ignore the fact that this province, which was once the 

heartland of social progress, has become the food bank capital 

of Canada. 

 

The record of this government in responding to poverty has 

been denounced by the voters of the urban areas, Mr. Speaker. 

They do not wish to see the victims of poverty pushed deeper 

into distress and they do not agree that people should be blamed 

for their own misfortune. 

 

But I do not wish to dwell on the record of this administration. I 

wish to address the future and I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the 

future of poor people in this province will not be improved by 

any measures announced in the throne speech. There is no 

mention of improvement in the minimum wage, and yes I know 

any increase in the minimum wage must be done in consultation 

with small business and must not be an undue hardship to small 

business. But, Mr. Speaker, we must also remember that the 

minimum wage is a poverty wage and it’s below the poverty 

line. 

 

(1630) 

 

Women make up approximately 70 per cent of those who 

receive minimum wage, and most minimum wage earners with 

dependants are women. This becomes a serious problem, not 

just for women but for society as a whole because this means 

that all these children are living below the poverty line — 

Saskatchewan’s future living below the poverty line. Also, did 

you know, Mr. Speaker, that most women 65 years of age and 

over are single, divorced or widowed, and that more than 60 per 

cent of them live below the poverty line? 

 

When I hear this government talking about the need for restraint 

and the need for cutting back and the need for reassessment of 

social assistance plans, I am concerned that their thought may 

be to impose restraint on the poor as they have done in the past. 

And I ask your government to assure this House that this is not 

the case; assure us that it will not reduce assistance to those in 

need while handing out millions to Peter Pocklington; assure us 

that it will not impose restraints on those on minimum wage; it 

will not ask them to tighten their belts while their own budgets 

continue to increase. I urge you when you practise restraint to 

spare those who are already carrying the burden of poverty and 

unemployment. Do not cut back on help for those in need. 

These people are your constituents and mine, and please listen 

to them and respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is a disappointment to many, 

many Saskatchewan people and I urge your government to 

enlarge its horizons and to respond to the needs of all citizens in 

this province. And because the throne speech fails to respond to 

the problems of the unemployed, to the problems of women and 

of ordinary taxpayers, of natives, of disabled persons and of the 

poor, and because it fails to reach toward a better future for all 

the people of the province, I must support the amendment 

which does deal with those matters and speak against the main 

motion if the amendment is not passed. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a distinct 

pleasure for me to rise in this Assembly to join with my 

colleagues and those on this side of the House in recognition of 

the support for the Speech from the Throne. It is a document 

that I believe is both substantial and is also timely. It 

demonstrates the forward-looking attitude that everyone has 

come to expect from our Progressive Conservative government 

while still dealing in a responsible fashion with the concerns we 

are facing  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

68 

 

today. 

 

Before I continue I want to add my personal congratulations to 

the long list regarding your election as Speaker. I believe that 

your efforts and our disciplines are necessary to make the 

Assembly work well and operate well, and you can rest assured 

that from my position I will facilitate that for you. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Premier 

for an outstanding re-election this past October. I believe it 

demonstrated more than anything else the commitment that the 

people who are, for example, in my constituency, have to the 

Premier. They felt that he had contributed in a way that far 

exceeded any other person who has led this province in the 

capacity to deal with agriculture problems and to deal with the 

things that were most important to them. I believe that he has a 

belief in the strengths of this province, and I believe that those 

are very, very important to him, and they are very important to 

me. And they rewarded that initiative on his part by re-electing 

me and him to the government side of the House. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me to thank the people 

of the Morse constituency for their trust and their loyalty. I 

want to thank the people who worked so hard to gain my 

re-election, and I am very pleased to represent them here today. 

The constituency is not unique. I think it’s relative to those 

around about it, but for me it is very special because that is 

where I live, that’s where my home is, and these people are part 

of who I am and what I am. 

 

I also want to pay tribute to the campaign managers that we had 

in this election. They demonstrated, I believe, that an election 

can be won on a positive note. And I think that that is extremely 

important when we rationalize the types of advertising that can 

be done in an election. I believe that we demonstrated that we 

can win with a voice that is positive, that has a direction of 

growth and diversification and stimulating the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Morse lies in the south-west 

part of the province, and I believe that is one of the best places 

to live in Saskatchewan, and that’s basically because I have a 

bias. 

 

We in the Morse constituency completely surround the city of 

Swift Current. My constituency is 75 miles square, and we have 

a lot of people who use the centre of the constituency as a 

trading area, and that is the city of Swift Current. So we have 

many people who focus their attention in that area, on Swift 

Current and the surrounding area, and deal in many of the 

shopping facilities that they have there, the service centres that 

they have there, and they are largely focused in there. 

 

The city has demonstrated a vitality that I believe is probably 

second to none. It has grown in business and strength, and I 

think that is largely due to the kind of people that live in that 

area, the rural area around, and also in the city centre. 

 

One of the those reasons is the energy development that has 

taken place over the last four and a half years. And as I was 

looking through the statistics that showed what has  

happened in the south-west over the last year. I would like to 

say that even in spite of the kinds of things that have been 

happening in the energy sector, the south-west part of the 

province has still demonstrated a fair amount of activity in the 

oil and gas sector, especially in the gas, and I think that’s 

extremely important as it relates to our capability of 

manufacturing in this province, our capability of providing 

energy to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The people in the south-west have probably in the last two 

years, outside of 1986, gone through probably the toughest 

years of their farming existence for the last 50 years. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that that has caused a good deal of 

concentration on various aspects as it relates to the financial 

areas in their homes and in their farming practices and their 

ranching practices, and I think that that’s focused an attention 

on giving to them a commitment to what their chosen work has 

become. And it has also been an opportunity for me, Mr. 

Speaker, to show some compassion. 

 

We just had indicated to us that our government is not one of 

compassion. And I can recall, Mr. Speaker, through the late 

’70s when farmers were mortgaging their interest against their 

farms and they couldn’t meet them, and the people over on the 

other side, when they were in government said, so what? It’s 

not my responsibility. And they demonstrated their callous 

attitude towards it. And those members who were re-elected 

who headed that government are sitting here today and are able 

to hear again that they had a responsibility, and how did they 

react? They reacted negatively to those inputs that were given 

by the rural people in this province, and that’s why. My. 

Speaker, they only have one person on that side of this House 

who’s from rural Saskatchewan — or two. I’m sorry the 

member from Quill Lakes just spoke up — woke up. But 

anyway, that’s the kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, that they never 

really cared about and they were never prepared to act on. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that is the key to the kinds 

of things that were told me in the last four and a half years that 

said the Premier of this province knows and understands and 

can react positively; can also motivate positively. And I want to 

just tell the members opposite that during the time from 1982 to 

1984 this government also worked with the federal government, 

which was not of the same stripe as this government is. And 

that also demonstrates to me, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of 

possibilities that our Premier, led by the executive of this 

government, can do for the people of Saskatchewan. It can 

work together with them. 

 

There are a number of things that I wanted to just briefly go 

through as an indication of the kinds of things that I think are 

really important to the people of Saskatchewan. And I noticed a 

bit of sarcasm on the other side of the House regarding our 

agricultural policies. And I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

fundamentally we must maintain that sector of our society or 

we are all going to be losers in this province, every one of us. I 

just want to say that when you put money into the hands of a 

primary producer. . . and I don’t believe that there is anybody 

more at the base level than agriculture. The people who are in 

energy — primary producers; people who are in exploration, 

oil, gas, gold, whatever it is — uranium;  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

69 

 

those kinds of people providing a base of entry into that by 

government assistance gives benefits to every sector of society 

as it relates to the involvement and the moving of the money 

through the system. And they never believed that, because they 

never gave anything for that kind of assistance. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, have been involved in municipal things, and 

also in agriculture, and I have dealt with those people in a 

time. . . And I found how difficult it really was. That’s why they 

scorn and scoff at it. I don’t’ believe that that is necessary to be 

done. For example, when agriculture was in need of operating 

money last spring, who went out on a limb? The Premier of 

Saskatchewan recognized that it was better as a corporate 

society that we deal with giving an opportunity for farmers to 

plant their grain than for them to do it individually, and with 

that we introduced a $25 an acre at 6 per cent. And what did 

that do? That had spin-offs throughout my constituency. That 

had spin-offs in providing benefits to my small business. Small 

businesses just thrived on the kinds of things that they could do 

with chemicals and with fertilizers, with small short-line 

equipment. Those are the kinds of things that really intensified 

during the summer, and it never quit as it went though. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, for my constituency the $50 

million that was put into my constituency, most assuredly, was 

well received by the people there. The demonstration of 

confidence that the people had also was increased when the 

Premier said he would make that roll over so that the farmers 

there could get some breathing room. And I want to just 

compliment the Premier and his staff for the kinds of things that 

they have done in that area. 

 

How do you maintain a certain level of confidence within the 

framework of rural Saskatchewan? We found out a number of 

those things, Mr. Speaker, as we toured the province last year in 

dealing with the agriculture input costs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What became of it? 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Martens: — He wants to know, on the other side, what 

became of it. I was going to come to that, because it represents 

the kinds of things that we are prepared to do: number one, 

listen; and number two, respond in a positive way. 

 

When we started that the federal government was only 

contributing 4.5 cents a litre on the gas. And what are they 

doing now? They’re rebating all of the tax that they collect to 

rural farmers, and the farmers in his constituency get the same 

benefit as everyone else.   

 

Then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we initiated a program where 

we were prepared to return to the farm customers $42 million, 

roughly, in total, of the royalty collected on the oil and gas. . . 

the oil that they were going to use. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

going to benefit many, many people in all of Saskatchewan. 

And it not only focuses in the rural part but it focuses in to the 

kinds of things that can be done through, for example, the 

upgrader and the oil, and that  

relates directly to my constituency where the west half of it is 

the oil patch in the South-west. 

 

When we ran in ’82, the benefits that we saw that would accrue 

to young people beginning farming was specifically focused on 

an area that dealt with young people being able to buy land — 

own their own land, not rent it from big government. And we 

decided that that’s what we would do. And Mr. Speaker, on the 

average, the people in the Morse constituency have benefited at 

about $4,500 a year on that one program. And I think that is an 

extremely important feature in determining that the kinds of 

things that happen for young people to start is very important. 

 

It also, Mr. Speaker, did a couple of other things. It transferred 

some of the indebtedness that fathers had so that sons could 

take it over at a far better rate, and they took it over and they 

applied for that. And that’s why you will find, Mr. Speaker, that 

bankruptcies in Alberta and bankruptcies in Manitoba are far 

higher than in Saskatchewan. And number-wise they are far 

higher when we have a lot more farmers. More than 50 per cent 

of all western Canada farmers come from Saskatchewan. And I 

think that that’s a credit to the kind of programs we put into 

place in this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — I believe that comes, Mr. Speaker, from 

listening. We initiated another one that I believe is very vital, 

and I’ve talked about the farmer’s side, and we’ll just address 

the livestock industry just a little bit. One of the things that we 

did, we involved ourselves in the livestock industry. We 

listened to the problems that were being dealt with with the 

drought in the south, with providing transportation, alleviating 

costs to them so that they could transport the hay from the 

north. Buy the stuff in the north and move it south. That, 

together with co-operating with the federal government, we 

provided $48 a head plus 60. 

 

We set up a livestock cash advance. The grain farmers in 

western Canada and the Canadian Wheat Board area have at 

their disposal a cash advance system at no interest. And we felt 

that as a livestock industry it would be an extremely important 

feature to put into place in relation to the livestock industry. 

And the livestock producers in my constituency really feel that 

this is a very important feature, and I want to say especially to 

those in the dairy industry this has become a very important part 

of their program, and I believe that that’s also an important 

thing. 

 

The other area that focuses specifically on, and I think is a 

benefit, is the livestock feeding area in the province, and that 

area has got a lot of benefits from the kinds of things that can be 

done in expanding that program. 

 

Another thing our government did and we’re building on these 

things. And I just want you to understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 

focus is on building and growth and assigning things so that 

people can understand that. 

 

What are we going to be doing tomorrow? Have we got a 

stability in the kinds of things that we are doing? I believe that 

we have We have put into place some venture  

  



 

December 8, 1986 

70 

 

capital programs relating to livestock, livestock investment tax 

credits, feeder loan association guarantees. 

 

Some of these things, Mr. Speaker, for instance, like the feeder 

associations loan guarantee program has been in existence since 

the 1930s in Alberta. How come they never ever thought of 

putting it into place in Saskatchewan? They didn’t understand 

it? They didn’t understand the agriculture side and the beef side 

or the other side. And as the member from Weyburn says, they 

still don’t, and I doubt whether they ever will. And that’s the 

very key to the kinds of things that we have to do. 

 

We have to be expressive of the kinds of direction we have to 

take, and we also have to be prepared to listen and then show 

some leadership in giving direction. 

 

Not only did we provide an area of growth for the livestock 

industry as it relates to the beef and the dairy, but we also did it 

to the pork. We initiated a pork board. The people voted on a 

board to set it up and they did. Not only that, we said the pork 

industry in this province has to go and last spring. . . I just want 

to use an example of a Premier that knows what he’s doing. 

 

Last spring in the United States in the mid-west, what 

happened? The bankers would not give their pork producers any 

money for operating. What did our government do? We gave 

them operating loans, interest free. And do you know what 

happened? Their pork producers went out of business. And if 

you look at the pork market in the United States in spring, it just 

went right down. And when it went down it demonstrated, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that the people of the province. . . or of that 

area, could not afford to have the pork industry continue. The 

pork went down. They sold everything out and from 

midsummer and on it just kept climbing and climbing and 

climbing. And what did that do for our producers? What did 

that do? It set a market for our producers to market into the 

United States and to the midwest and throughout the whole 

western side of the United States; and that is extremely 

important when we talk about these things. 

 

The areas that we have in dealing with the kinds of things that 

we have done as it relates to the grain, the pork, the beef, the 

dairy, can all come under a number of areas and one of those 

areas is the Agricultural Credit Corporation, and we have done 

a number of things in that area that are very important. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that time is pushing here, so I’ll move 

along. 

 

I want to mention a couple of things about the home repair 

program that I think are important for me. I noticed in early 

September, when we initiated this program, we were just 

bombarded in our constituency office with calls as to what to 

do, how to do it, where to get it done, and people just really 

responded favourably to it. And what it did, is it gave people an 

opportunity to work. That, I believe, outstrips the kinds of 

things that we were anticipating that it would do. It gave people 

an  

opportunity to work. The home repair at $10,000 at 6 per cent, I 

think, is also a very important thing. 

 

I want to just compliment the government on its moving the 

head office to Swift Current of the Ag Credit Corporation. 

Spreading some of the tax dollars around the province, I 

believe, is an extremely important thing. . . moving Sask Water 

to Moose Jaw, moving the crop insurance to Melville — I 

believe that is very important. 

 

I want to touch on one little detail yet, and that is the highways 

. . . (inaudible interjection). . .I will. And I have, in the four 

years that I was a member of this Legislative Assembly, had 

$30 million come into my constituency, and the four years 

previous to that you gentlemen on the other side of the House 

only gave that representative from your government $13 

million. And I think that, number one, that demonstrates not 

only what you thought of the member, but it also demonstrates 

what you thought of the area. And I believe — I firmly believe 

— that the kinds of things that were done by this government 

for that area are an example of the things that can continue to 

happen there. 

 

I could go on and on about the kinds of things this government 

is committed to do, is planning to do, and is comfortable in 

doing. But, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t the time, and we are about to 

cease, so I would like to ask you to give leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 

 


