


















































June 9, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 9, 1986 
 
 

1787 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 36 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
has there been a change recently in the providing of the telephone 
deposit for people who are on Saskatchewan assistance plan? That 
used to be covered. Is it no longer covered, and if not, can you tell 
me when that was changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There hasn't been a change, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So in other words, you're still providing 
funding, specifically for telephone deposits, when necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I am informed that we have never done that, 
unless it's an item relating to some kind of medical consideration. 
So there has been no change in policy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I assume that would mean 
that people who are beneficiaries would then have to find out of 
their food allowance or their rental allowance or something. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It comes out of the overall dollar allotments 
which they receive, and of course part of that is the $60 household 
allotment. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I raise that matter for a 
very specific reasons, because I'm sure we will both agree that 
every avenue of assistance that's available to assist people in 
finding employment should be provided. And it seems to me that 
when someone goes out and applies for a job or several jobs, one 
of the ways which the employer will use in which to get back to 
the prospective employee would be to telephone the employee. 
And if there is no telephone — and there are indeed many homes 
in which there are no longer telephones — that therefore creates a 
great difficulty for them to be able to be notified if they are going 
to get a job. The employer will make one phone call, maybe two 
phone calls, and because he's got a list of 200 or 300 people who 
have applied, will not take any more time and therefore will go to 
somebody else. Wouldn't you consider it reasonable to provide in 
cases where necessary, funding for a telephone deposit so that 
people who are out there trying to get some work would not lose 
job possibilities because they don't have a telephone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well with regards to the deposit issue, I think 
it's fair to say that it would not be appropriate for us to be 
providing deposits in the case of people who, for one reason or 
another, have provided to be a bad risk in the past, and that has 
been the policy. There is no change, as I indicated. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Surely, Mr. Minister, everybody isn't a bad 
risk. I mean the way you're stating the answer to the question is as 
if everybody is a bad risk. A moment ago you told me you provide 
no funding for telephone deposit. I'm not sure exactly what the 
amount is, but I know with some confidence that the amount of 
assistance that's available . . . And no one would suggest it should 
be a great deal of money, but with the amount of assistance that's 
available for, say, a family of four people, they would be 
hard-pressed to find money for a telephone deposit — a very 
important necessity when one goes job seeking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the issue of the telephone hook-up 
might very well be considered as a special needs situation in the 
instance of individuals who may be employable, looking for work, 
and for one reason or another aren't able to do the kind of 
telephone communication, so if you're aware . . . I'm not aware of 
any particular instances where that kind of problem has been 
directed to the attention of my office. You may be, and I would 
certainly be interested in knowing of those particular cases and 
whether or not we couldn't handle them under some kind of a 
special needs arrangement for those particular individuals, if 
you're aware of a specific case. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it shouldn't be you or I who 
should solve that problem. It should be a policy in your branch of 
the department that handles SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan). 
Is there a policy in Saskatchewan assistance plan to provide that 
kind of a special need and has there been that policy in the last two 
or three years, or are we writing the policy here in this committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated, there has been no change 
in policy. The policy is the same as it has always been. If you are 
aware of a particular individual who could benefit from having a 
telephone, and that individual doesn't have one at present and it 
would assist in their particular circumstances to locate work, then 
we certainly would be willing to consider that under our special 
needs arrangements. And I think that that's what the special needs 
arrangement is there for. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are your social workers authorized to make 
that decision? And they should be. I mean, people shouldn't have 
to run to the minister or a member of the legislature every time 
there's a problem. In some cases, yes, we are kind of like 
ombudsmen. Are your social workers authorized by your policy to 
make that decision on the basis, as you call it, special need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well a worker is authorized to recommend it; 
a supervisor is authorized to approve it — if we're talking about a 
special needs situation. Now I'm not aware of any of those that 
have come up in the past. The policy, as a policy, is today as it has 
been, and will continue to be so. 
 
We don't provide across-the-board allowances for people to 
subscribe to the newspaper so that they can read the job offering 
sin the employment column. So there are certain things that just as 
normal course are not  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1788 
 
 

done. However, if you are aware of a specific case where a person 
needs to have that particular service, then we would be willing to 
consider it under special needs allowance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I will take you at your word 
that indeed the policy is such that an individual or a family, who is 
forced to go on their Saskatchewan assistance plan and needs to 
have a telephone installed, will be able to get a telephone deposit 
when necessary. I have your assurance of that; I will be contacting 
with individuals; I will be contacting your social workers and 
making that recommendation when those cases are brought to my 
attention. I hope that you're accurate in your description of the 
policy, Mr. Minister, because we certainly will hold you to your 
word. 
 
That is not the way I have understood the policy to be. That is 
certainly not the way the experience has been from people who 
have been found in those kind of circumstances. But, if that's what 
you say it is, I am prepared . . . I have no other choice but be 
prepared to accept your word for it, and then we will monitor it to 
see how it develops. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did not have a question, and unless you want to 
make a comment, I'll go to something else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, as always with regards to special needs 
matters, we consider each individual case on its merits, case by 
case by case. And so if you are aware of a specific case, then we 
will deal with it as a specific case, and we will be happy to do so. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, let me turn to some other 
matters related to what we talked this afternoon but more specific 
to concerns that others have been raising with you and the 
government. And as you know, there is a lot of concern that has 
been growing about the growing rate of poverty. There is more 
and more individuals and organizations who are speaking out on 
this issue. You've heard from several of them, I know; so have I. 
And these people who speak out, Mr. Minister, are ones who care. 
They don't speak out because they just simply want to be heard, or 
they have no other better things to do with their time. They see 
what's happening in the communities in which they live, and they 
want those people who they elect to speak out on those kinds of 
issues and take action when necessary. So their motivation is not 
political in most cases, or maybe in all cases, and it's certainly not 
one of self serving. It's a real concern about certain trends, that are 
happening in our society which show the spread between the very 
rich and the very poor widening ever so dramatically every year. 
 
And one such group, Mr. Minister, is the Saskatoon health 
services society which not too long ago spent a lot of time 
preparing a brief with statistical support to what they had to say. 
Another group that comes to mind is the Regina Centre Interfaith 
Association. And these are only two of many who have worked 
long and hard to get the attention of the government and 
politicians in general so that more priority can be given to the 
growing number of people on social assistance; the growing 
number of people who are working for low wages and the growing 
unemployment situation that faces them; and in turn how all of 
this affects  

the well-being of people in the province. 
 
The brief that was prepared by the Saskatoon Health Services 
Association, I thought was particularly well prepared and should 
cause anyone in public life and government to take notice. And I 
want to underline again, I don't think this is just, as some people 
would say, just another noisy group. I don't think there are many 
such groups, but you certainly could not describe this group of 
people as being that. 
 
And I just refer you, Mr. Minister, to the kind of people who have 
endorsed and the kind of organizations who endorsed the concerns 
expressed in that brief: the Saskatoon Community Health Unit; the 
Saskatchewan Health Coalition; the Inter City Support 
Committee; Saskatoon Presbytery, United Church; The Church in 
Society Committee; Saskatoon Presbytery, United Church; an 
organization called Crocus Co-Op; Project Ploughshares in 
Saskatoon; Oxfam; Working for Women; Equal Justice for All; 
and the list goes on. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that this brief has been presented to the 
government long enough ago so that you would have been able to 
respond to it. And I'm interested in knowing — have you been 
able to respond to this brief, and if so, what was the nature of your 
response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — But, Mr. Chairman, I don't recall formally 
having received this particular brief. Evidently this report was 
made public through a press conference or a press release of some 
kind. I do not recall a specific report coming to my office 
requesting a specific response. Certainly I would be willing to do 
so. And if you're aware of some particular miscommunication that 
has taken place somewhere along the line, I would be happy to 
respond. 
 
I certainly am willing to respond to the various aspects of the brief. 
It has been reviewed by department officials, and I would be 
happy to do so tonight, if you want to be in discussion on this 
particular matter. But in terms of a formal written response under 
my signature, going back to this group, I'm not aware that they 
requested any such formal response from me. I don't recall a 
particular letter coming to my office or to the Department of 
Social Services. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I received a letter dated April 
21st, and at the same time a letter was sent to the Premier, the 
Leader of the Liberal Party, the Leader of the Western Canada 
Concept Party, the Minister of Health, and the Minister of Social 
Services. You have indicated that your department is considering 
the brief and has analysed it. If your department has access to the 
brief I do not understand how it was that you did not seem to have 
it, Mr. Minister. Have your department therefore acknowledged 
the brief at least, that they have received it, and have they given 
any indication to this group with regard to the information which 
they have provided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, my apologies to the member 
opposite. We have, in fact, responded formally to that particular 
brief under my signature. I couldn't  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1789 
 

remember that. It likely will have happened some time during the 
month of May because we did receive the brief in the latter part of 
April, I believe, either in the department or directly through my 
office. 
 
So we have responded and if you would like to take some time 
this evening we certainly can go through the .  . I don't have a copy 
of it here but we can go through the points on the brief if you 
would like to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, thank you. I knew you had 
received the brief, unless it got lost in the mail. And I'm glad that 
you were able to double-check that. 
 
Some of the things that have been raised . . . One of the members 
over there wants to get into the debate. Do you think we should let 
him, or would you prefer to have him ask you in caucus? I'm sure 
that the member from Saskatoon will better be able to get answers 
from you in caucus when it's not under public scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noted with some interest some of the points that 
were raised in the brief. And one of the things that was said, and 
supported by documents . . . Mr. Chairman, I can't hardly hear 
myself speak because of the noise coming from the government 
side of the House. Can you bring the members to order? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Could we have some 
order please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate 
that. Mr. Minister, some of the things that the brief noted was that 
one in four people in Saskatchewan live in poverty and that the 
number of poor families in this province have increased by 17.3 
per cent from 1981 to 1984, and that those numbers have 
increased since 1984. 
 
And I think it is of some interest and should be of some concern 
that among that group of new people who are poor are actually 
people who in the past have had an advantage over some other 
people. And that's the educated — people who've got a reasonable 
education. 
 
Now we have among those who are in the category of living in 
poverty, people who have an education but are unable to find 
employment; who thought they were secure in their jobs and got 
their mortgages and were looking forward to raising their families 
and retiring under a pension which they thought they had figured 
out and all of a sudden it all came to an end. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, were you able to respond to some of those 
statistics and information provided? And without going through 
the whole letter — if you will send it to me at some time that 
would be quite adequate. But were you able to respond to some of 
these statistics in any way, or was that not part of your response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the issue of poverty in our 
society is one that I think we would all naturally be concerned 
about. I don't think that one would wish difficult circumstances 
upon any of our fellow citizens. And we would all want to do what 
we could, within the limits of reasonableness, to deal with the 
particular issue of poverty as it faces us. 
 

There are some things that government can do and we have 
attempted to do some of those things. For example, increasing the 
supplements to low-income working families under the family 
income plan, or increasing benefits to seniors under the 
Saskatchewan income plan. 
 
We do know that the single most common characteristic of people 
on social assistance is in fact low education and lack of job skills 
and job readiness and so on. So even though there will be those 
people that do have some level of education, and who for one 
reason or another find themselves in difficult financial 
circumstances, I do not believe that that is a good reason to say 
that we should not be focusing on providing education and 
training for people on social assistance. Because I think all of the 
research throughout North America has indicated that when 
governments do focus on that particular area to ameliorate the 
individual circumstances of people, that in fact it does have 
success. It may not have success in every case, but certainly that is 
an area in which efforts need to be directed. 
 
In terms of whether or not social assistance rates should be 
increased . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn't ask that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, but you did deal with the general issue of 
poverty. And there are those who argue that one way, of course, to 
alleviate the problems is in fact simply for the government to 
increase the size of the welfare cheque. Of course here in 
Saskatchewan, as I indicated earlier, we do have among the 
highest benefit levels for families. And we can spend more time 
on that if you would like to. 
 
There are a number of other things that the federal government is 
looking at in terms of our income security programs in Canada, 
and our unemployment insurance programs. They are, of course, 
under review, and appropriately so. It has been some time since 
those foundational social security type programs have been put 
under the microscope and have been appropriately reviewed. I 
think that's something which governments certainly do need to do 
from time to time, and I think what the federal government has 
attempted to do is appropriate. 
 
It's one of the things that we undertook to do with the welfare 
system when we took over government a few years back. And 
while it's unfortunate that there are those individuals who do find 
themselves in difficult financial circumstances from time to time, I 
think that we are attempting at least to move in the right direction 
as government. Certainly there will be problems. And I would be 
the first one to publicly say that certainly no government has all of 
the right solutions or would be able to consider all of the 
alternatives. 
 
I certainly am interested in hearing from other individuals — and I 
don't particularly care where they come from or what their 
political stripe is — as to how we can provide a better society here 
in Saskatchewan and what government can do to help make that 
happen. I realize government can't do anything, and I suppose I'm  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1790 
 
 

somewhat less of the persuasion that the member opposite is, that 
government can in fact do a lot of things. There are some things 
government can do; there simply are some things that government 
cannot do; and we need to find the reasonable balance. And that 
certainly is what we're striving for. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, when I refer to the poor, I 
don't only speak of people who are on SAP, and neither do the 
people who prepared this brief. There are many, many people and 
many, many families who are living below the poverty level who 
are not on Saskatchewan assistance or Canada assistance or 
whatever. They are poor because they have inadequate incomes. 
 
And you made some reference to the federal government 
reviewing some of its programs and policies. I'm glad to hear that. 
I hope that in the review the federal government will reconsider 
some of the things that they have brought about in the last two 
budgets, which had really a disincentive to people. 
 
In 1985 and 1986, what the federal government has done through 
its budget is taken a family with two children and a single income 
of $10,850 annually and that family will lose $905 in increased 
taxation. A family, same family with income of $21,7000, which 
is the poverty line, they will lose $2,334 in increased taxation. And 
a family at $40,000 is going to pay $4,644 in increased taxation 
over five years. But listen to this, Mr. Minister. The family of the 
same size, with an income of $50,000 will only lose $2,933; and if 
it has an income of 80,000, it will only lose $1,002; and lo and 
behold, if you have an income of $100,000, that kind of family of 
two children with an income of that amount will actually gain 
$516. 
 
And when I stand here and talk about the unfairness of the system 
. . . and I know you don't write federal budget legislation, but 
hopefully you will have some influence because they are your 
brethren of the same political stripe over there. Hopefully, you 
might have some influence in persuading Mr. Wilson and Mr. 
Mulroney and others that they are misdirected in their policies as 
they apply to the way they treat people on low incomes, as 
opposed to the way they treat people on very high incomes. 
 
Now when it comes to training and education, we should provide 
all the incentives and all the assistance that's possible and 
reasonable. I don't disagree with that. And that's why I wonder 
why Social Services requires that anyone taking a post-secondary 
education has to first of all be on SAP for a whole year before they 
can qualify for assistance. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the member raises a fair question, and it 
is a difficult issue to determine at what point in time the taxpayer, 
through the social assistance plan, should be paying for university 
education for individuals. And I think you would agree with me 
that there would be, I think, a considerable debate in society as to 
whether or not social assistance, whether or not welfare, in 
essence, should be used to provide a university education for 
people. 
 

We do of course have a student loan program available in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. And we of course recently reduced 
the interest rate for students so that they are now eligible, for 6 per 
cent student loan money to finance university education. 
 
The welfare program was not designed, not put in place, and is not 
maintained, to necessarily provide university training or university 
degrees for people. However, we do realize that there may be 
those instances where, for example, handicapped people may not 
be able to access any normal kind of employment for themselves, 
and that they may require some kind of specialized training at the 
post-secondary level at a university; and in that particular instance 
we do provide them, of course, with funding. 
 
The average single employable is on social assistance for four to 
six months and then they are off. And to simply say that if you're 
going to be on social assistance for one or two months that we're 
going to say that you're eligible to receive taxpayers' money to go 
to university, I'm not sure that the public would accept that as 
being a sound social policy. I would have some problems with it 
myself. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you went to university and I 
went to university and others go. We all indirectly receive 
taxpayers' money to go to university. You did not pay the full cost 
of your university education, and neither did I. We happen to be 
among those who are fortunate enough . . . I had to do it on my 
own with student loans, and I think that's fair. But we were among 
those fortunate who are able to take advantage of a university 
education. There are others who pay taxes, but whose children 
never do. 
 
I don't quite understand your logic. You will provide up to two 
years training in vocational training through SAP but you won't 
provide assistance to university. Now how can you justify putting 
people into two classes of some kind. If you happen to be 
unfortunate enough for a period of time to be on SAP, and I know 
that there are many of them that are short-term, then somehow 
you're not worthy of a university education, so therefore you have 
to go in vocational. And I'm not discrediting vocational training; 
that should be equally as important as a university education. But 
why do you differentiate between the two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated previously, it is a matter 
that has some complexities. It's not just a black and white issue. 
And I don't think that you were suggesting that, you know, a 
person comes on social assistance today and if they want to go to 
university tomorrow — and I know you weren't suggesting that. 
And that's to put it in fairly stark black and white terms. 
 
So somewhere there has to be a point in time where you say, no, 
the social assistance system is not designed to fund your education 
at the university level. On the other hand, there may be a point in 
time when it is appropriate on certain case-by-case basis to in fact 
fund a university education for an individual who is unemployable 
at present and will benefit from that. 
 
Where that particular line has been is a difficult issue. The policy 
has not changed for some time. It is being reviewed. It's one of the 
issues that we are reviewing in  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1791 
 

its entire context of where do we go with the education and 
training thrust in welfare reform. We have been operating now for 
about 18 months under this new emphasis in welfare reform, and I 
think that it's appropriate that this whole issue of what is the 
eligibility criteria for social assistance clients be looked at. It is 
something that is being reviewed. 
 
I don't know exactly where it's going to go. I'm giving you what 
the rationale is at present. And it may be fair to say that in fact, 
you know, the one-year cut-off is not appropriate. On the other 
hand, I don't think it would be appropriate to say that if you're on 
social assistance today that you're into university tomorrow at the 
taxpayers' expense entirely. So somewhere in there is a reasonable 
balance and I would be interested in hearing what the member 
opposite would suggest in terms of what could be an appropriate 
policy in that regard if he thinks the changes need to be made. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'd like to suggest: have a change in 
government. But we won't get into that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let me give you one example, and if there is a legitimate review 
taking place, I'm glad, because I really think that the present 
system is skewed against encouraging someone who happens to be 
on SAP to get an education, particularly a university education, 
but otherwise, too. 
 
Let me give you this example. There are situations where students 
who may be single and may have families, find themselves in the 
last two years of their term needing to go on SAP. They have not 
been provided the benefit. Some of them have actually not been 
able to finish writing their examinations because they were not 
able to financially get by in order to do it. They either have had to 
leave where they were going to university and go back home to 
live with their parents and therefore lose a whole year of study 
because they weren't able to complete it. 
 
I would recommend, Mr. Minister, that you begin by at least 
looking into those kinds of circumstances in order that you may 
bring what I would call some reason into the whole system, Mr. 
Minister. So I'll leave you with that suggestion. We talked a little 
earlier, if I may . . . I'll wait. You may want to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well normally the kinds of circumstances 
that you're talking about are such that the individual, through one 
means or another, would be able to carry on. There may have been 
those particular instances. I'm not aware of any particular case 
where someone did in fact end up having to drop out of university 
after two years or three years and go on social assistance; and 
social assistance wouldn't pay for their university costs, therefore 
they had to terminate their university program. And nevertheless, 
if that has happened, that in itself may be a sufficient reason to 
take into account the kind of review that we are doing at present. 
 
Once again, it's not a black and white issue, and there of course are 
other means of funding that individuals have and families do have 
— student loans, for example . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 
you're saying that they've already used up the total amount of 
money that they have  

available to them under the student loan system, there is a fair 
argument then, as to whether or not the taxpayer should in fact 
continue to give them any further assistance if they've already used 
that up. And those are the difficult questions that we deal with on 
this issue. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that 
someone who took a student loan and may have a family of one or 
two children, can get by a whole year of university on a student 
loan alone? that's what you said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. I'm saying that there are student loan 
funds available to people, and one would expect that that 
particular course of available funding would naturally be 
investigated. And if you are aware of a particular case, I would 
certainly like for you to provide me with the details. You don't 
have to do that now, but as I indicated, the whole matter of where 
we are going with the education and training thrust is being 
reviewed, and rightly so. This was a major new thrust under this 
government; it's appropriate that we take a look from time to time 
as to whether or not the policies are in fact working in the best 
interests of as many people as they should be working in. And we 
will continue to take a good, hard look at those particular kinds of 
policies to ensure that they're doing what they're designed to do 
without, I would add, abusing the taxpayers' dollar because we 
don't want to do that, naturally. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well no one wants to abuse the taxpayer's 
dollar, Mr. Minister. But I just want to correct you on your 
argument which you made it appear that anyone who got a student 
loan somehow is abusing the taxpayer's dollar. Because that's the 
conclusion one would have to draw from what you said — 
because you keep falling into that trap which you have built for 
yourself, that you have got to keep attacking people who happen 
to be in the unfortunate situation of having to get assistance, of 
whatever form it is. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, on May 1st I wrote you a letter and I asked you 
some questions about the Saskatchewan employment development 
program. And you did respond, and I appreciate that — on May 
28th. And you provided me with the following information, that in 
'84 - 85 and 1985 - 86, 3,861 jobs were funded. Can you break that 
down for each of those years? That's the total for the two fiscal 
years. Can your officials tell me how much was in each of those 
years? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Just before I do that, I would like to clarify 
for the member opposite — and I will assume that what he said he 
said in all sincerity — but I have benefited from student loan 
programs, and you have benefited from student loan programs, 
and I suspect a good number of people in the Assembly today 
have benefited from student loan programs. And to suggest that 
somehow I was saying that that was abuse of the taxpayers' dollar 
— I  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1792 
 
 

wouldn't have thought that an educated individual like you would 
have reached that conclusion based on the remarks that I said, and 
I will assume that you didn't. I hope that was the case. I'm a very 
strong proponent of student loan funding. Indeed the moneys 
available to single parents and to married individuals today, in 
fact, has doubled through the bursary scheme this past year. So we 
believe very, very strongly that that is a very appropriate means to 
provide people with funds to secure much needed education. 
 
Now I will get the statistics for the member opposite to respond to 
his specific question on SEDP (Saskatchewan employment 
development program). In '84 - 85, SEDP was 2,707 people; and 
in '85 - 86, 2,130 individuals — 2,130. And if you just wait a 
moment, I want to clarify another figure here. 
 
I'm sorry. I should be giving you the job figure instead of the 
people, because some leave that particular position and it's filled 
by another individual for a period of time. So I was giving you the 
people as opposed to the jobs positions: 2,160 in '84 - 85; 1,701 in 
'85 - 86. But that 1,701 figure does not include the targeted 
positions under winter works which went to social assistance 
clients in '85 - 86. And then in '86 - 87, we expect around 2,400 
jobs in '86 - 87 under that particular program. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's why I wanted the breakdown, Mr. 
Minister. it appears that in 1984 - 85 you started with 2,160 and in 
1985 - 86 you went down to 1,701; and you talk about some 
targeted winter works jobs, but I don't really know what that's got 
to do with this program. So, even when you add them I suspect 
your emphasis on the program, in spite of your boasting about it, 
has seemed to have reduced itself. 
 
In line with the same argument, Mr. Minister, I asked you in 
question period several weeks ago, with regard to the negotiations 
between Ottawa and the provincial governments, to target 30 per 
cent of the training in and employment spaces under the federal 
government's major job creation program for social assistance 
recipients — and negotiations had broken off. They were 
supposed to have concluded by April the 1st. Already we could 
have some of that in place. Can you give us a further report? Have 
the differences between you and the federal government now been 
resolved so that people can start getting benefit from this 
federal-provincial program, or are you still finding yourself in the 
situation of locked horns with the minister in Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, we're not in a locked horns position with 
anybody. We're in the final stages of dealing with details. I 
understand that officials have reached, in negotiations, targeted 
figures where we will be able to put social assistance clients into 
the CJS (Canadian jobs strategy) job strategy here in 
Saskatchewan, and I might add that I'm very encouraged by that 
because it was this provincial government, the first provincial 
government in Canada to push the issue of welfare reform at the 
national level, in terms of getting people off of social assistance 
and into training and education and jobs, and to encourage the 
federal government to make it possible for clients right throughout 
Canada, and certainly here in Saskatchewan  

from our perspective, to take advantage in a much larger scale of 
the federal job creation dollars than previously they had been able 
to. And, I'm very pleased that we have been able to accomplish 
that and I think a good deal of a commendation needs to go to the 
officials in Social Services who work very hard to bring the 
negotiations to the stage that they are presently at, almost 
finalized. 
 
I would add, as it relates to the SEDP program, that as I indicated 
just moments ago, we're looking at 2,400 jobs this year. There was 
2,001 in the first year of the program, and in the middle year we 
had 1,701 plus targeted jobs under the winter works program. So 
we're maintaining a fairly steady, even keel with a slight increase 
this year in anticipated SEDP jobs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I asked you this question on 
this program some two months ago, and at that time I read from a 
document which is an Ottawa document, in which it was stated 
that, and the reason why the negotiations had broken off. The 
document said, with reference to your government, and I quote 
from the document. The provincial government: 
 

has a major disincentive in place which requires social 
assistance benefits to be decreased by the amount of any 
additional income received, including adult training 
allowances. 

 
This too is listed as one of the stumbling blocks in the 
federal-provincial negotiations. 

 
Mr. Minister, have you been able to resolve that disagreement that 
you've had with the federal government on this particular issue? 
You say your officials are close to concluding an agreement, albeit 
two months late. Have you been able to resolve this concern of the 
federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It never really was an issue of substance at 
all. When we indicated to the federal government exactly what we 
were interested in doing here in Saskatchewan, the issue 
disappeared. And it really never was an issue which in any way 
thwarted negotiations at all. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can I . . . Just to confirm 
something which we talked a few moments ago — did you 
indicate you would send me a copy of the letter you sent to the 
Saskatoon group in response to the brief that I spoke about? I don't 
need it right now but will you give that to me so that I can know 
what your responses were rather than getting into it all here 
tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Sure. I'd be happy to give you a copy of the 
letter. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, can you tell me 
the number of social workers you have employed who work under 
the Saskatchewan assistance plan in 1986, and whether there is 
more there now than there were, say, four years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well back in 1980 - 81 or '81 - 82, whichever 
year you want, there was an average of 141 workers, permanent 
and temporary, and we estimate  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1793 
 

'86 - 87 to be 170, permanent and temporary, average number of 
workers. So there has been an increase. I don't have the percentage 
figure here but there has been an increase in the number of people 
working in that particular area of the department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many permanent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don't have that figure here but we can 
give it to you. I have no problem doing that. We don't have that 
particular figure here directly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I guess I shall have to wait for it. I find that 
rather unusual. That is a very important question that would be 
asked and the reason I would ask it, obviously, is because the 
number of people who are dependent on welfare has increased 
dramatically. And in order for social workers to be able to do an 
adequate job it's important to know how many social workers are 
on staff. Surely your officials must know how many social 
workers they have hired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the reason why it's difficult to give you 
that particular figure, and to do so with any accuracy right tonight, 
is that we would have to find out from the regional offices exactly 
what their situation is because they have a certain pool of funds 
that they can use to access, to hire staff, depending upon whether 
the case-load goes up or down. So we will provide you with that 
information if you want it. You haven't told me you want it. If you 
nod your head or say yes — whatever — we'll get you that 
information as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, let's get serious about 
this. I want it, and I have a right to expect that I'd have been able to 
get it today. Your argument that somehow you have to consult 
your regions is a bunch of nonsense, and you know it. And your 
department officials, your senior officials, know how many staff 
are employed. The reason you don't want to give that figure, Mr. 
Minister, is because you know the number of social workers as a 
proportion to the number of people who are recipients is a 
disgrace. 
 
The case-loads of those social workers have increased to the point 
where they no longer can provide the counselling services which 
are so important to meet all those objectives which you talk about. 
Those case-loads have increased so dramatically that they no 
longer have time to sit down with a client, talk about their 
problems, and try to help them out of the situation which they're 
in. 
 
Since you don't want to answer the question about how many 
social workers you've got employed, because you know that it's 
less than what it was four years ago, Mr. Minister, I'll ask you this 
question: can your officials instruct you, and therefore can you tell 
me what the average case-load of a social worker is in your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, I don't want the member to get 
distraught over there as the night wears on, so I will try and 
maintain it on a low level here, even keel. 
 
The average number of workers, permanent and temporary, as I 
indicated, was 140 and has increased to  

170. The average cases per worker in 1981 - 82, I believe was 152, 
and then it rose to a high of 185 a few years back, and is now 
down to 176 per worker — average cases per worker. And there 
will be variance there as well. We understand that. 
 
And that compares favourably, for example, with Alberta, where 
their average number of cases per worker is 175. Ours is at 176. In 
British Columbia, theirs is 315 per worker. Now of course we 
don't want to compare ourselves all that much to British 
Columbia. But you can see there the extreme 315 per worker. 
We're 176, comparable to Alberta at 175. The average number of 
cases per worker has come down from a high of 185 to 176 today. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Won't you agree, Mr. Minister, and I'm sure 
that your officials can help you, that there are some social workers 
who have a case-load of 250 or more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, there are some case-loads that may be 
that high and even higher because they're called administrative 
type cases, and they would be appropriate in those particular 
circumstances. 
 
There are some duties that have been in fact removed from the 
day-to-day responsibilities of the Saskatchewan assistance plan 
worker and have been given over to the verification unit, which in 
fact we have staffed up somewhat more so than previously. So 
whereas the case-load may have increased somewhat, there are 
certain duties that are not now being asked to be performed by 
those particular individuals, which previously they were asked to 
do. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will you undertake to have 
your officials provide me either directly or through you, as of 
today — we'll take a specific date, so that we can have a specific 
time to work with — as of today, the number of social workers 
that work under the Saskatchewan assistance plan that you have in 
your department today, both permanent and temporary. Since you 
do not have that, will you undertake to provide it for me? As well 
as the total number of SAP recipients — and I don't mean 
case-load; I mean those who are children, spouses, and so on — as 
of today. so that when I receive the information., I can make a 
comparison as to the kind of case-loads you have. Can you 
provide that for me by letter or whatever, in the next day or so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, we will provide you with that 
information. But we will do so in the context of a fair comparison 
to what it may have been previously — for example, those people 
that are in the verification unit today, that are doing certain things 
that presently social workers don't have to do, that previously they 
may have done. 
 
As well, we have the assessment and placement unit which has, I 
believe, something in the order of 20-plus full-time people 
working there that are working directly with social assistance 
clients. And previously that kind of assessment and placement unit 
was not there that is  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1794 
 
 

providing direct, specialized, individualized counselling to clients. 
 
So we will provide all of the information that pertains to the 
number of individuals who in one way or another are working 
with social assistance clients. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would appreciate that. But you will also 
give me the number of social workers? Okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will turn to another time. Can you report to the 
committee the number of food banks that now exist in 
Saskatchewan; and do you in any way provide financial assistance 
to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe there is one in Saskatoon and one in 
Regina and one in prince Albert. There may be another one that 
was, I understand, talked about; whether or not it's come into 
being, I'm not sure. 
 
We don't provide direct assistance to food banks in terms of 
government funding directly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I have information that there is one in 
Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina. And I thought there was 
also one in Moose Jaw. So if there is, and I think there is, there 
would now be four food bank operations in the province, and that 
in itself tells us something about what's been happening. 
 
There were no food banks prior to 1983. When the food bank in 
Regina opened in May of 1983, in its first eight months of 
operation, there were 10,666 people who were served; for the first 
eight months of 1984, there were 24,770 people who were served. 
In January of '84, 2,617 people were served by the Saskatoon food 
bank; in January of 1986, 3,867 people were served, and that 
number keeps growing, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think food banks are a reflection of some of the difficulties that 
we see faced in Saskatchewan in recent years. That's the first time 
we've had food banks since before I was born. And I think that 
you would not deny that there is a problem here, and it's 
unfortunate. And yet, in spite of that, Mr. Minister, when people 
ask the department and ask your government to provide some 
assistance to these people, they are denied. 
 
For example, the Regina Centre Interfaith Association wrote you 
some time ago to request some assistance in providing counselling 
services to people who they refer to the food bank. Were you able 
to respond to this group in a positive way to this request, which 
may have assisted these people through counselling and help 
direct them into some other kinds of aids or some other 
occupations or what no? Were you able to respond to the Regina 
Centre Interfaith Association in a positive way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the provincial 
government funds a variety of counselling services in one form or 
another in this city and in other cities of the province. And of 
course there are counselling services available through the 
Department of Social Services as well, and then there are of course 
private counselling services that may be available, for example, 
through churches in the city. So there's a fairly broad spectrum of  

counselling services available. 
 
And if the member is suggesting that we need to see more 
counselling services, and that tax dollars should be spent that way, 
then I would be interested in hearing his particular 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, the problem with your 
response — and I guess you responded in like fashion to the 
Regina interfaith association — is that all of the agencies which 
you refer to are already overburdened to the point where they can't 
handle the clients that they've got, and I'll give you an example. 
The Family Service Bureau has had its case-load increased by 30 
per cent in the last year alone. It has not had additional funding to 
increase staff to handle this, but a case-load which has increased 
30 per cent in the last year. We've already established, because of 
the heavy case-loads of social workers, that they don't have the 
time to counsel their clients. 
 
And so my recommendation to you, Mr. Minister, is that when a 
group like the Regina Centre Interfaith Association makes a 
request to your department, that that is a request that's worth and 
has some merit. And I would hope that you would reconsider your 
denial of assistance. It would not be a great deal of money, but I 
submit to you, probably a better spent dollar than many other 
things that governments spend money on. 
 
Here is a group that has a lot of contact with people who are in 
need. They're there on the street working with them or in their 
homes working with them. What better group might be able to 
provide this kind of counselling — because they refer people to 
food bank every day — than this kind of an organization? 
 
I simply would hope that you might reconsider their request and 
provide them with that small amount of money that would assist 
them in at least a part-time counselling service, so that they could 
be of assistance to these people who they speak about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose one could for 
ever be positively responding to requests for funding from a 
variety of organizations. In fact, I suspect that the most common 
activity that I find myself involved in as Minister of Social 
Services is to consider requests for funding that come from a 
variety of organizations around the province. 
 
And the time comes when one simply has to say: here's what the 
priorities are going to be in the Department of Social Services; 
here is where the money is going to be spent; this year we will 
fund this new organization, which means we can't fund this 
organization this year; and next year we may fund this new 
organization. And the reality is that one simply doesn't have 
enough money in government to respond to all of the 
organizations who would like to have money from government. 
I'm sure that was the case when your government was in power, 
and it will be the case for ever, I suspect. 
 
I do think the member should be aware that the Family Service 
Bureau of Regina has received . . . or this year will received a 13.1 
per cent increase in overall dollars from the  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1795 
 

taxpayer; and the Catholic Family Service Society of Regina will 
receive a 12.7 increase. Now that's not 3 per cent, 4 per cent 
inflation-related; that's a significant increase. Ten point five per 
cent, Saskatoon Family Service Bureau; 11.1 per cent, Catholic 
Family Services; 11.8, Minto; for a total family service bureau 
increase around the province of 11.8 per cent, which is a fairly 
reasonable or significant increase, I would think. 
 
It may very well be that the particular organization that you made 
reference to was turned down for funding this year. And certainly I 
encourage any organization, if for one reason or another they have 
not been successful in receiving funds, to naturally reapply in the 
next budget year. And we will take a look at any organization, any 
request, seriously, and naturally they will have to be priorized as 
you get into the budget process. But if this particular organization 
wants to submit another budget request this particular year, then 
we would look at it as seriously as we would look at any new 
organization which is requesting government funding. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask a couple of 
questions with respect to day care. First of all, some factual 
questions, and then I have a couple of comments. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give us the number of 
additional day-care places approved and the number of places 
which were either not used or lost or closed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Since when? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Since March 31, 1985. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I understand it, last year the centre in La 
Loche closed but was replaced by a family day home operation, 
and the Smiles & Chuckles centre closed. It was simply not a 
viable operation as I understand it. So those would be the ones that 
closed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many spaces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — How many centres? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Spaces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Spaces. The centre in La Loche was licensed 
for 20 children but there were only five that were in attendance 
there. And as a consequence the centre closed and a family day 
home commenced operation in its place. And in Saskatoon .  . 
pardon me, in P.A., Smiles & Chuckles, I understand was licensed 
for 28, but the number of children had been progressively going 
down over a period of time, and as a consequence the centre 
closed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Well, I must say, Mr. Minister, you very 
effectively cured me of asking anything in the nature of a detailed 
question. I asked what I thought was a fairly short question. The 
answer took nine minutes. At this rate of going, neither you or I 
may live long enough to see the end of these Social Services 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me then try a general comment on you,  

and perhaps you can respond to that without a nine-minute delay. 
My impression, Mr. Minister, has been that the state of day care in 
this province is not very healthy. Visiting day-care centres, as I do 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there's the member from 
Moosomin, no doubt the acknowledged expert on day care, no 
doubt knows about all there is to know. 
 
Mr. Minister, the overall impression one gets visiting day cares is 
that the system is starved for money. The equipment is woefully 
inadequate. Many of the day cares I was in did not have good 
equipment for the kids to play with. Some cases it consisted of a 
few stuffed toys and a television. I don't regard that as an adequate 
stimulus for the intellectual development of children, and that's 
what toys should do — good toys should stimulate the child. I 
don't regard television or stuffed toys very good. 
 
Mr. Minister, the pay to the workers ought to make us 
embarrassed. As one member making a comment to the national 
committee on day care stated, the average paid to day-care 
workers is half that paid to zoo keepers. So we pay those who are 
paid to look after animals twice as much as we pay those who are 
paid to look after children. That strikes me as something of a 
misplace of our priorities. 
 
Mr. Minister, the equipment is inadequate. The system is not 
available for many children, particularly infant day care. It's a 
serious problem. Single parent families which have infants have 
great difficulty in finding day care. They usually can't. They are 
usually left with some private individual which may or may not be 
adequate, but there's no way of the mother knowing. And they are 
very hard to find. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it strikes me that what the day-care system needs 
is not a lot of briefs to a national committee. What the day-care 
needs is more money. The minister might say, how are we going 
to accomplish that? Well, I would invite the minister to check the 
report on day care which was given to the department in late 1981. 
It recommended a system of maintenance grants, a system of 
increased subsidies to the parents. In the day-care boards that I met 
with, I took a copy of that report with me and inevitably the 
members of the board, whom I talked with, indicated that was 
precisely what the system needs. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this government ever has any intention 
of doing anything with day care. You came into office with the 
report in place, commissioned by the department which, as I said, 
I have found attains universal acclaim when you discuss it with the 
directors and the staff at a day-care unit. You commissioned your 
own report by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. All of this 
has resulted, I think, in virtually no action being taken. We still 
have day cares which are inadequate in terms of quality, 
inadequate in terms of funds, and inadequate in terms of spaces. 
Some of them, Mr. Minister, I think are just not what they might 
be. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, is this government ever going to get 
around to doing anything with day care, or are you going to 
continue to let the existing system — which everyone including 
yourself, I gather, agrees to be  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1796 
 
 

inadequate — continue indefinitely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to 
respond to the concerns pertaining to day care. The member 
opposite casts some aspersions on the member from Moosomin 
concerning his knowledge of day care. I do suspect, having heard 
what the member just said, that the member from Moosomin 
knows as much about day care as the member from Regina Centre 
does. 
 
As it relates to some of the initiatives that this particular 
government has taken, I certainly can talk about those 
momentarily. But I do want to say that I think it is important that 
organizations do, in fact, present briefs to the federal government 
concerning the whole issue of child care and day care. And you 
seem to dismiss that whole process and say all they need is more 
money; forget about making recommendations to the federal 
government. You don't seem to recognize that in fact the federal 
government and all three political parties at the federal level, 
including your particular party, are very concerned about what the 
federal government at the federal level could be doing with 
regards to day care. And if you were on top of the day-carte issue 
then you yourself might have made a brief to that commission 
when it came through. 
 
Our particular provincial government did present a brief and it was 
most interesting that the commissioners on that particular task 
force indicated that the provincial Progressive Conservative 
Government of Saskatchewan was the only provincial government 
that to date had presented a brief to the federal government, which 
is indicative of our serious concern about child care in our country 
and in our province. And we did have some very significant 
specific recommendations that the federal government could in 
fact act on, which would in fact inject new money into the system. 
So contrary to your position, which is simply to go running around 
the countryside crying, more funds, more funds, our position is to 
say, here's where we think money could go; here's where it could 
come from; here is how it could be spent. 
 
Now I'm sure that if you think about it, you might be able to come 
up with some specific recommendations in that regard. 
Unfortunately you have not done so yet. And I was disappointed 
that the NDP party at those particular task force hearings did not 
have any specific, direct, exact recommendations about where the 
money should go to, where it could come from, what kind of 
changes could be made. Yes, there were important comments 
made about accessibility and affordability and those kinds of 
motherhood things. But nothing specific coming from the NDP 
party. And I was most disappointed in that regard. 
 
Now as it relates to the funds that day-care centres need, I can only 
state that under the former administration no operating grants 
whatsoever were provided to day-care centres. None. Zero. 
 
Now, I'm not so sure why that was. It may have been that you 
were more enamoured with potash mines than you were with the 
day-care needs of single mothers. That may have been the case. It 
may have been the case that you were more enamoured with 
taking my tax dollar and your tax dollar and spending it buying 
land for a socialist land  

bank scheme than you were enamoured with providing day-care 
facilities and assistance to families here in Regina. That may have 
been the case. 
 
Now you have suddenly woke up the day-care issue, and you have 
said there should be more money put into day care. Well in fact 
this time, for the first time ever, that direct operating grants will be 
provided to day-care centres in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
it's happening under a Progressive Conservative government — 
not under a New Democratic Party government — a Progressive 
Conservative government. And that particular operating grant . . . 
I'm sure that we can argue about what the size of it should be. And 
naturally there will be those people who will always say it should 
have been more than it was. But the fact that day-care centres are 
going to be receiving anywhere in the order of 4,000, 5,000, 6,000, 
perhaps in some instances even as much as 7 or $8,000 direct 
operating grant money which they previously did not have, which 
they can use for any purpose that they want to — to enhance 
salaries, for example, of people who work in the day care centres 
— I think that's a very forward-looking step that has been taken. 
 
And I would read into the record some information, this letter 
coming from the Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the Status of 
Women: 
 

On behalf of the Saskatchewan Advisory council on the 
Status of Women, I wish to congratulate you and the 
government on the proposed increase in day care spending. 
We are pleased the government recognizes that parents may 
need outside help and support in childrearing. Providing 
funding directly to the child (care) centres and homes will 
give a necessary cash infusion without encouraging fee 
increases. 

 
And then we have: 
 

The Board of Directors (from) the Idylwyld Child Care 
Co-operative (that) would like to express our thanks for the 
consideration given to daycares in the recent budget. We 
believe that the direct monthly operating grant is a positive 
step in the evolution of quality daycare in the Province. 

 
And here is a letter from the Kids' Place Child Care Co-operative 
in Saskatoon: 
 

Kids' Place Child Care Co-operative is very grateful for the 
operating grant of $20.00 monthly per licensed space. Our 
centre will benefit greatly from these funds which will be 
paid directly to us. This will enrich our program to provide 
higher quality programming and will improve the quality of 
care in our centre. We are very appreciative that you 
recognize child care to be an important issue in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you for your ongoing support. (Signed 
by the president of Kid's Place Child Care Co-operative.) 

 
So I think that we have taken some significant initiatives, not only 
in terms of providing direct operating grants to day-care centres, 
but also to provide child-care help for  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1797 
 

people that are involved in our SSDP (Saskatchewan skills 
development program) training programs. 
 
(2030) 
 
There's the MacKenzie Infant Care Centre which we have been 
involved in funding here. And we have the innovative Market 
Square approach to day care, where the business community in 
down-town Regina has decided to get involved in the provision of 
day-care services. 
 
We believe that those are the kinds of things that should be done. 
Some of them should have been done some time ago under your 
administration, but I understand that was four or five years ago 
and you had different priorities at that time. 
 
Our priorities are not to nationalize potash mines and uranium 
mines and buy land for a government-owned land bank scheme. 
One of our priorities is to work in the day-care field, and we have 
chosen to substantially infuse new dollars through a direct 
operating grant to day-care centres here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that will be very well received, as 
indicated by the letters that I have just read to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Mr. Minister, the amount of money has 
been restructured. I will wait to see if any more is spent. I know 
the minister in the past has budgeted more money for day care 
than you've actually spent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would not claim that day care was the single most 
significant achievement of the former government. I think there 
were problems then: I will readily admit that. But, Mr. Minister, 
you have done nothing to solve those problems, and they are 
worse now than they were then. 
 
I know the minister reams off these statistics. But I'll tell you that I 
have gone through this with you before. You always claim to be 
spending a lot more money, and each year when I go back and talk 
to the day-care people in my riding — and there's quite a few of 
the centres in my riding — the problems got worse. So I don't trust 
the figures in this book, and I don't think any of the people 
involved in day care, care what you put in the estimates. The fact 
is the situation has got worse each year that you have been in 
office. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did not go to the national committee on day care 
for good reason. The last thing this problem needs in one more 
study. It has been studied to death by a series of Conservative 
governments which wish to avoid taking any responsibility, either 
for doing anything or for their own inaction. The last thing this 
problem needs is another study by a federal committee. We need 
some action. We're not getting it, Mr. Minister. But if you'll call an 
election, I think you'll find that there will be a new administration 
to come into office, which will do something significant for day 
care. I have really very little hope that this government is going to 
do anything but talk about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member suggests 
that nothing significant has been done in day  

care. 
 
Well since 1982, we have increased the number of subsidized 
day-care spaces in the order of 1,710. That's a 44 per cent increase 
in the number of subsidized day-care spaces. Now I'm sure that 
some would say that's not enough. But surely the member opposite 
can, in all fairness, stand to his feet and say, yes, I acknowledge 
that there was a 44 per cent increase in subsidized day-care spaces 
since 1982. Now that's fairly significant. 
 
Now I've just indicated that there's going to be a direct operating 
grant going to day-care spaces this year in the order of $20 per 
child per month, which is going to inject in the order of anywhere 
from 4, 5, $6,000 of new money, unconditional, into day-care 
centres. Now that's significant. Surely you can stand in your place 
and say, yes, that's a new initiative and it recognizes the need in 
day care. And it has come under a Progressive Conservative 
government. And we applaud that. But you would choose to rather 
say, nothing has happened. Well the facts suggest otherwise. 
 
And thirdly, you just admitted that the reason why you wouldn't 
go before a federal task force on day care is because you've got 
nothing to say — nothing to say except we need more money. 
Well one of the things that we suggested to the federal government 
was, in fact, that they cost-share the kinds of things that they 
presently are not cost-sharing in order that the provincial 
governments would have some additional freed-up money that 
they could put back into additional child-care services. 
 
Now that's a very significant recommendation. And I think the 
task force was very encouraged by that. And I certainly was 
encouraged by their particular response. I think that there will be 
some very significant recommendations that come out of the task 
force that the federal government will look at very carefully. And I 
think that we are going to see some initiatives coming out of the 
federal government concerning child care, when that process is 
concluded. In the meantime, we have decided that we can't wait 
around; that there are steps that have to be taken. And one of them 
was in fact to provide the direct operating grant to child-care 
centres which will be coming this year, and which I believe will be 
very well received. 
 
And if the member wants me to read to him again the letters that 
have come from people who happen to run the child-care centres, I 
would be happy to do that, but I don't think we need to do that. 
We've already covered that ground. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, just to remind you that in 
1981 the recommendation for an operating grant was about $120 a 
space; you're providing exactly $20 a space. Can I ask you, Mr. 
Minister: how much equipment grant do you provide to the 
average day care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The old equipment grant was $100 per space 
per year. And what we have done is we have rolled that into the 
operating grant which now is a separate unconditional grant of $20 
per space . . . pardon me, per month per space. So if you take the 
old grant, and  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1798 
 
 

I believe it works out to something like $8.50 or whatever, and 
then you add on to that the dollars that we are in fact putting in — 
new dollars into the particular system — as unconditional grant, 
we're talking about an overall $20 unconditional grant. If you're 
talking about new money per space, it's around the $12 figure per 
space. So in fact it comes out to somewhere in the order of . . . 
well as I indicated before, it's going to vary depending upon the 
number of licensed spaces that particular centre has. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm glad we re-established that 
because a moment ago you were talking about a lot less — 4,000, 
6,000, $7,000 of new money going to day cares as an operating 
grant when in fact it was not new money. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you have done again is played with the figures. 
You cancelled the equipment which could have amounted to 1 or 
$2,000. Now you're saying you're going to give in the form of 
operating grants, $4,000. You've got a net gain of $2,000 for day 
care which is not, I don't think, a very significant change. So let us 
be clear on that, Mr. Minister, that all of the funding you're 
providing under the operating grant is not new money. You've 
actually cancelled the program that existed, and you've rolled it 
into what you now call the maintenance grants. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you just a quick follow-up on something 
which my colleagues were asking. Back in 1984 - 85 you 
announced in estimates that you were going to provide 217 
additional spaces. Your annual report states that you provided only 
185 additional spaces — not near the target that you announced, 
Mr. Minister. That's why we are concerned when we ask these 
questions because it seems to me what you announced is not 
coming to fruition. 
 
I do not have the statistics for 1985 - 86. Can you tell me what the 
net increase in day-care spaces was in the year 1985 - 86? That's 
when you take into consideration those that were closed and those 
that may have been opened — was there a net increase in day-care 
spaces in 1985 - 86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There were 50 additional spaces added in 
'85 - 86. On the issue of the direct operating grant, for a centre that 
had 60 licensed spaces, we're talking about 8,400 additional, new 
dollars, over and above anything previous — new money. For a 
50-space centre, we're talking about 7,200 new dollars. That's a 
significant infusion of money. For a 40-space centre, we're talking 
about 6,000 additional, new dollars — brand-new, new money, 
going in to that particular centre. So that's very significant. 
 
Now you could say, well, it should be 10 times higher than that, or 
who knows what. And you're right; back in 1981, someone did 
recommend $120 a space. And I suppose you could have put that 
money there, but over the next two or three or four years, we 
wouldn't have been able to add any additional new day-care 
spaces, if that's where the money had gone. Our particular priority 
over that period of time as to increase spaces by 44 per cent — 
1,710 new spaces. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fifty last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — This particular year — 1,710 since  

1982. This particular year we are deciding to direct the new 
money into the operating grant side of the centres, plus there's 
going to be 100 new spaces this particular year. Now we could 
say, well you need to have more spaces. Okay. Well that's fine. 
And you could take the operating grant away from the centres and 
you could have put it into new spaces. And there's a trade-off 
there, that you have to decide, you know. 
 
Now you didn't provide any direct operating grant. And you can 
stand to your feet today and say, well you should do both; you 
should provide an operating grant of massive proportion and you 
should massively increase the number of spaces. But I don't know 
that that's a responsible position to take. 
 
We chose during the first number of years of our administration to 
increase spaces by 1,710 new spaces over that period of time. 
Now we have decided to take new dollars — rather than this 
particular year putting them significantly into new spaces, to take 
that particular money and to put it directly into operating grants for 
centres. Now you can disagree with that particular expenditure 
pattern. That's naturally your right, if you choose to do that. But I 
think the fact that we have significantly addressed spaces over a 
four- to five-year period of time, and now significantly adding 
new dollars to day-care centres, is well received. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the responsible thing to do 
would be to give some priority to the need for family support 
services to families who need day care, and the need to put a 
priority on the care of our children. You are not doing that in your 
government, Mr. Minister. 
 
You did not give me the full answer for 1985 - 1986, and I think I 
know why, but I'll give you another chance to come clean. You 
said that the number of spaces that were added in '85 - 86 were 50, 
but you didn't say how many spaces were lost or closed in that 
year. Will you give us that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I'm informed that the net increase was 71 
spaces — total, overall, subsidized spaces, net increase in that 
particular year. 
 
Now if you want to take a look at the four-year period of time, 
we're talking about a substantial increase, and I'm sure the member 
opposite doesn't want to take a look at the particular four-year 
period of time. But when you take a look at, for example, the 
number of family home spaces: in 1980 - 81 under your 
government, 613; under this particular government, 1,892. So a 
substantial increase — 613 compared to 1,892. Day-care centre 
spaces, 2,929 in '80 - 81 compared to 3,732. So overall a 
significant increase on the magnitude, as I indicated before, of 
1,710 new spaces. And this year a direct operating grant to 
day-care centres. I think you could argue that, you're not 
responding enough, as I'm sure oppositions always do, but you 
certainly cannot argue that we have not responded. In fact we have 
responded and we have responded in very substantial fashion. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I was ready to proceed  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1799 
 

to the next item but once again you give us contradictory figures. 
Your first answer was that you increased spaces by 50. Now we 
discuss it further, you say you increased spaces by 71. In 1984 - 85 
you said you were going to increase spaces by 217; you actually 
increased them by 185. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in order to be credible in this committee and in 
the view of the public, will you tell us which figures are the 
correct ones — the 50 increases or the 71 increases? Will you 
make up your mind or will you give us the correct . . . Will you 
listen to your officials, hear what they say, and then tell us what 
they say, rather than picking up your own figures are you hear 
your officials. Is it 50 or is it 71? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if the member has any familiarity with 
the day-care system, he knows that there are centres that may in 
fact close down from time to time, although that is infrequent. 
What is more frequent is that you have more day-care homes that 
are closing and others are reopening, and when you take the 
overall net figure, 71 is the net figure — the best of the two that I 
gave you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I have had occasions where I have 
taken you at your word, Mr. Minister. I'm not prepared to take you 
at your word because I don't believe you. I really don't and I don't 
think anybody else does either. I mean, you have displayed time 
and time again where you choose to use figures and you throw 
them out and then you try to change the figures. And in this case I 
don't believe that there was a net increase in day-care spaces in 
Saskatchewan in 1985 - 1986. And you have not helped in any 
way to change my view of that, and neither have you helped to 
change the view of anyone else. But since we can't establish that, 
let me ask you one specific question, and surely you will not take 
10 minutes to get the answer; you'll be able to tell us. 
 
You have had a request from the Child Care Centre Co-operative, 
which is located on College Avenue, for what I think is a very 
innovative and needed and good infant-care program. It was 
submitted to you in time for consideration for the present budget. 
Are you able to respond to that request in a positive way in this 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — In that particular centre that you're referring 
to, already there are 120 spaces — 60 and there's a dividing wall, 
and another 60. So in fact what we have is a very large centre, if 
you want to talk about day-care centres. Now you're talking about 
adding an additional number of spaces in that immediate area — 
in that immediate neighbourhood. Okay . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well that's very significant. For a large number of 
infants. Now we have indicated that we will not be proceeding 
with that and the proprietor of that particular centre understands 
that. 
 
I think the member needs to know that there are very significant 
medical and health concerns about infant day-care centres, and 
there are serious reservations about whether or not the best way to 
provide infant care is in large or what we would consider to be a 
normal day-care centre environment. And in fact the federal task 
force, when they came through, indicated that they had received 
submissions from the medical community  

which suggested that in fact that may not be the way to go to 
provide infant care. 
 
At present we do provide infant care in our family day homes. 
And I read off the statistics to the member opposite to indicate that 
we have seen an increase from 600 licensed spaces in '80 - 81 
under your administration in family day homes to about 1,800 — 
almost two times an increase — in family day homes which of 
course provides care for infants. Now that may be the best way to 
go, to continue to increase day homes to provide infant care as 
opposed to doing it in a centre. I'm sure you would agree with me 
we do not want to jeopardize the health, the medical condition, of 
any particular youngster because of the problems that may be 
associated with providing day care to a lot of infants in one 
particular day-care centre. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, just to correct you because 
you provided some misinformation. I must say, and probably 
through no fault of your own. But indeed, Mr. Minister, this is not 
a proposal in which this would be in the same facility that's there 
now, which is what you said. This day-care is a very successful 
operation; they do have money set aside for a capital program; 
they do have additional property that's located there on which they 
could provide this service. And quite frankly, although I agree 
with you that there have to be alternatives for day care, I don't 
think we want to put it all into one kind of form, and the in-home 
day-care operation, I think, have got to be one of the options. This 
proposal has a lot of merit. At least you could try it. You've got 
people who are qualified, you've got people who have a record of 
terrific success, and some effort could have been made to provide 
a beginning. Now, I don't have a question in that. I simply want to 
make that point. I would like you to think about it again. Okay? If 
you want to respond I'll let you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Rather than trying it, which you suggest at 
that particular centre, we in fact are trying infant care in terms of 
the pilot project at the Balfour tutorial program, and in fact there 
will be a registered nurse who will be on site to ensure that we 
have the appropriate kind of medical and health facilities for the 
particular youngsters that are going to be cared for there. So in fact 
we are in a sense trying a pilot project infant-care approach 
through Balfour tutorial. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I will discuss with this group 
at a time when it's convenient to them about whether they've 
agreed with your refusal o provide the funding, as you indicated 
they have. 
 
But let me go on to another subject. In order to expedite time, Mr. 
Minister, can you provide me with a list of the non-government 
organizations which your department is funding this year — and 
your staff can do that later — the amount of funding you are 
providing to each, and how much that is an increase for each one 
over the previous year. Will you undertake to provide that for me 
through your staff so that I can have access to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I only want to specifically refer 
to one because I think there is a  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1800 
 
 

particular problem. This is the Prince Albert Group Homes 
Society, which according to the funding you give them now, have 
staff which is being paid, compared to the hours that they work, at 
about $2.79 an hour. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what kind of 
an increase of funding you have provided to the Prince Albert 
Group Homes Society this year over last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Four per cent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Four per cent? I thought you finished just 
telling us . . . You must have used selective figures again. You 
talked about 13 per cent increases, 12 per cent increases. Here's an 
organization which is in the process of negotiating a contract with 
its employees, where if you apply the hours worked to the amount 
that they're getting paid, about $1,070 a month, works out to $2.79 
an hour, and you provide a 4 per cent increase. Now, Mr. Minister, 
how do you propose to solve this problem which this society faces 
with a 4 per cent increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we're talking about an organization that 
has a house parent model that it uses to deliver its services, which 
means that people live in for a period of time. It means that they 
sleep there for a period of time. Now if you want to include the 
time that they're sleeping when they are there and roll that into the 
amount of money that they receive per hour and say that they are 
receiving $2.79 an hour, you can do that. I don't think I will do 
that. We, of course, have an autonomous organization there. It has 
its own board. It negotiates with its own employees. We have 
provided a 4 per cent increase in funding to that particular 
organization. You want to compare that to the 11 per cent. In fact, 
the 11 per cent that we talked about earlier with regards to family 
service bureaus was for various kinds of services that were being 
provided, counselling services. So it's an altogether different kind 
of an approach. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I don't accept the view that 
you're doing an adequate job because I think a 4 per cent increase, 
you will know, is not adequate. 
 
Let me ask you another question on another subject. Are you in 
the process of centralizing some of your operations in the city of 
Regina? You have two offices — one on Albert Street North and I 
think one further south. Is your department centralizing some of 
those operations that provides family services and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we're looking at the possibility of 
providing family services out of one office and the income 
security services out of another office for better service and 
efficiency of operation. It's something that is being looked at. It's 
being considered. But whether or not it actually takes place is 
another matter altogether. It may not provide to be the most 
feasible thing to do. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you're telling me you have not made 
that decision. The budget bureau has not directed you to make that 
decision, and there is no specific time on which it's supposed to 
happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. The budget bureau did not direct us to do 
anything with regards to this particular matter. Nothing. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Finish the rest of the answer. You have not 
decided to centralize. I really raise this because the locations now 
serve predominantly the clients where they live, and if you 
centralize some of the services, you're going to move away even a 
further distance, these services, from the people who really don't 
have access through transportation means in many cases. You're 
going to move it away and make it much more difficult for them 
to get the service. 
 
So all I want to know is: have you made that decision? And if so, 
what is the time frame in which it's to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well in fact most of the income security 
clients are dealt with out of the north office. And that is in fact 
likely where an income security office would be if you were going 
to have one income security office. You may have a family 
services office in some other part of the city. But the reality is 
most of the family service workers, or a good number of them, in 
fact perform their activities out there in the city. It's not all done in 
this particular central office. 
 
So we're looking for the most effective way of meeting the needs 
of our clients and doing so in as efficient a way as we can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, I know that some 
people in difficulty actually go to the office and talk to people who 
are there. If you move it out of the north office, you're really 
reducing the access. And I think that's wrong. And I hope that you 
would reconsider that move. I don't think it's more efficient. You 
can't just measure things by the efficiency of the dollar; you have 
to sometimes measure about the service they provide. 
 
And in this case you're taking away access to very, very important 
services which one could define as prevention — family service 
which you have in the north office, which if you move to the south 
will be removed away from people who predominantly have . . . 
who take advantage of it. And so I think it's important that you 
take a second look at it. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple of quick items before we move on to the 
subvote by subvote. Can you describe what kind of process is used 
when a child is charged under the Young Offenders Act? What are 
the steps and the procedures, as briefly as you can? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The police investigate and the police lay 
charges. And we don't get involved, from the Social Services point 
of view, until we may be asked for a pre-disposition report by the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — These young offenders obviously will need 
legal assistance or legal advice. Do you have a list of lawyers that 
you have available, who you refer cases to, Mr. Minister? And if 
you have such a list, can you send it to me — probably not today 
because you won't have it. But will you undertake to send it to me, 
if you have such a list. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1801 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the member opposite, legal aid provides 
universal services to all young offenders. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Does legal aid have all of the lawyers how 
are employed by legal aid, who provide the services, or is there 
also another list of lawyers, of the private sector, that legal aid 
utilizes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we make the service available. Legal 
aid makes the service available. The family can of course engage 
their own lawyer if they wanted to. So they have an option. If that 
option is there for them in terms of their fiscal conditions, then 
they could do that. Otherwise legal aid is there, available for 
people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Just one question and it has to do with the 
rights of parents with respect to situations where they are accused 
of abusing children. I've had some experience in this in a 
professional sense as a lawyer, and of course it's attained some 
profile recently. 
 
Suffice it to say, Mr. Minister, there's been an outstanding problem 
for quite a while. I don't think that's denied by either side of the 
House. If the problem has attained an unusual profile recently, that 
may be in part due to the fact that your government has not acted 
on a problem which has been outstanding. The legislation is 
inadequate, and so, I believe, is the rights of parents to appeal 
decisions of the department. There's simply no real mechanism 
there to do that. They are in many ways at the mercy of the 
department. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if your department has any plans to 
resolve a problem which has been outstanding for many years and 
which I assume your government admits is still outstanding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, the member has raised an issue which is 
of considerable concern to me. It's one of the reasons why we have 
been undertaking the review of The Family Services Act. And it's 
not true what the member has said, in fact. We have instituted a 
process of consultation with various professional groups and have 
reached agreement on some new protocols. We have reached 
agreement on some new protocols concerning the whole issue of 
child abuse. 
 
I would simply inform the member that if we are aware of a 
particular case that may have some criminal matters attached to it 
— possible — then we automatically refer that tot he police and 
they take it from there. And if they are of the opinion that 
sufficient evidence exists to lay charges, they lay charges. 
 
And it goes through the normal court process, and Social Services 
has nothing to do with that; that's the court process instituted by 
the police, and it carries on. As it relates to a family services 
matter, of course, we have the family court judges here, and they 
will make a particular determination once evidence comes before 
them. 
 
Now I do believe that the Act is deficient in a number of respects 
and needs to be changed. We do need to provide, I believe, for 
example, for the provision for a show-cause hearing. We do need 
to, in the Act, make it possible for parents to have greater access to 
information  

that pertains to them. And those are some of the things that we 
want to do. 
 
There are delicate issues involved here and we want to make sure 
that we are both providing for the rights of the parent and at the 
same time ensuring that children are appropriately protected if in 
fact that is what needs to take place. To find that reasonable 
balance and to write it in legal terms in an Act is not an easy thing 
to do. And I recognize that there is some urgency to that. We want 
to accomplish that as expeditiously as possible. And I indicated 
earlier on today that we hope to be bringing amendments forward 
into the House in due course, as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, through your own admission, 
there's a lot of things you haven't done yet. But there's one thing 
you've done a great deal of, and that's polling. Polling. Polling 
with your favour polling research outfit called Tanka Research. In 
1984 - 1985, Public Accounts show you spent $12,000 to do a 
poll. Your department, believe it or not, paid for a poll by Tanka 
Research. My question is: did you spend any money in 
1985 - 1986 for polling, and who did it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don't have that information here. I can 
get it for you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we don't. I 
mean, I don't have all of the information in the Department of 
Social Services here. And I will get it for you and provide it for 
you. We can do that in public accounts. I can send the information 
to you by way of letter, and I'll be happy to do that. 
 
I suspect that it may have to do with issues pertaining to 
productivity and attitudes of the public concerning productivity in 
the public sector, because I was involved of course as cabinet 
minister responsible for the cabinet council on productivity. And 
so I would want to check and make sure that that is exactly the 
information, and that I'm providing you with the correct 
information. I have no problem giving it to you; I just want to 
make sure I'm providing the accurate information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that's an atrocious answer. 
You do have a problem giving it to us. You don't want to give it 
under public scrutiny; you want to give it through letter, which is 
fine with me. But I want to have it. 
 
But what you're doing . . . Don't tell me your officials don't have 
that information. Your officials do have that information. That's 
their job. And when you come to the estimates of this fiscal year, it 
is your responsibility and it is the responsibility of your officials to 
tell this committee the expenditures you made in the previous 
year, Mr. Minister. For you to say to this committee you don't 
have the information on how much you spent on polling in 
1985 - 1986 only tells us that you spent a considerable amount of 
money and you're not prepared to let the public know what you 
spent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, will you ask your officials again to give you 
the information on how much you spent on polling in 1985 - 1986. 
We know you spent $12,000 in 1984 - 1985. You obviously are 
now telling us you spent a considerable amount more. How much 
more did you spend? 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1802 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I want to say to the member opposite, the 
Department of Social Services is a large department with a budget 
of hundreds of millions of dollars. Now I don't know off the top of 
my head, and I don't suspect my officials have the information 
here either, how much money we spent on pencils in the 
Department of Social Services. But I could get that and I could 
provide it for you. 
 
I don't happen to know how much money I spend on postage 
sending letters regularly to the member from Regina Centre who is 
constantly requesting information from me. I don't happen to have 
that particular information here. 
 
There are hundreds of items on which thousands of dollars are 
spent that I don't happen to have at my fingertips, nor do my 
officials have at my fingertips here tonight. We can provide the 
specific detailed information for you. 
 
I indicated I suspect that that figure that you talked about, the 
$12,000 figure, has to do with polling information relating to the 
attitudes of the public concerning productivity in the public sector, 
whether it's municipal or provincial or federal, because I was 
involved with productivity issues as chairman responsible for the 
cabinet council on productivity. 
 
I want to make exactly sure that that is in fact the information that 
is correct and accurate when I give it to you. And I think that's fair 
and that's reasonable. Now if you want to chastise me for not 
having that information tonight, then you go right ahead and 
chastise me. I won't lose one wink of sleep over it; I want you to 
know that. 
 
There are literally thousands of things that take place in the 
Department of Social Services for which we can provide you with 
information, but it will take some time. And that's the reasonable 
approach to take. I've been very forthcoming in providing you 
with information. I will continue to be forthcoming. If you want to 
make some cheap political points by chastising me tonight 
because I don't happen to know how much a particular item costs, 
then you feel free to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, this has in many ways been 
an exercise in futility in that you have not consistently provided 
information. You've consistently refused to provide information. 
 
And here we are dealing with what is well-known to the House 
Leader and the members opposite, a sensitive issue. And a 
minister doing his job would have alerted his officials that he 
wants to be prepared to respond to that sensitive issue. You 
obviously didn't do that, or you did and now you don't want to 
provide the information so that we can question you further. 
 
I didn't ask you to provide further information, '84 - 85. All I 
asked, Mr. Minister, is how much you spent in '85 - 86. Since you 
refuse to answer that, I will ask you if you will undertake to do the 
following: will you provide me the total amount of money you 
spent in 1985 - 86 for polling in your department who did the 
polling, and what the  

polling was for? And if you will undertake to do that, we'll move 
on to the other subvotes and proceed with your estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I'm not sure which years you're now talking 
about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — '85 - 86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — In '85 - 86, to the best of my knowledge, 
Social Services has not done any polling. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn't think so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — You were asking me about '84 - 85, and that's 
exactly what I was responding to. You know, if you'd be a little 
clearer, then perhaps we could get along better with one another. 
 
To the best of my knowledge, there has been no polling done in 
'85 - 86. But I will find out and I will also provide you with that 
information by way of letter in the same way that I have 
undertaken to provide you with information regarding any polling 
done by Social Services in the calendar year or the fiscal year 
'84 - 85. And I'm sure that will satisfy the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now to the extent that progress is possible, 
we've made some progress. I was for three times asking you about 
1985 - 1986. If you would listen to the questions instead of . . . 
well whatever, you would have been able to answer that. Okay. 
 
You know what I've asked for, 1985 - 1986. Will you check with 
your officials, provide me the information, and will you provide 
me the similar information for 1984 - 85? It will be in Hansard. 
 
You have undertaken to do that, I assume. And if that is so we will 
move on to the next subvote, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One question, because I didn't ask it earlier, 
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, on day care, are you increasing the 
amount of subsidy levels and the income cut-off point in this 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, we have chosen to direct any new dollars 
this year to the operating grant, direct operating grant side of day 
care, as I indicated before. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Have you informed the day care groups 
what your subsidy level is going to be for this year; have you 
given to all of them the financial indications of what your funding 
is going to be? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we're continuing on with the regular 
subsidy levels. We have informed them of the operating grant . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well it's a  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1803 
 

brand-new program so we have written them a letter telling them 
about the brand-new program. We didn't inform them in '84 - 85 
what the subsidy level was. That's just an ongoing thing. So I don't 
know what the member is getting at. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Day care operations are confused. They 
don't know whether there's going to be an increase in the subsidy 
or whether it's not going to be because you have not let them 
know. Indeed, you've informed them about the operating grant but 
the day care operations don't know whether there's an increase in 
the subsidy; they don't know whether there's a change in the 
cut-off income level for which people can qualify for subsidy. 
Why has your department not undertaken to let the day care 
operations know that there is not going to be an increase in those 
things? 
 
Since you haven't, will you be soon doing that so you can clear 
things up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well you only let them know if there is going 
to be a change. You don't let them know if there is not going to be 
a change. So we have provided them with the change information 
relating to the new operating grant that is coming. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency — Social Services 

Employment Development Fund — vote 65 
 
Items 15 and 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 36 

 
Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I do want to take a moment to 
thank all of the officials who have assisted me, particularly Mr. Ian 
Wilson who has travelled down from Saskatoon with the Legal 
Aid Commission, the members of the Department of Social 
Services that are seated in the gallery who have from time to time 
provided assistance in these estimates, and also those senior 
officials who have accompanied me today in the Assembly. I've 
had the opportunity of working with these people in the 
Department of Social Services for three years now, and I certainly 
have been impressed with their professionalism and their 
dedication to the task that the people of Saskatchewan have given 
to them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I too want to extend our 
appreciation to the officials for providing the answers to the 
minister. I'm not going to comment about his answers to the 
opposition; we've made that point. But  

certainly I know the amount of work that goes into preparing it for 
estimates by departmental people, and on behalf of the opposition, 
we extend our appreciation, and we look forward to the answers 
being provided to those questions which we have asked and for 
which the minister was not able to provide the answers but has 
undertaken to send them to us at some future time, as soon as 
possible. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Labour 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 20 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, yes. I 
have my deputy, Mr. Phil Richards and behind me I have my 
assistant deputy, Henry Kutarna, and next to him from 
administration, Mr. Pat More; and from labour standards, Marg 
Rappolt and some other assistants from various departments who 
are here in the Chamber to assist us. And they've been getting 
ready for a large part of the evening, and they're ready to proceed. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Mr. Minister, will you give me the names, 
salaries and the positions of your personal staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — — We have a ministerial assistant D, 
which is actually my chief secretary, Brenda Syhlonyk who has 
been with the department for quite a while. I inherited her from the 
former minister. I inherited her from Gordon Snyder, so she's quite 
experienced . . . (inaudible) . . . she's quite experienced, and she 
makes 2,179 a month. Margaret Peterson, doesn't have quite as 
much seniority, she makes 1,828 per month. Donald Spice, 
ministerial assistant 4 — 3,293; and James Goliath, ministerial 
assistant 2, at 2,353. Their increases don't seem to be very large. 
We can send it over for you to look at. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — It sounds, Mr. Minister, like a fairly 
modest staff. How I wish other members of the cabinet were as 
frugal as you are with the public purse . . . (inaudible) . . . Oh yes, 
indeed, you are. This government came into office paying the 
highest salary for personal staff in Canada by any provincial 
government and you continue that. 
 
It appears, Mr. Minister, that you have set some sort of a different 
standard for yourself, and that is . . . you are to be congratulated. I 
hope that some of the comments that I hear are not accurate. I 
hope it's not merely inexperience. I hope this remains a facet of 
your term as minister although it's apt to be a bit brief, I say. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you can get me these answers 
in writing; they don't necessarily need to be read out. I would 
appreciate the salary and the increases in pay of your senior 
officers of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — — We'll get you a copy and send it over; 
we've got it ready for you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — — Mr. Minister, does it include any 
increases? 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1804 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There are increases of 3 per cent. In 
addition, if anyone was promoted, of course, they were paid 
according to the salary scale that they were promoted to. So the 
increases are 3 per cent across the board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, are these pay increases in 
addition to incremental steps in the grid? I'm looking now at the 
first document you gave me with respect to your personal staff. 
Are these pay increases in addition to incremental steps on the 
grid, or are these all that this staff gets in terms of pay increases 
over the last 12 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — You're speaking with respect to my 
personal staff? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The increases include any increments if 
they were moved up in a particular division. Of course this works 
similar to the system in Education, that if you have more seniority 
or if you move into a different increment, you get your increment 
plus the regular increase which was about 3 per cent, which I felt 
was quite generous. However, all the other workers in the 
government got the 3 per cent, so I felt it was fair that my staff get 
the same sort of increase. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me the date when 
these increases were given and whether or not they were 
retroactive to any other date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question you've asked, the answer is 
being presented to you on the copy . . . The increases are effective 
January 1, 1986. So to that extent they might be retroactive as of 
today. But those are the pay increases on January 1, '86. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you give me the details 
of your out-of-province travel? This is something you may be able 
to give me off the top of your head. It may not amount to very 
much, or it may be something that you want to provide in writing. 
We're not going to finish these estimates tonight, so you may . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, we're not. So you may want to 
provide this in writing tomorrow, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, my out-of-province trips is, I went 
to Edmonton with respect to legislative review, and I don't know 
how much it cost. It wasn't very much — the price of a ticket and 
a hotel for two nights. I went to Winnipeg to meet the 
vice-president of CN Rail with respect to a labour situation. I don't 
know how much it cost because I forgot to put in my expenses, so 
as soon as I tally it up and put those expenses in — I drove my 
CVA vehicle to Winnipeg, and I stayed in a hotel two nights, so 
you can figure out the rates. It wasn't very much. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I must say there's a sharp contrast 
between the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade, the government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question with respect to  

the bankruptcy legislation. I'm looking at a clipping of the globe 
and Mail; virtually the same story was carried in the Leader-Post. 
There was some concern expressed by the labour movement about 
changes with respect to a report which recommended changes in 
The Bankruptcy Act. The Hon. Minister Côté stated that he was 
(a) surprised at the concern, but (b) wanted to discuss the matter 
with provincial people who he . . . this is dated June 3, 1986, and 
he stated that he had those discussions and that there was concern 
expressed. I would appreciate a comment from yourself, Mr. 
Minister, what your expressed view was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well in this fairly recent development, on 
June 2nd there was a meeting in Ottawa — the Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs ministers. And as you know, I haven't 
travelled outside of the prairies, so I wasn't there, but they're 
working on this to see if they can find a solution to the problem. In 
bankruptcy, as you know, you and I being lawyers, it's rather 
difficult to find someone to collect the money from, even if it's 
owed on wages, but the federal people are working on the 
problem. We're not taking a final position until the federal people 
have come out with their position and what their solution might 
be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don't think that's quite the problem. The 
problem has not to do with whether or not a bankrupt firm can 
page wages; the problem has to do with reorganizations under 
chapter 11 of the U.S. bankruptcy code. 
 
Under that chapter, firms can be reorganized and the courts have 
the jurisdiction to abrogate labour contracts and indeed, they have 
the right to decertify unions. If a company can persuade a court 
that that's what it's going to take to get them operating again, the 
court has that power, and the power is used quite frequently to 
reorganize companies. It was that section and the power of a court 
to set the terms of reorganization, which includes the abrogation of 
a collective agreement, that the labour movement in this country 
found offensive. And indeed it's been quite controversial in the 
U.S. It has been used in the majority of cases to set lower wage 
rates. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if we could have a comment on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I think you're exactly right. You've been 
watching a lot of American television, and that's predominantly an 
American problem and an eastern Canadian problem where they 
welcome industry into Ontario, and therefore they have companies 
that can go bankrupt. 
 
But in Saskatchewan, where so far we've only got 15 public 
companies, it hasn't been a big problem. And we will follow this 
because under our government we are now getting some 
development going in Saskatchewan, and 10 years from now it 
may become a problem. But it certainly isn't a problem right now. 
We're concerned now with getting the jobs here, and we don't 
anticipate a lot of bankruptcies in Saskatchewan under our 
government in the next 10 or 12 years. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don't believe chapter 11 is restricted to 
public companies. It is public companies one hears  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1805 
 

about, Penn Central and so on, but I don't think it's restricted to 
that. It's available to any company and, I think, is used for private 
companies. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate, rather than the rhetoric about 
how grand and glorious things are on the prairies, I would 
appreciate a statement about this government's position with 
respect to what I think is an important issue, one which your 
opinion has been sought by the federal government. And I would 
hope that you'd provide a position, Mr. Minister, and I would hope 
that your position as Minister of Labour would be to defend the 
interests of labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well first of all, I want you to get 
something quite clear. My duty is to defend the interests of 
workers. If you're referring to labour being the labour leaders who 
support your party, I really have no desire to support them. But the 
workers will be protected. And you're dealing with something that 
is hypothetical to the nth degree because you're referring to a law 
that now exists in the United State. The federal government is 
considering whether that type of a bankruptcy loss should be 
implemented in Canada. And our position would be that the 
workers be protected. It's not a tradition in Canada that you can 
use a bankruptcy law to get around a collective agreement. And 
we are stricter with our continuation of a company. So I would 
think Section 36, I believe, or is it 37 — Section 37 in our Act 
would most likely cover it. 
 
But since we are several years away from the problem, we will 
keep an eye on it, and we will make sure that the workers are 
protected. So don't start bringing the American situation to 
Canada. People don't care what's going on in the United States. 
They're worried about what's happening in Saskatchewan. It's not 
a problem here and it's not going to be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This is a difficult time to educate the minister 
in his portfolio. But if the minister took any interest in the area of 
labour relations, you would know that an accounting firm in 
Toronto has for the last year or so been acting as an advisory 
committee to the minister. They have brought forth a report to the 
minister in some levels of government, unlike this, that report was 
made public federally. The report by the firm — and I'll give you 
the name if it would be of any assistance to you — Gary Colter 
has recommended that Chapter 11 be incorporated into our 
Bankruptcy Act. 
 
This is why what is now happening in Tennessee and Arkansas 
and New York State has become an issue in Canada, because of an 
advisory firm set up by the minister to study the Bankruptcy Act 
has recommended be adopted. The minister has asked for the 
views of the provincial governments. 
 
so I'd appreciate if the minister would come down off his high 
horse, answer these questions; they are legitimate questions. I am 
not terribly interested in what's happening in the U.S., but I am 
interested in what's happening in Canada and Saskatchewan, and 
these questions pertain to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I just answered. I told you it's 

 purely hypothetical. There's a proposal in eastern Canada and it's 
being considered. It's being considered, and it is not an immediate 
problem now. And I've told you, our position simply is that the 
Bankruptcy Act should not be used to circumvent the Trades 
Union Act and a collective agreement that exists. 
 
Now is that . . . Do I have to make it any clearer for you? Is that 
quite clear? And it's all we have here is the traditional NDP doom 
and gloom scenario here — that's there is doom and gloom on the 
horizon. You're trying to scare people, and there's nothing to 
worry about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you didn't say that 
before. That's the first time you have said that your government is 
opposed to any changes to the Bankruptcy Act which would 
enable labour collective agreement to be abrogated, and I thank 
you for that. I regret that it took six full minutes to either get the 
minister to understand the question, or to get him to answer it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to turn to the problem which has arisen 
with respect to section 11(1)(m). The problem is obvious, Mr. 
Minister, you brought forth a Bill which now sits, I believe, in first 
reading. I believe it was given first reading but has not been given 
second reading — indeed hasn't, I don't believe, been moved by 
the minister. I don't believe you've moved second reading of it. 
 
I'd be interested, Mr. Minister, and so would a goodly number of 
other businesses and labour people in Saskatchewan — I'd be 
interested in knowing what this government's plans are with 
respect to the problems which have arisen with respect to 
11(1)(m). 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, the hon. member knows — you've 
been in this Assembly a lot longer than I have — that that Bill is 
before the Assembly and should not be the subject of a debate in 
estimates. But I will try to give you some direction on that, and 
that is, it is here, and we will get into this on second reading 
shortly, and you will have a chance to speak your piece. 
 
But it's quite clear that the labour leaders were trying to stir up 
unrest and concern, needless concern, among the public, and it 
hasn't been working. There were one or two employers who were 
showing signs of possibly abusing the labour situation. We've 
brought the Bill here and, as for all intents and purposes, cured 
that because it's clarified to them what the law really is. And we 
will pass the Bill in due course, and you won't have any doom and 
gloom to talk about. So it's going to be a disappointing summer for 
you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it's going to be a disappointing 
summer, but only because this government didn't have the nerve to 
call an election. However, I doubt that the fall will be that 
disappointing. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you saying, unequivocally, it is your intention to 
pass this legislation before this session prorogues? 
 
Let us take a wild flight of optimism here and suppose the 
legislature adjourned in two weeks. Is the minister saying  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1806 
 
 

unequivocally, no matter when the legislature adjourns, that Bill is 
going to pass? Because if it is, then I'm going to go on to a 
different subject. 
 
I may say that it doesn't meet, I think, the hopes of the trade union 
movement. I don't think it meets the expectations of the business 
community. I frankly don't know who you're pleasing with the 
amendment. But perhaps you think it's history; perhaps you think 
history will be kinder to you than your contemporaries. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just would like an unequivocal statement that the 
Bill is going to pass; it's slated by the government as part of the 
government program to pass in this session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well if you're in favour of the Bill, why 
don't you move it to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No one ever said it was uncontroversial. I just 
finished saying it meets the expectations of no one. I have been in 
receipt of correspondence from the chamber of commerce in 
Regina and, I think, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
condemning the legislation. I have been in receipt of 
correspondence from the trade union movement condemning the 
legislation. So I would doubt that it would be an appropriate 
candidate for Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you want to deal with the question 
instead of these silly answers. Do you intend to move it before the 
end of this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I intend to proceed with the Bill. But 
you've indicated now that you're opposed to the Bill, and I expect 
that you may delay the Bill, so I don't know how fast we can 
proceed on the Bill. But we intend to follow its course and 
continue with the Bill. 
 
I find it very unusual. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour has 
denounced the Bill and is not in favour of the Bill, and so I really 
don't understand your position as to what you wish to have. It was 
our opinion that the Bill was a compromise that was reasonable. It 
seems to me that neither side wants a reasonable compromise, and 
I'd like to know from you and the NDP which side you're on. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you move it, you'll find out. I 
want to know, Mr. Minister. I cannot tell you the matter has not 
been decided on in our caucus. Whether we have not decided 
whether this piece of legislation is better than nothing at all, I 
guess that's the question. 
 
There's no question, I think, but what, if we were in office, we 
could find if you people would have called the election when you 
should have, there would be a new administration. And I think we 
would have found the solution which would not have offended 
everyone on the horizon. 
 
So I take it, Mr. Minister, that you intend to pass the legislation 
before the end of session. Would you just say yes to that, just so I 
could get an unequivocal answer to this. 
 

(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, the member opposite and I used to 
be in the same party, in the same government. And I haven't 
forgotten that in 1972 the trade union leaders came to that 
government and said: here, pass this Act — and they did. They 
didn't say there's anything wrong with it; it's not fair. They didn't 
say anything like that. They said, how fast do you want it passed? 
 
So we know who owns the NDP. And we know exactly what they 
would do. But we don't know what they would do in this case 
because they have a hidden agenda again, and they won't give us 
their hidden agenda. I challenge you to give us your hidden 
agenda. You have put Bills here — private members' Bills, into 
the House — but you haven't on this subject. Bring us your 
proposal for a reasonable solution to this problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wish you would talk to the 
House Leader. We have three tax Bills which we would dearly 
like to proceed with, but which you have never let us get to, 
because every Tuesday, when we've said we want to deal with 
them, we wound up dealing with some silly resolutions instead of 
these tax Bills. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take it from your refusal to answer the question and 
from the fact that the Bill has sat in the first stage of second 
reading for some 57 sitting days of . . . that Bills was introduced 
very close to the opening of this session. I take it, Mr. Minister, 
that you don't intend to move with the Bill at this current session. I 
take your equivocation, Mr. Minister, to mean that you don't 
intend to deal with the Bill. 
 
I say that's regrettable, Mr. Minister, because it is a problem which 
needs resolving. 
 
The decision of the Labour Relations Board, whether or not it was 
correct in law, is most unfortunate. It puts a trade union in the 
position of often having to call an early strike, a premature strike, 
if they want to avoid getting caught in the jaws of this particular 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, you stated that the Act had not been used; in fact, it 
has. It was used by an employer who heretofore had been thought 
of as one of the more responsible employers — Canada Safeway 
— with a good record. If Canada Safeway will use it in a pinch, 
with their labour relations record, then I suppose the trade union 
movement might be forgiven for saying that anyone would. 
 
I think it's regrettable, Mr. Minister, that you weren't able to find a 
solution to this problem. It's regrettable, Mr. Minister, that you 
have come to this Assembly with an amendment which has 
offended everyone. I take it from your equivocation you're not 
going to be dealing with it, and that's unfortunate. This problem 
really needs to be resolved. The decision of the Labour Relations 
Board was, I think, patently unwise. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with a report which you received and 
which you were good enough to give me with respect to 
video-display terminals. It is, Mr. Minister, an area which the 
member may or may not be aware I've  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1807 
 

had some interest in. I've moved, I think, three or four private Bills 
on video-display terminals. I've read your report, Mr. Minister. I 
think it's short of what is necessary, but it would be an 
improvement. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, what is your intention 
with respect to the recommendations contained in that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I say to the NDP member for Regina 
Centre — is it? — that I'm disappointed you've gone off the topic 
of that Bill, because I'd like to see your hidden agenda on labour. 
I'd like to see you talk about tax Bills. I'd like to see your hidden 
agenda on taxation. You people live in the past and in the history 
of this province, and you go back to the 30's and you say, oh, I 
remember the Conservatives in the 30's. Well I wasn't even born 
then, so don't start that. 
 
But my father remembers, and he remembers Tommy Douglas' 
hidden agenda when he raised the sales tax — when he said, that 
is an evil tax, quote; it's unfair, it will be gone — and after he was 
elected he raised it. And so that's your hidden tax agenda, and I 
think you should lay it out on the table. I think you should lay your 
labour agenda out on the table. I've put my Bill on the table. You 
say it's wholly inadequate, but you won't come and tell us what 
you think should be done because you have a hidden agenda, and 
that is the history of your party to operate on hidden agendas. 
 
The only open agenda you ever had was the Regina Manifesto. 
That's the only one you ever laid out. And this is nothing new. I 
remember 1975, when I helped you, and you, and you get 
re-elected. And you never ever, every said one word about buying 
potash mines. Not one. I remember going to my last NDP 
convention in 1976 and saying, don't buy those holes in the 
ground. So I'm really waiting for your hidden agenda. If you want 
to go out and scare people with the unknown — what you people 
say and what you're planning, you know, it's causing people to 
fuel up their tanks just in case, because they're going to have to 
seek political asylum if you're ever the government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, this is a new approach to 
estimates. It's a brand-new approach to estimates, for the minister 
to insist that the opposition deal with problems which they were 
elected to solve. It really is a new approach to estimates. I haven't 
heard that used before. I suppose, Mr. Minister, it's one way of 
avoiding an issue. 
 
Let me say with respect to section 11(1)(m), I'm not sure what we 
would do with it, we don't have the resources you do in your 
department. I'm going to get to it tomorrow. I think you're short of 
resources in that department. But nevertheless, you have the 
department, you have the resources, and the people — we simply 
don't. It is not the role of the opposition to lay before the Assembly 
solutions to problems. It is the role of the opposition to act as 
critics and to offer alternative to the government at a time of an 
election. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure what I'd do with section 11(1)(m); 
I don't have the resources you do. You have the resources, and you 
have the job, and you have the portfolio, and I would suggest, Mr. 
Minister, that you  

either answer the question as to whether or not you're going to 
move it or deal with the next issue I raised, but I suggest it's not a 
very fruitful approach for you to be insisting that we solve the 
problems you were elected to deal with. 
 
Let me say in passing, with respect to section 11(1)(m), it was 
introduced in the legislation during the 1960s, before either the 
Blakeney government or yours . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh 
no, it wasn't. It was introduced in the '60s; it has been there for a 
long period of time, Mr. Minister. However, where it came from is 
irrelevant. The point is labour and management alike thought they 
knew the meaning of that section. It was interpreted in a given 
manner for many, many years — I'm not sure how many — I'm 
not sure how many years, but it was interpreted for many, many 
years, and then it was changed. The issue is not when did the 
problem arise. I guess in a very real sense the problem arose in 
1985 with that decision. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd ask you to either deal with the question as to 
whether or not you're going to move section 11(1)(m) or go on and 
answer my question with respect to video display terminals. But if 
you're going to insist, Mr. Minister, that we answer and deal with 
all of the issues which you were elected to solve, these estimates 
are going to take a mighty long time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I was going to tell you about video display 
terminals, but the misrepresentations that you've made here cause 
me to make a correction for the public here that this section, The 
Trade Union Act that you introduced, that has never been 
replaced, was brought in in 1972. And a similar section appeared 
in 1966. When the union leaders said to you, enact this Trade 
Union Act, you enacted this — and I've got to solve your 
problems — and not only do I have to solve your problems, but 
you don't even know how I should solve your problems. You 
caused this mess, and you don't even know how to solve it. 
 
In any event, video display terminals, first of all . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You have to be corrected again. It's not my report. 
It was the committee's report that had a broad cross-section of 
people, some of them very left-leaning people, and they had a 
close look at it. we had right-wingers, left-wingers, and good old, 
down-the-centre type people. And they had a look at it, and they 
came out with a report that was not nearly as serious as the doom 
and gloom you had been predicting for five or six years. All of the 
research around the world — and we don't have a monopoly on 
the video display terminal in this country — I would think Japan 
and the United States and western Europe have a few thousand or 
million more than we have in Saskatchewan, and all of this 
research indicates that there is no danger to the user. There is 
discomfort, and there are some nuisances attached to the use of 
this machine, and we've made some of those corrections, and the 
report has recommended corrections. But there is no danger. 
 
And you are predicting danger for years and years — that these 
are dangerous machines. That's because you would like to get 
back to the old quill pen with thousands of people scribing away. 
You don't like technology; you don't like change. I don't know 
why your party is  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1808 
 
 

considered revolutionary because you're the most reactionary 
group of people I've ever seen. They don't want any technological 
change; you don't want any innovations to cause efficiency. Just 
do it the way it's always been done. We want double the pay and 
half the hours and new quill pens, that's your attitude. 
 
Your attitude is that hardly anybody works but everybody shares, 
and society doesn't operate that way. So video display terminals 
. . . Again I have to correct you. First of all, it's not my report, it's 
the committee's report. Secondly, they are not dangerous, but there 
are some problems, and the report has dealt with the problems. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have really set a new 
high bench water mark in terms of silliness. Mr. Minister, all I can 
say is I sincerely regret that the member from Yorkton has left the 
Chamber because I think that we owe him an apology. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He's there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Ah yes, indeed he is. He was described by me 
and a number of other people as the worst Labour minister in the 
history of the province. Mr. Minister, he wasn't; he wasn't. The 
silliness with which you have proceeded with your estimates 
tonight suggest that the harsh condemnations of your ministry, 
which are already coming forth from those for whom you are 
supposed to be serving, are well-founded. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, you accuse us of adopting legislation 
written by Nadine Hunt. She was not president of the Federation 
of Labour then, nor was that the process, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you insist upon turning these estimates into some 
sort of circus . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Prince Albert, who has been here for three years, still apparently 
doesn't know the rules. One of the problems, Mr. Minister, is that 
the Conservatives . . . 
 
Until it is 10 o'clock I have the floor and the House Leader is out 
of order. At 10 o'clock you may rise and I have to sit down. But 
for two more minutes I am going to tell the Minister of Labour 
what a jackass he's making out of himself here this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And if he continues to act like a jackass, then 
these estimates are going to take a long time. 
 
Mr. Minister, the questions which we put to you were questions of 
a serious nature. We asked, Mr. Minister, for your position on 
some relevant issues to the trade union movement. I make no 
apologies for asking questions on behalf of the trade union 
movement. 
 
I don't think, Mr. Minister, you or your predecessor in office have 
any idea of what a trade union is. A trade union is a voluntary 
association of workers who voluntarily agree to form a trade 
union; and at any time a majority of them don't want it, there's a 
relatively effective mechanism, Mr. Minister, for setting it aside. 
 

Mr. Minister, you and your predecessor seem to believe that trade 
unions are instruments of oppression for those who belong to 
them. You act as if . . . members opposite use the word trade union 
bosses in a very pejorative sense . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake has used it as 
much as any one does. The member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, the member from Regina Rosemont, and other members are 
continually referring to the leaders of the trade union movement as 
trade union bosses. And they spit it out as if it were a dirty word. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, that the trade union movement have been 
ill-served by this government, in large part because you do not 
understand what the trade union movement is. It is a voluntary 
association of workers who have banded together to promote their 
interests. You seem to believe, Mr. Minister, it's some sort of an 
evil dictatorship imposed from abroad. 
 
I said the House Leader had to wait till 10 o'clock. It's now 10 
o'clock. If you wish, you may rise and adjourn the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure if I should say 
thank you. Mr. Chairman, when I tried to rise a minute or two 
earlier, it was only to save the member from Regina Centre from 
making a fool himself in front of all of those thousands out there. 
Mr. Chairman, I move the committee rise, report progress and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 
 
 


