
























































May 14, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 14, 1986 
 
 

1287 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to the members of the legislature this 
afternoon 10 women who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
who are members of the Chinook Group. Plus 40 Club of 
Regina, which are people . . . or women who are newcomers to 
the city. And I would wish the members to welcome them here 
today. 
 
They are here with Henrietta Stemshorn, who, I take it, is the 
president of the group. I’d like to wish them well and hope that 
they have a good stay with us this afternoon, and would all 
members join me in welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to the House, a group of 22 grade 4 and 5 
students from Nokomis who are in the Speaker’s gallery, along 
with their teacher, Mr. Keith Hassman, and the chaperons, Mrs. 
Emmons, Mrs. Ferguson, and Mrs. Braun. 
 
The students and their adult chaperons and teacher will be 
spending a half hour here in question period. They will then be 
going on a tour of the Legislative Building, and then I will be 
meeting with them at 3 o’clock, and I looked forward to that 
very much. 
 
I trust the guests here from Nokomis will be edified by the 
calibre of both the questions and the answers this afternoon. I 
ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to welcome on behalf of the Hon. Minister of Education, the 
member from Swift Current, a class from Swift Current 
Fairview School., And Keith Ahrens is their principal there, and 
Pat Brososky and Mrs. Donna Rezansoff are teachers 
accompanying them. 
 
They have a number of chaperons there with them, and I want 
to ask the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Young Offenders’ Centre in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Justice, I direct my question to the Acting Minister 
of Justice, and it deals with the concerns raised by residents of a 
residential neighbourhood in Saskatoon who have learned 
almost by accident that your government plans to open a young 
offenders’ centre in  

the middle of a residential area. 
 
Can the member tell the Assembly when this decision was 
made, and specifically, what consultation there was with the 
people in this residential area prior to the decision? And can 
you also indicate how many young offenders you plan to have 
in this particular facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I will take notice of the question. Of 
course, the hon. member knows that the New Democratic Party 
has, of course, supported The Young Offenders Act, and the 
great extension of the changes to the law, so I’m sure that the 
hon. members opposite will be supporting any increased 
facilities which are necessitated by virtue of The Young 
Offenders Act. But I will take notice of the specific question as 
to the location of the facilities. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplemental, while you’re looking up the 
other information, which I thought you would have known. But 
I ask you: how many of these young offenders’ facilities do you 
plan to open around the province, and can you tell the 
Assembly where, specifically, you plan to open them so that the 
people in the areas may, in fact, have some say and some 
consultation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the hon. members 
that the Young Offenders Act is putting very intense pressures 
in the province of Saskatchewan on the need for additional 
facilities. Those facilities are cost-shared. There are discussions 
with several organizations and those affected. 
 
The delivery of the various facilities — to date some of them 
are well know, for example, the Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon. We 
have announced North Battleford, for example, an extension in 
North Battleford, with the support of the community— with the 
support of the community, Mr. Speaker — over the opposition 
of the New Democratic Party. 
 
And so I again will take notice of the specific question as to the 
facilities and have the Minister of Justice supply the 
information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Would the hon. 
member please sit down until I’m finished. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve undertaken to take notice of the question and get the 
answers for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll ask you another question, which you should 
take notice of while you’re looking up some of the details, 
which I thought you would have available to you. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister: is the minister confident that the 
young offenders’ centres located in residential neighbourhoods, 
such as the Nutana area in Saskatoon, can you guarantee to 
those people that these pose no threat to the safety of the 
families in those residential areas? This is what is the concern in 
the Nutana area, and they’re wanting to know because they’ve 
apparently had no consultation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well of course with any correctional 
facilities I wish we could give absolute assurance, and I know 
the hon. members that had a practice with  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1288 
 
 

correctional facilities when they were in government of letting 
people take the canoe trips, the marathon races, the jogging 
trips, and everything around the city of Prince Albert weren’t 
concerned about public safety. 
 
We certainly are very concerned about public safety, and that’s 
one of the concerns that any correctional facilities, or facilities 
for young offenders, Mr. Speaker. But again, I’ve taken notice 
of the question. I’ll have the Minister of Justice reply. 
 

Crude Oil Seepage into Lake Athabasca 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister of Environment. Mr. Minister, last 
summer crude oil began leaking into Lake Athabasca from a 
large storage tank near Uranium City, which used to be owned 
by Eldorado Nuclear. It is estimated that anywhere from 8 to 
10,000 gallons of heavy crude oil have seeped into the lake 
from the tanks and the rock crevices, yet your department’s 
clean-up operations have been slow. 
 
Some work was done last summer, but no work has been done 
on the clean-up this year, and local residents are telling me that 
more and more crude oil is seeping into the lake every day from 
underneath the building near the storage tanks and from out of 
the rock crevices. The crude oil slick is now all around the main 
bay and around the main dock, and some wildlife, local 
wildlife, has been killed. The individual claims that muskrats 
have been found dead, coated in oil. 
 
Mr. Minister, why has your department refused to hire local 
people from Uranium City to get this crude oil slick cleaned up 
before it does more damage to the environment and to the local 
wildlife? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, I’m unaware of the 
situation that the member is speaking of today. I will take notice 
of the question. We will check out his allegations and bring 
back an answer at the earliest opportunity. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. While you’re 
taking notice, Mr. Minister, I ask you this supplementary. 
Another concern of Uranium City residents is that a strong wind 
in the wrong direction could take this oil slick out into the lake 
itself where it could threaten commercial fisheries and 
water-fowl and could reach as far west as Fort Chipewyan or as 
far east as Fond-du-Lac and Stony Rapids. In light of this 
serious threat, can you explain why no work has been done on 
the clean-up of this spill this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, if one thing we’ve noted 
from the opposition in the last few months is their ability to 
exaggerate. I will take notice of the question and bring back the 
answer. When we find out the facts, Mr. Speaker, I will bring 
back the answer to this House. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to, by way of information, indicate to you, sir, that I am not 
exaggerating and I’m surprised that the minister is not aware. 
Mr. Minister, as I understand it, your government has hired a 
service station operator from La Ronge to do the clean-up when 
unemployment in and  

around Uranium City is so high and the need for quick action 
on this spill is so obvious. Why not hire the local people and 
provide them with the environmental expert to supervise the 
work? They have the equipment at Uranium City and they have 
the manpower to do the work. Wouldn’t this provide local 
employment and get the job done, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to that 
member twice now, and this will be the third time, once we find 
out what the true facts are, once we get through the 
exaggerations and the story line, I’ll bring the answer back to 
you at my earliest opportunity. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
are you saying that you are not aware of this spill when your 
department has already hired a firm to do the clean-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of 
questions asked today by that member. Preceding those 
questions were a number of statements made. I’ve told that 
members that I’m going to take notice. I’m going to take notice. 
I’ll bring back the true story and the answer to him at the 
earliest opportunity. 
 

Marketing of Saskatchewan Forest Products 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in my capacity as 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest Products to give a 
reply to a question which was raised, I believe, two days ago by 
the member from Cumberland, and yesterday the exact same 
question by the member from Athabasca. The answer here, Mr. 
Speaker, is reminiscent of one which was given to their 
colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, as he reiterated the 
NDP policy in aggressive marketing for potash. They talked 
about the aggressive marketing of wood products. And I have 
this reply, Mr. Speaker. You will recall that the question related 
to the marketing of chemically treated products from Sask 
Forest Products. 
 
In December 1985, Mr. Speaker, a Mr. Ken Wall, who is a 
marketing representative of Sask Forest Products, made a 
presentation to the Shan-Wood group on Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation treated wood products. This presentation 
was made to every wholesaler located in Winnipeg. At the 
presentation Mr. Wall advised Shan-Wood that they should 
check all regulations regarding treatment agreements for the 
U.S. market as Shan-Wood had indicated they wished to sell the 
total volume purchased into the United States. 
 
Mr. Wall checked with the chemical supplier, Koppers Inc., as 
to the validity of the warranty given by Koppers to the customer 
in U.S. markets. Koppers advised Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation that no warranty would be honoured for 
products sold in the United States. Shan-Wood were advised of 
this fact in March 1986 by personal visit, prior to receiving the 
letter of March 3, 1986. 
 
Shan-Wood requested that they be allowed to put their own 
warranty on the treated wood. However, in response to this 
request Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation were 
advised that this did not constitute a release of  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1289 
 
 

liability, and therefore it was not considered prudent to 
undertake this sale. 
 
Shan-Wood also requested that they receive exclusive rights to 
market-treated wood in Manitoba. Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation did not accept this proposal due to the 
fact that we have other wholesalers in Manitoba marketing 
other lumber and plywood products and who, in turn, had and 
currently are purchasing treated wood products. 
 
When Mr. Wall visited Shan-Wood as related earlier, Mr. 
Shannon informed Mr. Wall he had already written a letter 
declining any further interest. The prime reasons for that letter 
were: we were not prepared to give Shan-Wood an exclusive 
market arrangement; and (b) the treated wood product sales in 
the United States exposed Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation to potential liability. Following that meeting it was 
then deemed unnecessary to forward further details. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the claim of lack of interest is totally unjustified. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just a couple of very short paragraphs to finally clarify this 
issue for the members. 
 
The claim of lack of interest is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve just asked the members for order, and 
I’m going to ask again. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The claim of lack of interest is totally 
unjustified from those members. Mr. Wall had telephone 
conversations two and three times a day with Mr. Shannon in 
addition to personally visiting him in Winnipeg. The decision 
made by Saskatchewan Forest Products to refuse an exclusive 
market and not expose itself to unnecessary liability is based 
solely on sound business practice. Mr. Speaker — sound 
business practice, which will continue to be the policy of Sask 
Forest Products in aggressive marketing of our products, not 
only here in Saskatchewan, but around North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — A short supplement, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Minister. Do you deny that this Manitoba wholesaler has been 
among SFPC’s top 10 customers in each of the past six years, 
since shortly after its incorporation early in 1979? And do you 
deny that SFPC has regularly made some of the largest sales of 
wood products to this very wholesaler whose reputation you are 
now questioning? And also, Mr. Minister, do you deny that the 
letters that were written by Shan-Wood Lumber Company, and 
the phone calls, were not returned by your corporation, and as a 
result the loss of this large sale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I deny that the phone calls 
were not returned. I do not deny that Shan-Wood  

has been a wholesaler on behalf of Sask Forest Products in the 
past. I will reiterate once again that that fact in itself is not 
reason, nor is there any good reason, why a company like 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation who is aggressively 
marketing products should give an exclusive marketing right to 
Shan-Wood or any other group when we have other very 
reputable wholesalers in the province of Manitoba who are 
doing good work for this corporation. 
 
When they wanted an exclusive marketing contract, we said no 
— which was a good business proposition on behalf of Sask 
Forest Products — and we will stand by that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Impact of Soviet Nuclear Fall-out 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister for the Environment, and it deals with his department’s 
follow-up to the nuclear reactor disaster in the Soviet Union. 
My question is: are there regular tests being conducted by your 
department or the federal government to determine the 
immediate impact of fall-out from this nuclear accident on 
Saskatchewan’s food chain, Mr. Minister? Specifically, are you 
doing regular tests on milk or livestock being prepared for 
slaughter? And, Mr. Minister, who is performing these tests, 
how often, and what are the results to this point in time, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, it has taken that member 
and the opposition some two weeks to figure out that there’s 
been a nuclear reactor spill in the Soviet Union. Mr. Speaker, it 
amazes me that this is the first . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask the members to contain 
themselves a bit. It’s impossible to hear in the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — It amazes me, Mr. Speaker, this is the 
first question on this rather significant disaster since it 
happened, in this House. To answer your question, the 
Department of National Health and Welfare monitors both the 
food and the rain-water. In Saskatchewan, those are the . . . The 
rain-water is checked in Regina and in Saskatoon. They are 
checked here daily. They are sent to Ottawa, and we are kept 
informed, as well as my colleague, the Minister of Health. And 
I would like to state to you and to the public that, while there is 
an advisory on rain-water which has been issued, Mr. Speaker 
. . . I wish the opposition would quiet down a little bit. At least 
the public may be interested. While the national advisory is still 
in place for rain-water, tests to date have indicated that our 
drinking water is safe, and so is the food and the milk. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say for the 
record, Mr. Speaker, that it has also taken two weeks for this 
government to make a public statement to the effect of this 
national disaster in the city of Chernobyl. My question to you, 
Mr. Minister, as a supplementary: what plans does your 
department or the federal government have to do long-term 
testing on the impact of this nuclear accident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I might point 
out to the member opposite that my colleague, the  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1290 
 
 

Minister of Health, did make a statement in regards to the 
rainfall some days ago. Now whether you heard it or not I don’t 
know, but there has been a statement made. We do monitor the 
situation daily. I think that there is no need to try on behalf of 
the opposition to create any panic in the public. I think that we 
are on top of the situation. There’s no need for concern at the 
moment, and if there is, the public will be notified. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would just 
like to ask the minister if his government concurs with Mr. 
Getty’s statement in Alberta that these disasters in the Ukraine 
are good for western oil prices, and whether that’s an official 
policy of your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, I am, and this government 
is, primarily concerned with public safety, both the safety of our 
citizens and the safety of citizens of Canada and around the 
world. 
 
I am not aware of Mr. Getty’s remarks, nor am I in a position to 
say whether I agree with him or not. We are concerned with 
public safety, the safety of the citizens of Saskatchewan. We 
monitor the environment daily to ensure that that safety is kept 
up. And if anything happens, Mr. Speaker, we will notify the 
public immediately. 
 

Investigation of SGI Claims 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, in the absence of most of your cabinet, the majority of 
your cabinet. This one, however, is not unfair since it involves a 
member of your staff. I first ask, Mr. Premier, if you will 
confirm that Saskatchewan Government Insurance maintains a 
special investigation unit whose job it is to check into the 
circumstances surrounding questionable claims against SGI 
policies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
leader of the NDP, who hasn’t been in the House for several 
days, I will respond to the hon. member that yes, SGI has - as 
far as I know, and I will find out - special units that will do 
investigation on particular circumstances. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Premier, will you tell this 
Assembly whether it’s the policy of SGI’s special investigation 
unit to keep its files and its work confidential, particularly when 
these investigations involve allegations of arson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that 
they would depend on whether the particular investigation is. At 
some point in time they may turn it over to the police or the 
RCMP, and at that point it’s out of their hands into somebody 
else’s hands. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. New question, I suppose I 
should say. Mr. Premier, most people would assume it’s SGI’s 
policy to keep the files confidential. And in light of that, I think, 
obvious assumption, I ask if there’s been an internal 
investigation launched at SGI with respect to a court judgement 
they did January 30th of this year. In this court judgement, a 
copy of which I have here, Mr. Justice MacLean of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench states clearly that this policy was breached in an 
investigation  

by a claim by one Tom Townsend. 
 
I asked the Premier, if he’d been listening, if an internal 
investigation had been launched at SGI with respect to the 
comments made by Mr. Justice MacLean in this judgement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea. I’m not the 
minister of SGI. Maybe the minister of SGI could respond on 
specific comments. 
 
I can remind the member opposite, if he wants to go back and 
look at the record quite easily, that the former member of 
Saskatoon Nutana, the NDP member, would take our 
colleague’s driving record and talk about it on the radio. I mean, 
it was highly questionable whether a member of the NDP 
cabinet should take confidential records of a driving individual 
and be talking about them. 
 
So I mean, again it’s a little bit of another witch-hunt that the 
opposition are on. The Leader of the NDP is not here, he’s not 
in control of his caucus. You can just go on one witch-hunt to 
another. First it’s on public employees, then it’s on somebody 
else. I mean, it’s the same old thing day after day . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the absence of the minister of SGI, I 
put this to the Premier, and I refer to the January 30, 1986, 
judgement by Justice MacLean in a civil action between 
Thomas Townsend and the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance. 
 
In this judgement the justice states that one Ron Ryan, at that 
time executive assistant to SGI president Don Black, removed 
the file concerning an investigation of Mr. Townsend’s claim 
against SGI and reviewed it with one Dave Tkachuk, the 
Premier’s chief political adviser. And further, the judge states 
that after this review Mr. Ryan reported to Mr. Black that he 
and Mr. Tkachuk didn’t think any further investigation of Mr. 
Townsend’s claim were required by SGI’s special investigation 
unit. 
 
Now my question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is: is this the 
kind of conduct that you would find acceptable under SGI 
policy, and are all claims investigations at SGI subject to that 
kind of review from your political people in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier will know that Mr. Ryan is still very much in 
evidence around the province — we’ve referred to this — 
collecting a series of government contracts without tender. And 
Mr. Tkachuk is now heading up your party’s election campaign 
preparations. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is: did their actions breach 
SGI’s policy with respect to confidentiality of files of the 
special investigation or not? Can you inform the Assembly 
whether there was a breach of SGI policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it as raised 
by the opposition — I’ll certainly confirm it and I 
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1291 
 
 

won’t take it at face value — but they’re saying this has been 
dealt with in the courts. Now he’s asking me about more of it 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right. Well you just raised it 
and said that it was. Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean, I don’t run SGI 
on a daily basis. And I will certainly go back and examine any 
details with respect to a court decision, or public documents 
made by the member of the court. So I said that I would, and I 
will, but beyond that, Mr. Speaker, I mean they’re asking me to 
deal with something that was dealt with some time ago. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question . . . My 
supplement is again to the Premier, and I wonder if you can 
indicate, when Mr. Tkachuk was serving as your principle 
secretary and political adviser, did his duties and 
responsibilities include the review of confidential files of SGI’s 
special investigation unit? Was he doing that under your 
instructions, because obviously the judge who was involved 
indicates that that’s what he was doing? And if not, do you 
condone Mr. Tkachuk’s conduct as outlined by Justice 
MacLean in his court document, and most important of all, 
what action will you take to send a clear message to everyone in 
Saskatchewan that such conduct is not condoned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the matter has 
been dealt with, and I haven’t read the court document, so if I 
haven’t read the court document, how am I supposed to respond 
to it. So, Mr. Speaker, until I do read it, I’m not going to take 
anything that they say at face value because half the time when 
they’re saying something or alleging something, it’s not true - 
it’s not true. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 - An Act to amend The Livestock Investment 
Tax Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Livestock Investment Tax Credit Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting the Establishment, 
Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources, I move first 
reading of a Bill, An Act respecting the Establishment, 
Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:35 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the Establishment and 
Operation of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre for the  

Provision of Rehabilitation and Extended Care Services in 
Saskatchewan 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
 
Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered 
Accounts Act and The Certified Public Accountants Act 
 
Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection 
Orthodox Church 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:37 p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speakers, just prior to going on to 
government orders, I wonder if I might have leave of the 
Assembly to move the following motion: 
 
That when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, May 16, 1986 it 
do stand adjourned until Tuesday, May 20, 1986. 
 
I ask leave and so move, seconded by my seat-mate, the 
member for Kindersley. 
 
Motion agreed to.  
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Items of business before the House 
is estimates for the Department of the Environment. Before we 
begin, I would like to ask the minister to introduce his officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is 
Peter van Es, the deputy minister; Bill Howard, the assistant 
deputy minister; Rick Knoll, director of administration branch, 
directly behind me; and Dave Clark, the director of the land 
protection branch, back there. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
participate in the debate of estimates, Mr. Chairman, to begin 
proceedings of the estimates before us dealing with our 
environment. I would like to get into specifics, Mr. Minister. I’d 
welcome your officials as well. 



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1292 
 
 

My first question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: can you tell me 
how many personal staff you have as Minister of the 
Environment and their names and their salaries at present? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I have them here. I’ll 
send a copy over to the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Send a copy over to the other member. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I note, Mr. 
Minister, that you have Bruce Evans, ministerial assistant 4; Pat 
Murphy, ministerial assistant 4; Ken Syrnyk, ministerial 
assistant 1; Vonda Croissant — I believe that’s how it’s 
pronounced; and a Margaret Marsden, with salaries of a 
minimum of 25,000 annually, and up to 44,000 annually with 
wage increases of, I believe, 4 per cent. I note as well that you 
have . . . Pardon me; this is an explanation here below. I want to 
go on, Mr. Minister. I just read that for the record here for 
Hansard. 
 
I want to go on and ask you, Mr. Minister: of the assistants you 
have in your office, what are their scientific and academic 
qualifications to equip them to deal with environmental 
matters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have their 
resumes with me. We will get those and provide them to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I will get that information, Mr. Minister. I will 
anticipate receiving that information then. 
 
Of all the personal staff you have, Mr. Minister, when were 
their last increases of salary, and what was the dollar amount 
and the percentage of the increase? Is that the information that 
you passed on, or is it not? Have there been recent changes to 
the information you sent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, as indicated in the 
information that I provided you with a note too, would indicate 
that two of my staff received a 4 per cent increase effective 
January 1st. The dollar amount is also on the right-hand 
column. I presume you have the same piece of paper that I have. 
 
Mr. Yew: — What, Mr. Minister, was their wage increase for 
1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 
information with me either, for 1985. I recollect, however, these 
people were with me last year in my other portfolio, and I had 
furnished the opposition with that information last year in 
estimates. So you should be able to go and get back into the 
information I gave you last year to get that information. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I believe that we’re dealing with the ’86-87 
estimates, Mr. Minister. But going back to 1985 like you 
suggest I should do, you’re responsible for a very different 
portfolio. And I’m not certain as to whether or not you had the 
very same people working with you under Environment 
estimates as we do now today. So I would again ask for that 
information. If you can provide it later, fine; I’ll take that later. 
But I certainly hope that you can provide that information to 
me. 

My next question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: how many 
employees did the Department of the Environment have when 
your government, the PC government, took office in the spring 
of 1982? And how many employees does the department have 
today? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, we have, in 
answer to the previous question regarding my staff’s increases a 
year ago, you will find that answer given on page 2821 of 
Hansard from last year. 
 
Bruce Evans, I’ll give it to you. Bruce Evans was 8.8 per cent, 
which represented two years’ increments. In other words, he 
had not had an increment for two years previous to last year. 
 
Pat Murphy was zero. Vonda Renwick was zero. That was her 
name then. Now it’s . . . In your books it’s Vonda Croissant. 
Margaret Marsden, zero. 
 
As for the numbers of employees in 1982, was 170; ’82-83. 
Since that time, 59 . . . No, 60 positions have gone to the water 
corporation; 16 positions have gone to the Parks department, 
habitat enhancement, leaving 92 in Environment. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Following 
that question I want to ask you: what was the budget for the 
Department of the Environment when the PC government took 
office in the spring of 1982, and what is the budget for the 
coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to that 
question, in 1982-83 estimates the Department of 
Environment’s estimates were 10.1 million. In 1986-87 the 
estimates, which are in front of us obviously, are 7.4 million. 
Again, between that time and now, between 1982 and now, the 
water Crown has, as I indicated in the previous answer, 
received 60 of our employees. They are now over in the water 
Crown, who now have some of our programs that were 
delivered under Environment at that time. And about $3.7 
million of budget is now at the water Crown, which would have 
been included this year as well if the water Crown had not been 
created and these people and that part of the budget taken over 
to that vote. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I can’t take the explanation as the gospel policy. 
Mr. Minister, you know, it is interesting to note that, when I 
look at the figures I have on your estimates before me and the 
figures that I have of the 1982 estimates, they indicate to me — 
and for the record I want to tell you — that the budget for 
Environment for 1982-83 was actually $11,050,220, the budget, 
the environmental budget. And in terms of the budget today, 
like you quoted, it’s 7,440,940. That has been cut in half, Mr. 
Minister. And in terms of employees, in 1982-83 they tell me 
that there were 172 position, and today that has been cut to 92 
positions. 
 
Mr. Minister, that indicates to me the concern and the 
commitment you have for environment. Both areas have been 
effectively discouraged, cut in half, and very little commitment 
has been shown with regards to our natural environment. I take 
it, Mr. Minister, that you and your  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1293 
 
 

government simply don’t have any sound regard to our 
environment. 
 
I want to go on with my questioning, Mr. Minister. With 
regards to another item I have that is of concern to people of the 
province: Mr. Minister, has an environmental impact study of 
any kind been done into the effects of the proposed thermal 
electric power station near Estevan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: Mr. Chairman, it is presently under way 
and is expected to be done some time this summer, probably 
about midsummer that that study would be complete. But to 
comment briefly on the member’s remarks on this 
government’s commitment to environment. I would point out, 
based on the figures in the blue book ’82-83 and blue book 
’86-87, he ignores the fact which is in the record and has been 
stated to him several times over the last half hour: the 
establishment of the water Crown happened to take some of 
those positions that were previously in Environment and they 
were put into the water Crown, and as well some 16 positions 
over into the Parks. So I don’t think that you can construe from 
blue book to blue book that either the positions nor the money 
have been reduced for environment. They are simply in the blue 
book in a different subvote. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I won’t dispute the fact that I have 
with your blue book. I just wanted to state the information that I 
have came from the Estimates for 1982-83, and also the 
Estimates before us for 1986-87, and those are actual figures 
that I’m sure that the minister cannot dispute, but no doubt you 
will try to cover up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I didn’t get your . . . There was so much noise on 
that side of the House I couldn’t get the answer to the question I 
raised regarding the environmental impact study re the thermal 
electric power station near Estevan. What was your answer to 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — My answer, Mr. Chairman, was that it is 
presently under way and should be completed about 
midsummer. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, if the environmental studies indicate 
that the proposed thermal electric power station that we’re 
talking about near Estevan will have a damaging effect to the 
environment, can you assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
this project will not proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously this 
government has great concern with the environmental impact of 
any of these developments. I mean, we have many, many 
developments going on in this province, thanks to our 
government. And we will ensure that these developments will 
not have adverse effects on the environment. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. My next 
question deals with yet another environmental concern. Mr. 
Minister, on Thursday, February 1st, The Estevan Mercury 
reported that an environmental study would be done before the 
Rafferty dam is built on the Souris river, and the Alameda dam 
is built on Moose Creek. Have those studies started, Mr. 
Minister? And also can you  

assure the people of Saskatchewan that the environmental 
impact studies on Rafferty and Alameda dams will be 
completed prior to work commencing on the construction of 
both dams? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I think that there is no 
doubt that there will be no work done on those projects until the 
studies have been complete. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you for the response to that. I feel a little 
confident then that your commitment is that no work will be 
done until those studies are completed. 
 
I want to ask you then, Mr. Minister, how extensive . . . my 
question to you is: how extensive will these environmental 
impact studies be, Mr. Minister, and who will be doing those 
studies, which consulting firms, and just how much local 
involvement and consultation is being done with respect to the 
people directly affected? 
 
Mr. Weiman: — I’m wondering if, with leave, Mr. Chairman, 
before the minister replies to his question, whether I may have 
leave to introduce some guests? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce, again, more guests from Fairview, and 
being the member from Fairview constituency in Saskatoon, it 
doubles that pleasure. 
 
As the House knows, in the past we’ve had many guests from 
Fairview, and Fairview has always sent their very best. In 
keeping with our policy of truth in government, though, I have 
to be a little bit more candid, Mr. Chairman. My guests from 
Fairview this time are a little bit south of Fairview in 
Saskatoon; 12 grade 8 students from the East Fairview 
elementary school. They are here with their chaperons, and I 
would lilac to read into the record the chaperons that are with 
them this afternoon. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher Arlene Karst, Mr. and 
Mrs. Terry Cayko, Mr. and Mrs. Allan Lassey, Mr. and Mrs. 
Bruce Youngquist, and the bus driver, Alvin Miller. 
 
It is, as I indicated earlier, a privilege to be able to introduce 
you. You can be assured that the people of Saskatchewan not 
only have an admiration for our neighbours to the South, we 
have a great deal of admiration for people from the United 
States of America. And I have very many fond memories of 
driving through Montana. 
 
I apologize for not having stopped in Fairview as I was down in 
the United States two years ago, but I took the road that went 
from Glendive to Sidney up to Plentywood and back to 
Saskatchewan. And I realize if I’d have just made a right-hand 
turn, I could have gotten to Fairview. 
 
I would like the members of the Assembly, along with myself, 
to not only welcome you here but wish you a safe journey back 
to the United States. And if I may add, I will be meeting with 
you at 4 o’clock for pictures and  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1294 
 
 

refreshments and to answer any questions that you may have 
about the parliamentary system in Canada. 
 
So with that, I ask the members to please join with me in 
greeting our American friends. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Department of Environment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
question of the member from Cumberland, the SPC is presently 
holding a series of open houses in the area, gathering views of 
the local residents. Then, of course, there will be an EIS 
(environmental impact study) done. The types of things that 
will be looked in the EIS, the kinds of things that will be 
studied and examined, either by Sask Power or by Sask Power’s 
consultant if they hire one, are such things as wildlife, fish and 
habitat, agriculture and land use, water quality and quantity, air 
quality, archaeology, socioeconomic concerns. And of course 
then they have to produce development and operational details 
and that type of thing. So it will be a complete EIS. After 
which, of course, it is published, there is a public review period. 
After these concerns have been addressed and that study has 
been produced, obviously there is then a public review period 
after this which the public can again have their input into the 
things that the study has highlighted and commented on. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the record, Mr. 
Minister, I understand that the Rafferty dam, if the Rafferty 
dam is built, it will flood 172 acres — the 172-acre Mainprize 
Regional Park, the Lutheran Bible camp and as much as 72 
kilometres of one of the most beautiful valleys in southern 
Saskatchewan. And I want to include that into the record, Mr. 
Minister. And I noted that from a letter coming from the mayor 
of the town of Coronach, that this dam was referred to as a 
political give-away, Mr. Minister. 
 
The announcement of the Rafferty dam project by Premier 
Devine goes on to say: 
 

. . . is in my view one of the government’s biggest political 
give-away since gaining power in 1982. 

 
And there’s a lot to this, and what has been brought up to the 
public, Mr. Minister. As you may know, there is an agreement 
dating back to 1909 which requires Saskatchewan to pass on 50 
per cent of the water collected in the Souris River system to 
North Dakota, U.S.A. That being the case, how many years of 
average run off will it take to flood all of the Souris valley and 
fill the reservoir to be formed by the Rafferty dam? 
 
Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that because we must pass on 50 per 
cent of the water in the Souris River, that for many years there 
will be only a large, shallow, stagnant slough behind the 
Rafferty dam, and the same situation will  

develop over and over again in dry years. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, what arrangements have you made on 
planning, or planning to make, and what have you done to 
handle problems that may arise with all your growth and other 
environmental implications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, of course the 
member opposite asked in a previous question what kind of 
public review would be done in regards to this development. I 
went to some length to outline to him, not only what steps were 
taken in the public review, including an environmental impact 
study which included — and I read him the different types of 
things that that study would cover — included the public review 
of the projects prior to and after the study. And I went on to tell 
the member that part of the study and part of the review would 
be on water quality and water quantity; then he gets up and asks 
me about water quality and water quantity. 
 
I think the answer to his question is that the EIS, one of the 
objects of the study, is water quality and quantity, among 
others, but it would be fruitless . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Regina North East is speaking from his chair 
again. It would be rather fruitless, in my view, to prejudge what 
that review is going to do, and what the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well now the member from Assiniboia is 
speaking from his chair. It would also be, I think, prejudging 
what the results of that study will say. I have already indicated 
to the member that this review is going to take place, that this 
review will be complete prior to the development taking place. I 
might also point out, however, that there has been for 50, 60, or 
70 years promises of this project in the province. This 
government is proceeding to develop this long-awaited promise. 
 
I might also point out that, unlike any other project, member 
from Assiniboia, unlike any other project done in Saskatchewan 
— any other project in Saskatchewan — we actually have the 
Americans who are going to pay for some of it. We’re going to 
get the Americans to pay. Mind you, you wouldn’t like that. As 
a party who officially burns flags, of course, you wouldn’t like 
the Americans to participate in this type of a project . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
We see the member from Quill Lakes has arrived. You can hear 
him for miles, Mr. Chairman. You can hear him for miles, 
speaking from his chair. But I think that the member . . . 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has made unfounded 
accusations, and I want to say that it’s casting an aspersion and 
a slander on members of this caucus, and I demand that he 
retract that statement. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I find that there’s debate going on between 
two members, and I am not able to rule on that. Would you 
carry on with the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I have stated 
my case; I am correct, and I would ask the House to come to 
order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — What’s your point? 
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1295 
 
 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, the minister blatantly accused 
this caucus in an aspersion and cast false accusations against us 
that are . . . indicated that we burn flags and that we officially 
take that position. And I demand he apologize and retract that 
statement now, before this debate proceeds any further. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In speaking to the point of order that’s 
obviously . . . that has been raised by the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who has a very short fuse today, it 
seems - a very short fuse; he must have. And, Mr. Speaker, but 
anyway, as you have said, there has been and there will 
continue to be for a good long time debate back and forth in the 
House on various issues. 
 
The member clearly did not say that the members of that caucus 
have in fact burned flags, or whatever the member is suggesting 
there. What he had said is that some members of the NDP faith 
in this country have, and that’s an indisputable fact. It’s an 
indisputable fact that people affiliated with the NDP in Canada 
have been known to be involved in that type of activity. That’s 
an indisputable fact. 
 
But the point of order is that the point of debate in any case, Mr. 
Chairman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He is getting into the debate. Order. He 
is getting into the debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. Mr. 
Chairman, the Deputy House Leader is erroneous in his 
comments. The record will show, Mr. Chairman, that the 
minister opposite made no reference to anybody being affiliated 
with anybody. He made no reference to others in the NDP. He 
made a direct and specific reference to the members of this 
caucus who are members of the New Democratic Party, and he 
called it the official position, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now I bring to your attention that in previous rulings by 
yourself, sir, and your other colleagues who have sat in that 
Chair, that in similar situations you have called “order” to 
members on both sides of the House. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, to reconsider your ruling. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I am sticking to my ruling that 
it is a subject for debate between two members. I would now 
ask that we get on to the subject of debate that has to do with 
the environment. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Engel: — I challenge your ruling, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Call in the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Glauser: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of 
estimates for the Department of the Environment, the member 
for Shaunavon raised a point of order to . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t in the House at  

the time. How in the world I could have possibly raised a point 
of order, but this guy is totally confused - totally confused. 
 
Mr. Glauser: — Mr. Speaker, pardon me, it was . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Glauser: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I’ll make a 
correction to that. And it was the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg raised a point of order to the fact that 
the Minister of the Environment cast aspersions on the 
opposition, to which I ruled that this was a dispute between two 
members . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s impossible for me to hear 
what the member is reporting, and I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Glauser: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I ruled that there was no 
point of order. And the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
of course challenged, and that is the reason for calling you in, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? 
Those in favour say, aye. Those opposed say, no. I believe the 
ayes have it. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! I don’t think anybody can 
hear anything that is going on in here. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, as I was saying before 
the interruption, the only reason that we were talking about 
flags at all was of course because of the environmental impact 
on the air when they burn. 
 
In any case, Mr. Chairman, to get back to the original question: 
the original question, of course, was what studies will be done 
prior to the Rafferty project taking place down at Estevan. I had 
indicated to the member opposite that SPC were holding public 
meetings, that an EIS statement would be done, and that part of 
that EIS would be highlighting water quality and quantity. And 
therefore . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I think the member for Cumberland 
has asked a question. I’m sure he will be pleased to hear the 
answer. And I think, if the members of the opposition would be 
a little more quiet, he will perhaps hear it. Order, order! Order. 
Can we now proceed with the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, and that it would be, in 
referencing to the question from the member opposite, who was 
asking particular questions on the quality of water that would be 
going through Saskatchewan into the United States. The quality 
and quantity of that water obviously is subject of EIS, and I 
think that a debate on  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1296 
 
 

that subject in this House at this time would be a little 
pre-emptive of what may come out in the study by midsummer. 
I’m not sure when the study is complete, midsummer, 
end-summer, when this study would be published, and then of 
course the public review would take place, and we would have a 
lot more information upon which to base a debate in this House. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, before we got those rude remarks 
made by the Minister of the Environment and trying to put 
official words into the mouth of the opposition here, I want to 
say that that was unwarranted. That is not the official position 
of the officials of the opposition, and I just want to state that for 
the record. 
 
You were way out of your league, way out of line, Mr. 
Minister. And the same applies here, Mr. Minister. It seems that 
you guys are very desperate over there. You’re slugging all kind 
of insults on the small caucus of the official opposition. We are 
obligated to perform our jobs, to provide an official opposition 
that can get some answers from this government. You’re 
continuously hiding information from the public. You’re 
dictated, Mr. Minister, by politics. And there’s papers and 
papers to document that. I look at the Star-Phoenix dated March 
29, 1986, just recently, Mr. Minister, where it states in big black 
headlines, “The Rafferty dam location determined by politics.” 
And it’s also . . . I just happen to note the first paragraph, Mr. 
Minister, where it is acknowledged by one of your officials, 
“politics dictated . . . and I’ll read that article out, the first 
paragraph: 
 

Politics dictated that Saskatchewan Power consider an 
Estevan location for its proposed new $500 million power 
plant, a high ranking Conservative officials admits. 

 
Mr. Minister, just for the record I want to state to you that you 
guys are desperate, clinging to power. You’re now on your fifth 
year of office — the longest-term government ever in history in 
this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Yew: — That’s right; that’s true. The member for Meadow 
Lake disputes that. Look at the records. History speaks for 
itself. You can’t deny history, Mr. Minister. 
 
Getting back to the estimates, Mr. Minister. We’re on 
discussion regarding the proposed power projects. I want to ask 
you, Mr. Minister, are you aware that the Souris River valley 
which will be flooded by the Rafferty dam is a unique wildlife 
area? In addition to . . . If the minister will listen and quit 
getting dictated by the member for Meadow Lake . . . If I could 
get your attention, I’d certainly appreciate it, Mr. Minister. If 
you’ve got any comments to make about the environment, Mr. 
Minister, you’ll have your opportunity. 
 
Mr. Minister, in addition to the fact that the Rafferty dam will 
flood a unique wildlife area, and in addition to the 1,200 
white-tailed deer that will be forced out or forced up into the 
surrounding prairie and likely not fare too well without wildlife 
habitat, there are very rare species in the Souris River valley as 
well, Mr. Minister. 

There are, I noted, Mr. Minister, burrowing owls, western 
painted turtles, hogs, prairie long-tailed weasels in that valley, 
and their population will likely be wiped out, or pretty near 
becoming extinct. This is happening in northern Saskatchewan 
where we have huge forestry, where we have a clear-cut policy 
whereby we lost a lot of natural habitat . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s true. You drive into the North with me 
— the member for Prince Albert wants to dispute that now — 
but you drive with me in the northern administration district and 
you talk to people like Albert Ross, a local trapper, that has 
made his living out of traditional pursuits like trapping, fishing 
and hunting. You talk to Albert Ross or Noah Bird or George 
Bird or any one of those people that supplement their seasonal 
incomes, and they’ll tell you otherwise, Mr. Member for Prince 
Albert. They’ll tell you otherwise. You go there. 
 
You don’t derive your living from traditional pursuits, do you? 
It hurts us. It hurts the native people. And I want to impress on 
the Minister for Environment, it’s hurting the traditional 
pursuits of Indian and native people. And I concur that a lot of 
people in the southern area are genuinely as concerned, Mr. 
Minister. We’re losing our natural environment. 
 
Aren’t you concerned about all the issues that have been raised 
re the natural environment? On one hand the Department of 
Tourism promotes tourism, putting out a tremendous amount of 
ads, publicity, trying to attract people on one hand, saying that 
we have a unique province; and on the other proposing, and 
governed by politics, proposing to build major hydro projects in 
areas that are not required. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the NDP would have 
you believe that the Rafferty dam somehow is going to go into a 
Conservative constituency. Well there’s two things I want to 
point out to the NDP opposition. One is that there are very, very 
few NDP constituencies in the first place; and secondly, none 
where this river runs through. 
 
In other words, in order to put the dam on the Souris River you 
have to put it on the Souris River. And the Souris River happens 
to be in this constituency, and this constituency happens to be 
Conservative, like many others. But this one happens to have 
the Souris River in it, and that is why the dam is going to be 
built there. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, I have never witnessed such 
arrogance coming out from members on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — As I’ve stated to you, Mr. Minister, and I’ve 
pointed out, the Rafferty dam will be built only at a 
considerable price for our natural environment. Now I noticed 
in yet another story published by The Estevan Mercury, dated 
March 26th, that $23 million will be paid by the Saskatchewan 
treasury to oil companies such as PanCanadian and Canadian 
Roxy Petroleum for 32 oil wells affected by the rising water. 
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1297 
 
 

At the same time, Mr. Minister, only $500,000 is being offered 
to the city of Weyburn to make substantial improvements to its 
sewage treatment plant so as to avoid pollution in the reservoir. 
Is this another indication, Mr. Minister, of your priorities? How 
much money, I ask you, Mr. Minister, will be spent moving 
wildlife and protecting the wildlife habitat of the flooding 
valley that we’re in discussion about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now that we’ve 
established that we will build the dam on the river and you will 
built it on top of a hill somewhere, we’ll go back to the first 
question and the first answer, because we’ve never really 
strayed too far from that. 
 
Once the EIS has been complete, the public review has been 
complete, we will then be able to establish some cost. We have 
not yet established the cost of doing anything with the habitat 
because we have not yet established and we have not yet 
received the EIS, the environmental impact study. So this 
discussion, as I had indicated I guess now about 45 minutes 
ago, somewhat precludes what we may find out when this EIS 
is finished. It’s a little premature, so it’s very hard to discuss 
these things until we have that study and we know what we are 
discussing. 
 
The answer to your question is: we don’t know that cost yet. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, in this study that you 
referred to that you described 45 minutes ago, am I correct that 
I heard you say that the study will talk about the quantity of 
water that’s available as well as the quality? I missed it when 
you were talking about that, and I just wanted to clarify it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I just checked my 
officials because perhaps this member, unlike his colleague, 
once I’ve given him the answer once or twice or three times, 
may get the answer. I’ll read it to you. Saskatchewan . . . Well 
they don’t want me to read it to them; they want to talk from 
their seats . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he still wants to 
speak from his seat. 
 
All right. I’ll read it to him. Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well now the member from Assiniboia wants 
to speak to his seat. Maybe, Mr. Chairman, at some stage, 
they’ll want to hear it. 
 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation should predict future 
water quality, including ( I don’t know what that is) 
eutrification effects at the U.S. border. Predicated effects 
should be compared to present conditions. Seasonal effects 
and the effects of unusual conditions such as drought and 
floods and water quality should be predicted in 
relationship to changes caused by the projects. 

 
Soils in the potential reservoir area should be sampled for 
nutrients and mercury before the project goes ahead. The 
effects of the project and the concentrations and dispersion 
of these parameters should be estimated. 

Ground water quality, quantity, and movements in the 
potentially affected area should be delineated. Existing 
and historic situations with regard to water quality, 
quantity, flow rates and régimes in relation to the 
seasonality and municipal and agricultural uses and 
discharges should be described in detail. 

 
And I could go on. The point is that until we have the study 
completed, until we have the study completed, it’s a little 
premature to be trying to debate the pros and cons of the thing 
until we know what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. That’s what I was looking for, and I appreciate the 
answer. In other words, what you are saying, and will you 
confirm to the committee, Mr. Minister, that your government 
and your department in particular, and that’s only fair, does not 
yet know whether there is enough quantity of water to be able 
to sustain such a project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, no, that’s not what we’re 
saying at all. We’re not talking about the feasibility of 
generating power or any other engineering question in this 
discussion. We’re talking about the environmental effects of 
this project. Now obviously Sask Power has already decided 
that there is sufficient water to go ahead with this project. 
 
As far as the Department of the Environment is concerned, 
however, we want to make sure that it does not adversely affect 
the environment when it does go ahead. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s the point, Mr. Minister, that I’m 
trying to make here. When my colleague, the member from 
Cumberland, asked you an earlier question some 45 minutes 
ago about the quantity of water available to sustain the project, 
Mr. Minister, you said to him that will be determined — I 
remind you what you said 45 minutes ago — that will be 
determined when your department has completed its studies 
which include the quantity of water. 
 
Forty-five minutes later, Mr. Minister, you are changing your 
story. Now you are saying you are not considering the question 
of quantity of water. I ask you now, and I repeat the question of 
my colleague: is it assured — can your department assure this 
committee, because it is the Department of the Environment 
who deals with these kinds of question — can you assure this 
committee that there will be a sufficient quantity of water to 
supply this dam; that it will not take five years to fill the dam; 
that all questions related to whether there is certain amounts of 
rainfall in different seasons of the year and so on, whether that 
will be adequate in order to sustain the dam? That was the 
question my colleague answered. 
 
You said at that time you didn’t know, because your department 
was studying the question. Now you’re saying to me your 
department isn’t studying that question at all. Now which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure which 
member speaks in code. The quantity of water has been 
determined by Sask Power. They’ve obviously determined that 
commercially there’s enough quantity of  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1298 
 
 

water for the project. The quantity of water we’re talking about 
is simply from an environmental view, not whether it’s viable 
for Sask Power. I mean, obviously that’s up to Sask Power. 
They are much more adept at determining that than the 
Department of the Environment, and that’s their job. 
 
Our job, when we talk about quantities of water, is to talk about 
the environmental aspect of whether there’s enough water 
agriculturally, or for wildlife, or for whatever, or ground water. 
That obviously is the aspect that we look at as the Department 
of the Environment. I mean, whether there is the raw quantity of 
water for the SPC project is determined by engineers in Sask 
Power. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I wish you would get the 
members on the government side of the House to stop pounding 
their desks when we’re trying to ask a question. But I shall 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you a very direct question: did the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation consult your department 
about the quantity of water that’s available for this project? And 
if so, Mr. Minister, what was the response of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I think we have the wrong 
mike here. Thank you. I’m even having the lady up there cut me 
off, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, why . . . Let me ask you another question on the 
same subject. Has your department, or have you as the minister 
responsible for the Environment, undertaken to provide to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation your views, which is your 
responsibility, on the quantity of water that’s available for this 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we went through, I 
suppose, indirectly some of this some time ago when I indicated 
to the member, your colleague from Cumberland, that some 
years ago some of our responsibilities and some of our staff and 
some of our budget went to the water corporation. Now Sask 
Power would have consulted with the water corporation, which 
is the corporation that we created to manage our whole water 
resource - this may have gone by the members opposite, but this 
was created a couple of years ago — and they would have gone 
to the water corporation to talk about that supply. 
 
Now the Department of the Environment, of course, being the 
regulatory body, would be concerned with the environmental 
aspects of the project. But the quantities and the history of the 
quantities of water and what they could project into the future, 
that is, the whole management issue of the quantity of water, 
would have been dealt with between the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and the water corporation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That is a rather peculiar line of 
reasoning, Mr. Minister. You know full well that the supply and 
the quantity of water is going to have a very, very significant 
impact on environmental considerations. And yet you stand in 
this House and say two things now:  

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation did not consult the 
Department of the Environment on quantity; the Department of 
Environment -— and I say, you, Mr. Minister, not your 
officials, because they can only act under your authority — the 
Department of the Environment has not undertaken to talk to 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation about quantity of water. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, do you not consider that to be highly 
irresponsible on your part and on the part of your department 
which you speak for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: —Mr. Chairman, as has been the practice 
in these estimates for some weeks now, we will now debate this 
question back and forth and repeat the question and the answer 
for some time. The member opposite obviously either missed 
that small news that there was a water corporation around and 
what its function was, which is the whole management question 
of our water supply in Saskatchewan. And obviously, 
economically, commercially, the quantity of water and the 
information required to see if there’s enough water now and in 
the future — that question would be discussed with the water 
corporation who has that information, and whose job it is to 
manage that water resource in Saskatchewan. 
 
As far as the environmental aspect, which also includes 
quantity, but has an environmental impact on a whole lot of 
other things, not particularly the project itself — Okay? — not 
particularly the project itself, but everything in the environment 
that would be affected by that project would be our concern. 
And that, of course, yes, we have discussed with Sask Power. 
 
(1545) 
 
And as I’ve indicated to you and your colleague, there are a 
series of steps being taken now for the public’s input into that 
for the EIS study to be done, so that we can discuss those 
findings with the public and with the proponent, Sask Power, of 
the proponent of the project, and that process will be followed 
through. And it’s a process that is not new to Saskatchewan. In 
fact, I believe the process was there when you were 
government, and the process is there now. It has worked very 
successfully in the past; I suspect it will work fairly 
successfully for this project as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I remind you that that 
question you just responded to I only asked once. I’m fully 
aware of what the water corporation is and what its mandate is, 
and I don’t need you to indicate to me what it does. 
 
I simply ask you another question. Does your government not 
know about the existence of water quantities available in any 
part of the province? Does your department not know that 
information, as a Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, obviously the member opposite 
does not know the mandate of the water corporation, or you 
would not have asked the question. The mandate of the water 
corporation is to manage that  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1299 
 
 

resource, the water resource in Saskatchewan. 
 
And yes, if you wanted to know about quantities of water 
somewhere in Saskatchewan, we would go to the water 
corporation to get that information. They would have that 
information; we would not have that information. If we wanted 
to get it, we know where to get it, and the public knows where 
to get it. As a matter of fact, all of the public knows where to 
get it, except the member from North East. You go to the water 
corporation. 
 
Now the mandate of the water corporation, which the members 
seems to say he knows but doesn’t know, is to manage that 
resource. One of the pieces of information they need to manage 
it, obviously, is to have background information on quantities in 
Saskatchewan and other pieces of information dealing with our 
water resource. And yes, they would have it; the Department of 
the Environment would not have it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I don’t know if more needs to be 
said on this. I think it has become very clear what has been 
happening here, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. What the 
committee has, I think, established here this afternoon, is that 
the Sask Power Corporation, at the behest of the minister in 
charge, at the request of the Premier, decided that they needed 
to make a political announcement — a cabinet political 
announcement. 
 
The Sask Power Corporation did not approach the Department 
of the Environment, which it should have, to establish the 
question of quantity of water as it applies to the environment, 
and I appreciate that there will be studies that are going to be 
completed which are undertaken now. That’s not a reflection on 
the politicians, Mr. Chairman, who have spent all of this time 
dealing with the politics of this Rafferty dam and no time 
dealing with quantity of water available; no time dealing with 
environmental implications, and simply made an announcement 
without even as much as speaking to the appropriate 
departments who ought to have been consulted. 
 
I do not question that probably the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation spoke to the water corporation. I hope it did. And I 
hope that maybe in this session the government will decide to 
allow the water corporation to come to the Crown Corporations 
Committee so we can ask those questions. And that’s kind of 
doubtful because the government has not been calling forward 
corporations which they don’t want the opposition to ask 
questions of. 
 
So what we have here, Mr. Chairman, is the Premier and his 
minister in charge of the power corporation signing an 
agreement with all the parties that are involved here, United 
States and others, an agreement before they even knew whether 
there was going to be sufficient water quantity to supply this 
project. And I can only assume that, because the Department of 
Environment, in the minister’s own words, was not consulted. 
 
Now the minister may want to stand up . . . Oh, but the water 
corporation was consulted, and I will accept that, and so they 
should have been. But they are not the only agency of this 
government that deals with the question,  

Mr. Minister. The Department of Environment also deals with 
the question. It was not consulted, because I expect if it had 
been, the Department of Environment would have said to the 
power corporation there is not sufficient water quantity there to 
do what you are saying in your proposed press release it’s going 
to do. You’re misleading the public, Mr. Minister, and I’m not 
surprised of that. You have developed the art of misleading the 
public on this project as you have on so many others. 
 
It’s really hard to believe that your Department of Environment 
was not consulted, and it’s even harder to believe, Mr. Minister, 
that you, as the Minister of the Environment, would not have 
taken it upon yourself to initiate a discussion with the power 
corporation on this question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s an interesting 
discussion. It’s interesting in this aspect, Mr. Chairman; it’s 
interesting in this aspect that the member for north-east Regina 
who now does not agree with this project — okay — he has 
now issued the statement that they don’t want this project - 
okay — his leader has been in parts of Saskatchewan saying he 
does favour it. The public . . . If you talk about misleading, Mr. 
Chairman, the public is becoming very confused with the NDP. 
They’re becoming very confused with their stance on there 
projects. One day they’re for them, and one day they’re not for 
them. I mean we’ve heard it on the bacon plant; we’ve heard it 
with the paper plant; we’ve heard it with the upgrader, and 
today we’ve had another example of it. 
 
We’ve had a dissertation from the member from Regina North 
East on why we should not build this project, the Rafferty dam. 
And I hesitate to say that we have the American co-operation, 
because the last time we had to call the Speaker in. They don’t 
like those Americans. But we have, and we’ve got that 
co-operation from them — the first project in Saskatchewan 
history that will be partially financed by the United States, 
because they agree with the project as well. 
 
So the only people, or maybe the only person — I don’t know 
how many of the NDP don’t agree with the project. Because, I 
mean, what day is it? Is it Wednesday or is it Thursday? 
Tomorrow they will agree with it; today they don’t. Today they 
don’t. Well that’s fine. As long as that position is clear, that 
they don’t agree with it and we do, at least the public will know, 
and the public in Estevan will know. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that there’s not much more that we can 
accomplish by us stating that we agree with the project, and it 
will go ahead as soon as the environmental impact study is done 
and that review is finished. And the NDP say they do not like 
. . . do not want that project to proceed. So be it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, for the record, want 
to state that the minister should not be putting words into our 
mouths. Mr. Minister, our official position is well-known. And 
the exchange that you had with my colleague from Regina 
North East certainly indicates to  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1300 
 
 

me that, again, we have a very arrogant government, and it 
simply wants to continuously get argumental and does not want 
to disclose the pertinent information that we’re after. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: in view of the fact that $23 
million will be paid by the Saskatchewan treasury to oil 
companies — that I’ve mentioned before and I’ll mention 
again; you haven’t answered the question — to oil companies 
such as PanCanadian and Canadian Roxy Petroleum for 32 oil 
wells that will be affected by the rising water; in light of the fact 
that this amount of money will be spent to compensate those oil 
companies, I want to ask you, in terms of the fact that you have 
such misplaced priorities, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: how 
much money will be spent towards moving wildlife out of the 
flooding valley and to enhance wildlife habitat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, about an hour and 
a half ago I recollect that question was asked for the first time. 
The first time I remember it because we got into the 
environmental aspects about burning nylon at the time. And I 
said at the time, and I will say it again, that when we started this 
afternoon off we were talking about this project. We talked 
about the environmental impact study and how it would be 
premature to try and debate the project until that study was 
done, because we really wouldn’t know the costs, and we 
wouldn’t know what the impacts were going to be on the 
wildlife and the other aspects of the environment that you 
mentioned in your question. 
 
And that is still true. Mind you, if we keep debating this long 
enough, the study may be finished. But today it won’t be, and 
so I can’t answer your question with any solid figures, because 
we don’t know. The study is not finished. The public review has 
not been done. Those things will be fleshed out when that 
process is finished. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I certainly can’t buy that argument 
at all. How did you arrive then, Mr. Minister, at supplying the 
oil companies with $23 million for the rising water that will 
affect the oil industry? How did you arrive at that $23 million 
figure if the environmental impact studies have not been 
completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, the 
figures that the member uses, in fact the whole proposition that 
the member is proposing, did not come from this department. If 
he would like to furnish us with that piece of information that 
he has, we may be able to discuss this more reasonably. 
 
But it was certainly not my department or myself that either 
proposed the payment to those companies, or company, for 
those oil wells, nor the amount. So if he would like to furnish 
me with the information he has in front of him, we’ll see what 
kind of debate we can get into after that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well it has been noted by The Estevan Mercury, 
in a story dated March 26, 1986, Mr. Minister — not too long 
ago — that this money was earmarked to go to these oil 
companies. 
 
Now I ask you. Maybe it didn’t come from your  

department, Mr. Minister, but it certainly came from your 
government. I ask you: which department is offering this money 
to compensate for losses perhaps, or compensate for the rising 
waters that may damage the industries that we’re discussing 
here? I don’t know. But it certainly came from your 
government. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister. You know, it’s coming from your 
government. Surely you must know what is happening within 
your caucus. And I ask you again, Mr. Minister: how did you 
arrive at that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
reading something partially out of a newspaper that is some 
weeks old. I have no idea what he is . . . I don’t know where the 
information comes from. 
 
As I’ve indicated before, if he would like to furnish me with all 
the information he has — which I suspect isn’t much so it 
shouldn’t take much of a wheelbarrow to get it over here — so I 
can take a look at it, perhaps then maybe we could debate the 
subject. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to, Mr. 
Chairman, before we go any further in this review of the 
Department of Environment’s estimates for ’86-87, I would like 
to make some brief and general comments evolving out of the 
exchange we’ve had thus far with the minister responsible for 
Environment. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Chairman, there is a fundamental policy difference in 
Saskatchewan in basic environmental issues. On the one hand, 
we have those who respect our natural environment, who 
understand the need to preserve and protect our environment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who are they? 
 
Mr. Yew: — The people of Saskatchewan, that’s who. The 
people of Saskatchewan who know that our natural 
environment is a precious, precious treasure we have inherited 
from the past but which we only borrow from our children. The 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who want our society 
and our provincial government to ensure that we protect our 
natural environment as a healthy place to live for ourselves, for 
our children, and for future generations. 
 
On one side, Mr. Chairman, we have the people of 
Saskatchewan, my New Democratic colleagues. And I share 
their view and share their concerns about the need to protect 
and enhance our environment. But on the other side, Mr. 
Chairman, we have this narrow-minded Devine government; 
this huge PC government with a different set of priorities; 
misplaced priorities; this PC government with it’s own narrow 
set of special interest priorities. That’s what we have, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The PC members opposite may not want to hear this, but their 
record speaks for itself, Mr. Chairman. Now let’s look at the 
record. Number one, since the Devine government took office, 
Mr. Chairman, more than four years ago, going on five years, 
they have effectively cut the Department of Environment in 
half. That’s the facts,  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1301 
 
 

Mr. Chairman. That shows their priorities. That shows where 
their priorities are. 
 
Number two, the Devine government has not held a single 
major environment impact assessment since taking office. They 
have not completed anything. 
 
Number three, the Devine government badly mishandled the 
biggest environmental accidental in Saskatchewan’s history, 
and I’m referring to the serious spill at Key Lake. 
 
Number four, the Devine government has failed to respect the 
safety standards regarding the storage of highly toxic chemicals 
in our cities. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, there has. There has been. You people authorized spraying, 
didn’t you — 1982, ’83? The member of Meadow Lake dispute 
that fact. But again, the records are there, Mr. Minister. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, when we judge them by their 
words and by their deeds, by what they say and, more 
importantly, by what they do, the Devine government’s record 
and commitment to environmental protection has been a major 
disappointment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The PC government has been a major disappointment to men 
and women all across Saskatchewan. The Devine government 
has failed to create jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. It has failed to provide fair taxation for the people of 
this province. They burdened us with the flat tax, Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
It has failed to stand up for the Saskatchewan interests in 
Ottawa, Mr. Chairman. It has abandoned and betrayed the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Chairman, this 
Devine government’s record and commitment regarding our 
environment and environmental issues and environmental 
policy has been a major disappointment to concerned residents 
all across our province. That is why, Mr. Chairman, 
Saskatchewan people are saying that we just can’t afford four 
more years of PC government. Saskatchewan can’t afford four 
more years of Devine. 
 
But there is a better alternative, Mr. Speaker, and that 
alternative is a commitment to environmental issues — a 
commitment — a government that shares the environmental 
concerns of Saskatchewan people and will act on those 
commitments. And that alternative, Mr. Chairman, is 
Saskatchewan’s New Democrats, committed to work together 
with the people of Saskatchewan for a better, healthier, safer, 
natural environment for today and for future generations to 
come. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that commitment is based on several 
fundamental principles, including the following: number one, 
that it is our natural environment, the land, the water, the air, 
and the life they support; that life in our  

province and life in our own plant depends on it; all 
Saskatchewan people should have the right to an environment 
of productive lands, pure water, and clean air; that our 
economic activities should be environmentally sound, energy 
efficient, and enhance the overall quality of life and not detract 
from it; and that the physical and mental and social health of 
our people depends so greatly on a safe and sound natural 
environment. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a New Democratic government would respect 
those principles. A New Democratic government would be 
guided by them. A New Democratic government would act on 
them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a New Democratic government would preserve 
critical wildlife habitat areas throughout Saskatchewan. It 
would built new provincial parks and designate additional 
heritage waterways and ecological reserves. A New Democratic 
government would stop the plans to use aerial spray of 
chemicals in our northern forests, Mr. Chairman — chemicals 
that are dangerous, unnecessary, and do not create jobs for local 
people and for people throughout this province. 
 
A New Democratic government would provide funding for 
environmental research and expand work on alternatives to 
dangerous farm chemicals. It would extend soil conservation 
research and promote shelter-belt planting. Mr. Chairman, a 
New Democratic government would participate fully and 
actively to prevent acid rain in our province. A New 
Democratic government would develop a hazardous waste 
disposal system for Saskatchewan. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Chairman, a New Democratic government in 
Saskatchewan would establish an environmental development 
and protection agency. We would establish an environmental 
development and protection agency independent, Mr. Speaker, 
independent of the government of the day, with the opportunity 
to report directly to the legislature on environmental issues. 
 
Those are some of the positive environmental commitments the 
people of Saskatchewan have told us they want. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, New Democrats are listening, and those are some of 
the positive commitments New Democrats make for the people 
of our province, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a number of questions I wish to put to the 
minister. Before getting to those, however, I wish to address 
one further general point. That is the issue of jobs and the 
environment. Note, Mr. Chairman, I say jobs and the 
environment — not jobs or the environment, for this is not an 
either/or situation. 
 
The Devine government has been a disappointment with respect 
to both jobs and the environment. Mr. Chairman, New 
Democrats are committed to both, committed to energy 
conservation, for example, in ways that will protect our 
environment and create more jobs. New Democrats are 
committed to sound forestry policies, Mr. Chairman, that will 
ensure the long-term future of our forests and ensure jobs today. 
We are committed to  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1302 
 
 

resource development as well, Mr. Chairman, but in ways that 
will create jobs, opportunities and economic activity, and are 
environmentally sound. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, the Devine government may try to hide 
its head in the sand like an ostrich. Is that the word? Is that the 
right pronunciation? The members opposite continuously love 
to laugh at my English. But that’s fine. That’s okay. I don’t take 
any offence. That’s fine. At least I can raise a few points, a few 
issues in this House that are of genuine concern to my 
constituents, and I’ll continue to do so until the last hour, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Chairman, finally, the Devine government 
may try to hide its head in the sand. They may try to pretend 
that environmental issues are somehow not important - issues 
are somehow not important to Saskatchewan people. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, the PCs are wrong. The PC government is wrong. 
And I only cite the recent nuclear accident in the Soviet Union 
as an example. 
 
We raised a point of question in the House today during 
question period, but has that government on that side of the 
House raised, or made a policy statement with regard to that? 
Certainly nothing has come out from the Department of 
Environment. That was your responsibility, but we hadn’t heard 
after two weeks from the Department of Environment — 
nothing; not a word. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the last 20th century, the nuclear age, clearly 
poses grave environmental dangers to all of us — to our 
children, to our environment, the future generations, wherever 
in this planet we may live. 
 
Now we here in Saskatchewan can perhaps do little to combat 
the potential danger of nuclear accidents in Russia, but we can 
concentrate on Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. Here, close to 
home, we can act. We have that opportunity, Mr. Chairman. As 
I was saying, Mr. Chairman, we have that opportunity. We 
clearly have the obligation to our children and to future 
generations. What is required, Mr. Chairman, is a sound 
commitment and the political will to do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is it? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Leadership, Mr. Chairman. The member for 
Meadow Lake asks, what is it? And I say: leadership, Mr. 
Chairman — not the type we were getting from that 
government on that side of the House. Certainly not. And as I 
said before, we have a better alternative, and that is the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Chairman, I submit that those are precisely the reasons that 
the next general election, whenever the Premier gets the nerve 
to call it, the Devine government will be defeated soundly in 
this province, and a New Democratic government will act on 
concerns and the commitments that I have just presented to you 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member for Meadow Lake and the member 
for Prince Albert continuously try to confuse  

matters here in the House by their tactics, by trying to distract 
me and trying to get me riled up in terms of past involvements 
in the North. That’s fine; it doesn’t bother me. It doesn’t distract 
me at all. They’re just making complete, idiotic fools of 
themselves over there. They won’t listen to serious concerns 
and commitments that this small opposition on this side of the 
House have announced and have committed in terms of 
environmental concerns. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, there’ll be a different response 
coming from the members on that side of the House once the 
Premier of this government of the day, a Premier with cold feet, 
a Premier that does not have the nerve to call an election — 
whenever he finds the socks and the mukluks to call a general 
election to warm up his feet, whenever he finds courage 
enough, they’ll be uttering a different tune, I can assure you 
that. 
 
Now I’ll get back to the question, Mr. Speaker, but before I do 
that, I’d like to maybe hear a little response of what form of 
commitments they have with regard to environmental 
commitments for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
an environmental hazard. I want to make it quite clear to the 
members opposite I have five points here; I have noted them 
down, as the member opposite made them, and they are all 
untrue. And now, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to read to you some 
of the answers to the questions. 
 
The first was: since 1982, this government has not done one 
major environmental impact study. I’m going to read to the 
member some of the environmental impact studies that are 
under way and have been completed in the last four months, not 
the dozens and dozens and dozens that have been done since 
1982. Note them please. 
 
The city of Regina waste management study; the R.M. of 
Hoodo, Wakaw Lake Weir; the Cigar Lake Mining 
Corporation, Waterbury uranium development; the SPC, the 
Uranium City to Collins Bay transmission line; the SPC 
Shand/Rafferty study, which we’ve gone over for an hour; the 
Mahogany Resources, Mallard Lake gold development; and the 
Northern Landfill incorporation, commercial landfill; the Prairie 
Coal Ltd., Poplar River mine expansion. The Redberry 
Development Corporation — you must remember that one. 
McNeill Northern Services Ltd., Cluff Lake to Fond-du-Lac 
haul road; the SPC Alberta-Saskatchewan interconnection; SPC 
Boundary dam; Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation, 
Highway 47 reconstruction, phase one; the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, all-season road, Highway 102 to 
Grandmother’s Bay; Erskine Resources Ltd., shale oil recovery, 
Pasqua Hills; Simplot Chemical Company Ltd., fertilizer 
facility. 
 
These are the assessments that have just been completed. The 
Husky Oil, Aberfeldy commercial, EOR; the PCS potassium 
sulphate plant at Big Quill Lake; Red Deer Silica Inc., silica 
sand deposit development; SRC, processing of high-grade ore 
in multi-purpose pilot plant; Interprovincial Pipe Line Ltd., 
pipeline facilities expansion program; Ducks Unlimited,  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1303 
 
 

Makaroff-Boulanoff complex; Ducks Unlimited, Tesch’s marsh 
project; Ducks Unlimited, Wallace project; Ducks Unlimited, 
Long Lake project; Ducks Unlimited, Gomersall project; the 
P.A. Silica Sand Company Ltd., silica sand quarrying operation 
in La Ronge area. Not one done since 1982, he said. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we have learned over the months and over 
the years from this opposition that what they say should be 
taken with a grain of salt. I think I’m allowed to say that. It’s 
probably an environmental matter. A grain of salt, Mr. 
Chairman, because we know that they tend to exaggerate, and 
they tend to misconstrue facts, to put it politely. 
 
The point number two, Mr. Chairman, was that for some reason 
that we had tried to hide or tried to do something with what the 
member opposite called the biggest environmental spill in the 
province’s history. Well I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, about a 
bigger environmental spill in this province that the members 
opposite, when they were in government, neglected to tell the 
city of Regina about for two years. For two years they decided 
not to tell the city of Regina — I happened to be on council at 
the time — about the Federal Pioneer PCB spill which was 
about 100 yards from the city of Regina’s water supply. Now I 
want the members opposite and I want the public to know that 
what the members opposite say and what they do are two 
different things — two completely different things. 
 
I think my colleague — and his third point, Mr. Chairman was 
about spraying the forests. I think my colleague from Meadow 
Lake, through that discussion, was trying to point out to the 
member opposite that there is no spraying of the forests and, in 
fact, there’ll be no spraying this year either. You may have 
missed that announcement some months ago, as well. 
 
And you know, I think, Mr. Chairman — they’re speaking from 
their chairs again — but I think, Mr. Chairman, that these three 
points alone would indicate to the public, and obviously 
indicate to the members on this side of the House, that the 
members opposite may speak for hours if they wish. They may 
cover the spectrum on any speech that they wish to make. But 
the grain of fact in those speeches is hard to find. 
 
I took the first three points that the member opposite made in 
his remarks and found them all to be wanting in fact. And I 
think that the rest of his remarks — and we could go through 
them once we have the Hansard tomorrow — and we could go 
point after point after point in those comments and find that in 
actual fact, in actual fact, that those things that he says are facts 
are not. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that if the member opposite has some 
other specific questions on these estimates, he could get at 
them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find the minister’s 
presentation very amusing. Just a while ago he said, when I was 
questioning him about the environmental impact studies 
pertaining to the proposed thermal electric power station near 
Estevan, the Rafferty dam project, and the Alameda dam project 
at Moose Creek, he said to me  

some half hour ago or so, or 45 minutes ago, he keeps saying 
that the environmental impact studies weren’t completed. 
That’s what he said. 
 
And all of a sudden he says, well we’ve got a whole bunch of 
environmental impact assessment studies completed some four 
months ago. That’s what he said. And just a while ago he said, 
pertaining to the questions I put to him about the three major 
projects that I raised in the House, he said that they didn’t have 
the reports and the recommendations. 
 
And when I asked him about the moneys that were allotted to 
the oil companies, pardon me, 2,300 million . . . or pardon me, 
$23 million allotted to the oil companies to, I presume, 
compensate for the damages and whatever affected by the rising 
waters. I asked him about how much money they would be 
prepared to spend on moving wildlife out of the flooded areas 
and how much money they’re prepared to spend on preserving 
our wildlife habitat, he said, how can we provide that 
information, because we haven’t completed those 
environmental assessment projects. 
 
I ask the minister again: how much money have you set aside to 
preserve our natural wildlife habitat in those three major 
projects that I am questioning you about in estimates before us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I think the member opposite could find 
the answer several times in Hansard now. I suggest he read 
them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well I’ll certainly look into the information that 
you refer to, Mr. Minister. But anyway, I’d like to go on. I don’t 
believe that I’ve had the information and the answers that I can 
feel at ease with at all, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to go on then with regards to another area. And I want to 
ask the minister: I would like to know what you think of the 
recent proposal to locate an ammonia plant very close to the 
city of Moose Jaw? Did you or did your department get 
involved in the discussions which went on some weeks back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No, Mr. Chairman, we were not 
involved in that project. No project proposal was forwarded to 
Environment. It was within the city of Moose Jaw’s boundaries. 
We know from the news reports that they’ve talked to the city 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
As far as the storage question, that was under the regulations of 
the Department of Labour which requires that to be stored 
outside of city boundaries and a certain length from residential 
areas. And that’s a Department of Labour regulation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, given some of the properties of 
ammonia which make it a very dangerous substance, why did 
you or your department not take a more serious interest in the 
chemical plant proposal that we’re referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the proposal for 
the storage of ammonia is not a new proposal in the province of 
Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, there are  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1304 
 
 

80 or 90 of these sites in Saskatchewan, and they were 
established, of course, when you were in power. 
 
(1630) 
 
But the Department of the Environment, of course, was 
involved in the making up of the regulations that are now in 
place, and now under the Department of Labour, regarding the 
storage of ammonia. And those, as I’d indicated to you in a 
previous answer, those deal with the distance that the storage 
has to be away from built-up areas, and that they have to be 
outside of city limits. And those regulations are under the 
Department of Labour. And Environment — when those 
regulations were made up, and are now in place — 
Environment, of course, had input into the regulations. But they 
are under the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to ask you a number of questions regarding the oil spill 
that we have up in Uranium City that I brought to your attention 
earlier today in question period. And, Mr. Minister, I didn’t 
quite get the answers you got today. But I see that you have 
your officials here now, and I want to get to the bottom of this, 
at what I consider, and what the citizens up in that area 
consider, a very serious oil spill. 
 
I want to first indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that when you have 
the magnitude of 8 to 10,000 gallons of crude oil seeping into 
Lake Athabasca, that becomes a very serious situation — not 
only just for the residents of that immediate area, in the 
Uranium City area, but also it becomes very serious for the 
environmental structure of that whole area. 
 
One has to remember that when you’re dealing with Lake 
Athabasca you’re dealing with a lake that is very cold. The ice 
on the main lake does not go out until, sometimes, in early July, 
and as a result that water up there never really warms up. And 
also as a result, the crude oil that is going into the water will . . . 
very little of it will evaporate. 
 
And you know that the flow of Lake Athabasca goes 
north-west. To the north-west of where the spill is taking place, 
approximately 15 miles down the shore, there is a small inlet 
with the community of Camsell Portage, which is going to be 
the first community that will be affected, other than the 
community of Uranium City, at the present time. 
 
As I indicated to you today, they are starting to find animals 
that are corroded with oil and that are dead already. And some 
of the birds that migrate up into that area have not reached 
Uranium City yet, as that is close to the Northwest Territories 
border. But they tell me that some of the water-fowl is now 
moving in; that bay is now starting to open up. And the 
water-fowl that migrates north and who nest in that area will 
now be using that bay, because that is the first bay and the first 
open water to open up. So naturally that’s the first place they’re 
going to go into. 
 
This spill took place last summer, and there was some work 
done, Mr. Minister. And as indicated to me from a member of 
the town council in Uranium City, a  

contractor from La Ronge has been contracted to come up there 
this summer and do the clean-up. 
 
Now I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that you and y our officials will be 
aware that if they’re going to wait to get the equipment in from 
La Ronge, that’s not going to happen until July, early July, 
when the first barges start coming in. And as a result, the 
10,000 gallons of crude oil is going to be dispersed all over 
Lake Athabasca, and most certainly is going to get down into 
the Fort Chipewyan area on the west side of the lake. 
 
And providing what types of winds we get, and if that oil gets 
into the ice now and the ice floes, with the wrong wind 
direction that oil could possibly end up in the Fond-du-Lac area 
and even go farther east into the Stony Rapids area. And I know 
that’s against the flow and you’re going to say that the water is 
flowing north-west and that can’t happen. But I tell you that it 
can happen because ice moves for hundreds of miles. And 
we’re talking about hundreds of miles on that lake. I think it’s a 
serious situation and if it’s not handled immediately, it’s going 
to get out of control. As I indicated, it’s in the bay right now — 
the main lake is full of ice yet — but now is the time to take 
action on that. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, why you would hire a firm 
from La Ronge to go in there and clean it up this summer when 
you could hire the local people of Uranium City. As the town 
councillor indicated to me, they have the equipment; they have 
the manpower; and they could go in there and do the job right 
now. That oil is seeping out of one spot on the bay; it’s not 
seeping out all around the bay; and if action was taken properly 
right now, it can be under control in no time. But if it’s left until 
the water goes out or till equipment or men can be moved in on 
the barge from La Ronge, then I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 
this is going to become an environmental hazard the magnitude 
of which you just did not expect. When you’ve got crude oil 
floating around on a cold lake such as Athabasca, it’s just not 
going to evaporate. It’s crude and it’s going to continue, and 
it’ll continue to move back and forth along the shores of Lake 
Athabasca as the winds shift. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, why 
you do not hire local contractors from La Ronge and get this 
here massive oil spill that we have up there under control right 
now and nip it in the bud while it’s small. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, when I took notice 
of this question in question period today, I premised my 
remarks saying that I was going to take notice so that I could 
get all the facts, because from time to time the opposition have 
been known to miscue the facts, and they have again. 
 
First of all, just in your question, just in your question, Mr. 
Member, you indicated to this House, first of all, the spill took 
place last summer. The spill took place October 20, 1985 — not 
last summer. 
 
You intimated . . . You stated in your question that the 
Department of Environment had hired a contractor to try and 
clean this spill up this summer. The Department of 
Environment did not hire the contractor to clean anything up 
this summer; the person whose spill this is hires the contractor. 
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1305 
 
 

And I would like to note for the House the chronology of events 
as it took place in this event. On October 20th — which 
apparently, according to the member opposite, is last summer, 
but I don’t take it to be last summer — October 20, 1985, the 
Saskatchewan spill response centre received a call regarding an 
oil spill in Bushell Bay from the local resource officer. 
 
The spill report centre, on October 20, 1985, contacted the 
mines pollution control branch and requested that they inspect 
Bushell Bay and report to the spill centre regarding possible 
damage and possible methods of clean-up. 
 
On October 21st, the day after the spill, the mines pollution 
control branch inspected the bay and observations were made. 
 
On October 22 and 23, 1985, arrangements for air 
transportation were made; equipment and contracting spill 
clean-up personnel were made by spill section personnel. 
 
And on October 24, 1985, Saskatchewan Environment staff 
arrived at the spill site at 1300 hours. And it was determined 
that the bunker C oil, which was being stored in a 
100,000-gallon tank, had spilled and had run over a bank, 
cooled behind a metal building, and then seeped under the metal 
building and was seeping into the bay along the shore line. 
 
The spill appeared to have been caused by vandalism or 
carelessness, as a section of line had been disconnected, and 
this was where the spill occurred. The local resource officer had 
successfully deployed approximately 200 feet of boom and 
much oil had accumulated behind the boom. A black oil slick 
had accumulated along and under the main dock. The decision 
was made to boom as much of the dock area as possible, as this 
was where the oil was the heaviest. An additional 325 feet of 
boom was deployed by Saskatchewan Environment around the 
dock area. Oil staining was evident several hundred feet in both 
directions of where the oil was seeping into the bay. The 525 
feet of boom deployed contained the worst of the oil. And from 
there on, Mr. Speaker, the oil was cleaned up, as much as they 
could, before freeze-up. 
 
Now it’s quite evident, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. Chairman, I 
should say — that Lee’s Construction, which I believe is the 
company from La Ronge, was the contractor who did that for 
Environment. 
 
This spring, of course, it was realized that more clean-up had to 
be done — this spring, not this summer. I am told that the 
owner, who is Burksen Transport — who is the owner, and who 
has to pay for the clean-up — Burksen Transport has hired 
Lee’s. Okay? Burksen Transport has hired Lee’s. Not the 
Department of the Environment but Burksen Transport has 
hired them. And I also understand that they have this week 
flown up the absorbents to Uranium City and that they expect 
work to be under way on further clean-up of this oil spill either 
later this week or early next week. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find this  

quite interesting that the minister would take such a massive 
spill and make such a mockery of it in the legislature. I asked a 
question today in this House. Mr. Chairman, I asked the 
minister in the House about a spill that took place last year, and 
he got up and said — just got up after sitting down and said it 
twice — that there was no spill last year; that it happened on 
October the 20th of 1985. Well I wonder, Mr. Minister, when 
was October 20, 1985 if it wasn’t last year? That’s the kind of a 
minister that’s going around knocking on doors in Regina trying 
to get re-elected. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that when I brought that to your 
attention, I was serious, and the folks up in Uranium City, who 
are finding dead rats and birds who are coated with oil, are very 
serious too. Regardless whether it happened on October 20, 
1985 or if it happened in April of this spring, it’s a massive 
spill. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you don’t know how 
many gallons are spilt because it’s a 100,000-gallon tank and 
the estimated loss is between 8 and 10,000 gallons, and it could 
be a lot more. 
 
But right now I was told by a city councillor in Uranium City 
yesterday that when they pull their boats into the dock right 
now, it’s corroded with oil. So you can imagine what’s 
happening to the wildlife, and what’s going to happen. I 
indicated later on, as it disperses and gets out into the 
environment, it’s going to cover that whole lake because of the 
cold water. 
 
But to get up and joke about whether October the 20th was last 
year or not, I think that shows the depth of the Minister of the 
Environment. I could ask you the question, if October 20, 1985 
was last year. I don’t know if you could answer that, the 
remarks that I’m getting from you. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, that this is a serious matter that 
we’re dealing with. And what I’m asking you to do — and you 
say that the transport company that owned the oil are the ones 
that have to hire the firm to clean it up — but I want to indicate 
to you, Mr. Minister, in your duties as Minister of the 
Environment, it’s your responsibility, and your officials, to 
oversee that that is done. Not if it’s not done, then I think that 
it’s up to your department to say, look here, sit down with the 
community, the town council of Uranium City, and say, look — 
they’re not satisfied; they indicated that yesterday; and I’m sure 
your officials are not satisfied because they are now starting to 
pick up dead animals and birds — you as the Minister of the 
Environment are not satisfied with the clean-up. And you then 
have the authority to say to that community who indicate they 
have the equipment and the manpower, to send one of your 
experts in out of your department, or your department hire an 
expert in the recovery of that oil and let the community do it. 
They have the equipment; they have the manpower; and you 
have the authority. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I think that when you take a look at the seriousness of that 
spill and just how serious it could get in the next six weeks 
when the ice goes out and it disperses itself over a massive lake 
that’s over 200 miles long, that you can just see that things are 
moving too slow. 
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1306 
 
 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of the Environment 
and the powers that you have, if you will send your officials or 
your deputy minister up to Uranium City and meet with that 
town council and come to some agreement, because they’re 
worried up there. 
 
And you guys can sit in your seat and laugh all you want. But I 
think it’s a serious matter. I think it’s a serious matter . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Moosomin, if he 
wants to get into this debate . . . And I think that he should get 
up. He should get up. 
 
And if he thinks that I’m misleading the House, then you get up 
and say that. Don’t say it from your seat. You just stand up and 
ask me the question. Why don’t you stand up, the member from 
Moosomin? Stand up where you are and make that statement. If 
not, fine. Then just let me continue with the estimates, if that’s 
fine with you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But I say to the minister who was just making a mockery of 
when the spill took place . . . And I think that’s wrong. And all 
I’m asking you to do, Mr. Minister, is to use your authority to 
go in and meet with the community of Uranium City. And that 
could be done tomorrow. You have the aircraft to do it. 
 
I ask you to go in there and meet with them and listen to their 
concerns, and maybe through the concerns expressed to your 
officials that you can get this problem solved — solved before 
the ice goes out and before that oil disperses over a massive 
area and then it’s just not going to be recoverable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 
a convenient hearing impairment. The member opposite got up 
in this House and tried to indicate to this House that the spill 
took place last summer. Not last year — last summer. Now I 
wouldn’t mind that, except that what he was trying to imply 
was that the Department of Environment sat around for six 
months and did nothing. And that is the reason I commented on 
it, because the member opposite said last summer so that he 
could imply that. I wanted to read into the record that it was in 
fact October 20th and not last summer, so that we could, in the 
record — in the record — call another miscue, as I put it, of 
fact, from the opposition. All right? That is exactly why I 
commented on it. It had nothing to do with 1985. 
 
Now you seem to think . . . And I say you have a convenient 
hearing impairment because I just indicated to you that the 
company had hired this contracting firm out of La Ronge and 
that they had already, this week, flown some of the material up 
to Uranium City to continue the clean-up, and that we expect 
that clean-up to proceed this week or early next week. This 
week or early next week. I want to repeat that because again the 
member wants to imply in the record that again the Department 
of the Environment is somehow sitting around and is not 
worried about this lake. And that’s not true, and that’s why I 
want to underline the fact that this is under way now. Because 
again the member, in his remarks, implied in this House that we 
were not going to do anything about this spill till this July. And 
tomorrow you can read the Hansard, and that’s what you said 
in this  

House. And that’s why I’d like to point out to the member 
again, that some of this material has already been flown up to 
Uranium City and that we expect this clean-up to be under way 
this week and not in July. You have trouble with facts. Your 
members opposite have trouble with facts. But I want to point 
out in the record what the facts are. So that clean-up will be 
under way in the immediate future. 
 
Mr. Thompson: —Well, Mr. Minister, I do not have a hearing 
impairment. I can assure you of that. 
 
I find it quite interesting that you would get up here the second 
time and say that last October . . . that there was a difference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
between last October and last summer, and that seems to be a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
big item with the minister. The spill of 10,000 gallons of crude 
oil took place in October, and just because I used the word “last 
summer”, which I guess I should have used “last fall”, and I’m 
assuming that’s what the minister means — that I should have 
said last fall instead of last summer. I really don’t understand 
you. I suspect that the citizens who you are knocking on their 
doors don’t understand neither. 
 
But regardless if the spill took place last summer or if it took 
place last fall, it took place last October. And I suggest to you, 
Mr. Minister, last October there was no snow on the ground and 
the lake was open and summer conditions were prevailing all 
over this province, if you can understand that. I’m not too sure 
if you can understand that. 
 
But you think that’s a great joke because we’ve got a major 
spill. You also make light of the fact that the city council in 
Uranium City are concerned. And you say, well that’s fine, the 
company has hired a firm and they are flying in the equipment. 
And that goes to show you why you’re $2 billion in debt in this 
province, because you could have hired the local people at 
Uranium City with the local equipment and you could have got 
that spill under control. But instead you leave it and you let 
somebody look after it from the South who have to fly their 
equipment in, when equipment is sitting there not being used. 
Now the bays are opened up and we have animals who are lying 
along the shore dead and corroded with oil. We know that the 
birds are going to land there and they’re going to be corroded 
with oil. And you stand up in the House and you say that well 
— to the opposition — it’s not true; they’re not listening 
properly; and that the spill wasn’t last summer, it was last 
October. And you make a mockery of this. 
 
No wonder this government is $2 billion in debt because we 
have ministers like yourself who are arrogant and who do not 
realize the facts of life. Unemployment is running high up 
North; it’s running high in this province. But yet what do you 
do? You say. . . You get your officials and you give 
authorization to make a major clean-up of a major oil spill by 
an outfit who has to fly the equipment in.  And that is being 
flown in the month of May in 1986, and we had the major oil 
spill in October of 1985. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that you, as the 
Minister of the Environment, knowing full well that we had at 
least 10,000 gallons of crude oil spilt in October — in the fall of 
1985 — that you should have had your  
  



 
May 14, 1986 

 

1307 
 
 

officials act immediately, not wait until May, almost June of 
1986. 
 
Now you say that they’re starting to fly equipment in, when that 
equipment and the men to operate that equipment and you and 
your officials were aware of the seriousness of that spill. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, that when you stand in this House and you 
question the credibility of the town council of Uranium City, 
who expressed to me yesterday their concerns over this spill . . . 
And I know that you were aware of the spill in October of 1985, 
and you know that you were aware of it. Why on earth did you 
not take on the responsibility as the Minister of the 
Environment and use your powers to see that that spill was 
cleaned up? 
 
Not only did that spill take place, Mr. Chairman, in October of 
1985, but at that time there was still a month of open water on 
that lake, or two months of open water, because that lake, Lake 
Athabasca, doesn’t freeze up until almost Christmas sometimes. 
That’s a big lake. And that oil spill took place on October 20th. 
Now that crude oil could be floating all over Lake Athabasca 
before the ice came. And I think that your officials and yourself 
should have took action in October — not in April of 1986, but 
in October of 1985, in the fall. Not in the summer, as you 
indicated. It wasn’t summer, but it was fall. It was October. 
 
And I think that to leave a massive oil spill of this magnitude 
lay there all winter and lay in the ice . . . And that’s why some 
of the muskrats now are starting to come to the surface because 
the muskrats up in the north country do not have push-ups. 
They’re bank rats. They go into the banks and they go under 
docks and that’s where they build their houses, under docks. 
And you just stood up in this House a little while ago and said 
that you were putting new oil into the docks and then the 
muskrats, they go in under the docks, into their houses, and then 
they swim under the water into the bays and into the runs up 
into the banks. And this is how it spreads. 
 
And this is how serious it is. And that’s why they’re finding 
muskrats all along the shore now. And the town council of 
Uranium City has these muskrats and they’re there for your 
viewing. They want you to go up there and to view them and 
they would appreciate that. And they would appreciate getting 
that problem solved. 
 
But to stand up in this House and make light of it and say that 
it’s not serious, that it didn’t happen last summer but it 
happened in October . . . Mr. Chairman, if the House Leader . . . 
I have a number of other questions that I want to ask, Mr. 
Chairman, but if the House Leader wants to take my place now 
and adjourn the House, that’s fine. But if it’s not him, then I 
want to keep going. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


