


















































June 11, 1986 Debates


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 11, 1986 

1873 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to my colleagues in this legislature, a 
group of grade 6 and 7 students from Wascana School. They are 
here accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ingham, and their 
chaperon, Mrs. Skolmoski. They are attending here as part of 
their social studies program. 
 
The Wascana School is in the constituency of Elphinstone, and 
I know a good deal about it since my son David and my 
daughter Margaret attended Wascana School and have many 
fond memories. The students here had enjoyed a tour of the 
building, will be with us during question period. I will look 
forward to having an opportunity to view the question period 
and to give yourself an even better understanding of how our 
legislative and parliamentary system work. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in greeting the students from 
Wascana. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a 
group of 50 students from the Sylvania-McKague area just 
south of Tisdale. They’re grade 7, 8, and 9. They’re 
accompanied here by their principal from the Sylvania School, 
Mr. McGowan, also Mr. Dahlsjo, Mrs. Shirley Dusener – I 
didn’t say that correctly, I know – and Mrs. Loewen, and Mrs. 
Furber. I don’t know who else is accompanied with them, but I 
understand those are with them. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them later at 3 o’clock for pictures out front 
and in my office for drinks. I hope they find this stay in the 
legislature both informative, and I’m sure they’ll find it exciting 
at times. I hope they find it very informative also. I wish them a 
safe journey home, and I ask all the Assembly to join with me 
in welcoming the students from McKague and Sylvania to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, a 
number of miners and wives from the PCS Lanigan mine. The 
miners are members of Local 922 of the Energy and Chemical 
Workers. They are here today accompanied by their president, 
Mr. Gil Todd. There are some members in the Speaker’s 
gallery, there are some members in the east gallery, and there 
are some members here in the west gallery. 
 
I want to say that the miners and the supporting members of 
their families are here indicating their deep concern of not 
having a contract for over a year and a half, almost a year and a 
half. I want all members . . .  I’ve had the opportunity to meet 
with the miners, and I know that I  

share their concern in respect to their problem that they are 
facing, and I want all members to join with me to welcome the 
miners and members of their family here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Dispute with Saskatchewan Doctors 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question with 
respect to the Department of Health, and in the absence of the 
minister and the Premier and the Deputy Premier, I will direct 
the question to the Acting Minister of Health, the hon. Member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
My question deals with the dispute between the government and 
Saskatchewan doctors which has resulted in the withdrawal of 
health care services to members of the public in a number of 
communities. I ask the minister, or any other member of the 
treasury benches, whether they could provide the Assembly 
with a report on the status of negotiations which, I understand, 
began yesterday and continued this morning in Regina. 
 
News reports indicate that there is a tentative agreement, and 
I’ll ask the government to respond indicating whether or not 
there is a tentative agreement, and does this mean an immediate 
end to any planned withdrawals of health care services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 
there were long and intense discussions that began yesterday 
and carried on throughout the evening and into the night hours, 
and that an agreement in principle was reached. I’m not privy to 
the details at this particular moment, and I would certainly take 
notice. I believe that the Minister of Health would be able to 
provide more details to the member opposite and to this 
Assembly at some further time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll ask a supplementary. Since these negotiations are very 
important, not only from the point of view of health services, 
but also from the point of view of the amounts of money 
involved, can the minister inform Saskatchewan taxpayers 
whether the tentative agreement to which the minister has 
referred will require additional funding for the medical care 
insurance commission over and above the amount provided for 
in the estimates which we have already discussed in this House, 
and if so, can he indicate where additional funds would come 
from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated just a moment 
ago, I was not partly to the negotiation process myself, and I’m 
not privy to the exact details of what actually transpired during 
those particular negotiations. I’m sure that dollars were 
discussed. We all know that there were some differences and 
some disagreements and that that certainly will have been a 
focus of the discussions. Exactly what the fiscal implications 
are of the agreement in principle, I would have to take notice. 
And I’m sure the Minister of Health, who, I understand, is  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1874 
 
 

opening a nursing home today, is not able to be here, would 
certainly be willing to provide that particular information at the 
appropriate time. 
 
I’m very encouraged, as I’m sure all members of the Assembly 
are, that an agreement in principle was reached. There was 
previously an agreement reached with the nurses and an 
agreement with the doctors now, and I’m sure that’s something 
that we all are very encouraged by. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Final 
supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will be aware that 
there were news reports indicating that the area of discussion 
indicated a settlement of the order of 4.2 per cent plus 
adjustments for particular groups of specialists. 
 
Can the minister indicate to the House and to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers whether or not the overall settlement, the global 
settlement, will involve an increase of in the range of 3.5 per 
cent gross, or is it going to be 4 or 4.5 per cent, or some figure 
substantially higher than 3.5 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the 
Minister of Health will, at the appropriate time, make public the 
details of the particular agreement. I indicated previously I’m 
not privy to the exact amounts that were discussed or 
percentages that were agreed on. I would take notice of that, 
and the Minister of Health will, I’m sure, make that information 
available. 
 
I think the fact that we did work long and hard to achieve this 
agreement indicates once again that health care is certainly a 
number one priority of the Progressive Conservative 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Strike at Lanigan Potash Mine 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a 
question to the minister responsible for the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, and it deals with the strike at the PCS mine at 
Lanigan which began three months ago yesterday. 
 
The 290-some employees at that mine have been without a 
contract for more than 16 months, Mr. Minister, and in spite of 
repeated attempts to bargain with you and the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. The minister should know that 
this dispute has created a great stress to hundreds of families 
involved in it and has also had an adverse effect on the 
economy of Lanigan and immediate district. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: will the minister not take an active 
interest in this dispute and instruct his officials to get on with 
some serious bargaining so that these 290 workers can get back 
to their jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I have in fact taken 
an active interest in this rather unfortunate event. I have met 
with Mr. Todd; I have met with the townspeople, the mayor of 
Lanigan. We have been in constant communications, of course, 
with the PCS management. 
 

I understand that the conciliator has a meeting scheduled 
tomorrow. Hopefully that meeting will lead towards some 
settlement of this dispute, but I think the logical progression of 
events would be to let the natural bargaining process take it’s 
place, and that is, in fact, happening. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further question to the minister, supplement. 
Mr. Minister, there was some discussion with the corporation or 
the conciliator following the strike, and the remarks by the 
corporations in respect to it is that it was essentially a money 
dispute. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: are you not appraised of the 
fact that the workers have raised a number of concerns in 
respect to the health and safety at the mine? Is that not one of 
the key issues that they have raised? And can you explain why a 
government corporation like PCS would not want to set an 
example for health and safety record, and why you would refuse 
to seriously discuss the health and safety concern raised by the 
employees and the workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’m certainly not 
prepared at this time to get involved in the specific issues which 
have led to, and are continuing, this impasse. I discussed the 
health and safety issue with Mr. Todd when I met with him in 
Saskatoon. In fact, I indicated at that time, if those were the 
only issues, we could solve them right there, and the strike 
could end the next day. 
 
Mr. Todd indicated that there were in fact other concerns, 
monetary primarily, that had to be dealt with, and I think that 
the process has to take place. The conciliator is meeting 
tomorrow with the two sides, and as I indicated, I am hopeful 
that something of a positive nature will flow from that meeting, 
and we can go on down the path to settling this unfortunate 
impasse. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplement. Mr. 
Minister, would you agree that the meeting of the conciliator 
tomorrow is a very restricted meeting; that the area of concern 
is not in looking at the overall attempt of settlement, but 
confined to a very limited area; and that as a result of that there 
could not possibly result in resolution of the strike? 
 
And I ask you further, since the Premier and yourself have 
indicated publicly that you would actively take part in an 
attempt to settle it, and since the Premier has already taken part 
in the medical dispute, I wonder whether you, or in fact would 
you ask your friend, your colleague, the Premier, to take an 
equal interest in the workers at Lanigan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at this 
particular time I am fully prepared to let the natural process take 
its course. We have confidence in the conciliator. I think he has 
a proven record. I think we would like to see him bring the two 
sides together and see if discussions can be held. 
 
The comparison between the medical association and this union 
are somewhat different in the fact that it was the first time under 
the new agreement that negotiations had  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1875 
 

taken place, and there was some lack of understanding, 
possibly, on how that process should work. This process is 
clearly laid out. The conciliator, I think, will get the two sides 
together. Hopefully, as I indicated, there will be some 
movement on both sides, and we can get on to serious 
discussions to settle this impasse. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
ask – the minister alludes to allowing the matter to go its natural 
course – I ask you: why did you not, in respect to the medical 
dispute, allow it to take it’s natural course? And you had the 
minister involved and you had the Premier. I say that there’s 
290 workers in Lanigan that haven’t had a contract for almost 
18 months. I ask you: will you use your office, or ask the 
Premier, to bring the two sides together to resolve this matter 
which, in fact, has to do with a number of safety issues as well 
as fair return for their labours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again the process 
is clearly established: the conciliator is in place; there are 
meetings taking place. I think that the point that the member 
tries to make is, in fact, an attempt to play cheap politics with 
the lives of the workers in this province. The member, in his 
own right, advised this union that it was not wise to go on strike 
at this time. I think, when you look at the industry there, maybe 
his advice was not poorly taken; possibly it should have been 
heeded. 
 
But the point is, we have gone through an impasse. It has been 
unfortunate. There is blame on both sides. It’s not clear-cut, one 
side or the other. The conciliator will have them together 
tomorrow. They will begin discussions to try to solve this 
impasse, and I have confidence that the conciliator will, in fact, 
see progress tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, or a new question to the 
minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you will recall that 
executives of SaskTel received a 13 per cent pay increase, and 
these are people who earn $75,000 a year in the last . . .  In 
some Crown corporations that’s what the increase has been. 
Can you detail what cuts in pay and fringe benefits have been 
demanded of all the executives of PCS as part of your restraint 
measures, Mr. Minister, which you are implementing? Has 
there been an across-the-board cut in pay for all the senior 
executives or has there not been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well obviously we have a Crown 
corporations question, something that . . .  (inaudible) . . .  The 
answer is no, there has not been an across-the-board cut, and 
there is no across-the-board cut being discussed in this strike. 
The fact of the matter is that potash corporation and all the 
potash industry is in very difficult times. We’ve been through 
that debate a number of times in this House and in Crown 
corporations. And the answer to the question is simply no. 
 

Funding for CMHC Regional Assistance Program 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for the Sask Housing Corporation. This 
deals with the serious problem now being experienced with 
CMHC’s residential rehab assistance program, the RAP 
(regional assistance  

program) program, Mr. Minister. 
 
Because your government and your political friends in Ottawa 
failed to agree on a funding agreement for this important 
program, and employees of this program are being laid off, Mr. 
Minister, contractors that usually do this work don’t have the 
work to do at this point. They are waiting to get some funding 
in place so that they can get some of the applications processed, 
Mr. Minister, to get the grants and the loans going. 
 
Can the minister explain why he and his friend, Bill McKnight, 
from Ottawa, have failed or have been unable, for whatever 
reason, to sign a global agreement on the housing program 
which would free up some of the funds for the RAP program 
and get this good program back under way and back on track, as 
it has been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always been my intention 
to see a global agreement with subsumed operating agreements 
signed as expeditiously as possible, and that in fact is what will 
happen. I expect that that will take place in the very near future. 
 
At the same time, we want to ensure that we negotiate the best 
possible deal that we can for Saskatchewan and for 
Saskatchewan residents. And it is for that reason that we are in 
the final stages, and we expect that we will, in fact, be signing 
an agreement in the very near future with CMHC, and that the 
activities that the member opposite is referring to will, in fact, 
take place. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Question to the minister. Mr. Minister, surely 
you’re aware that all funds have been froze at this time, and 
we’re about two months into the construction season for this 
year, and you’re talking about getting something signed soon. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you not aware that applications are piling up 
all over this province at this point; contractors that usually do 
this work are looking for jobs because they don’t have anything 
to do. The programs are not . . .  the funding is not being freed 
up, Mr. Minister. When are you going to get together with your 
political friends in Ottawa and get this agreement signed so that 
the program can get back under way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member 
opposite just a half minute ago that we have been negotiating 
the best possible deal for Saskatchewan. I suppose that we 
could have signed a month previously, or two months 
previously, and then he would have said, you rushed into 
negotiations; you didn’t get the best possible deal that you 
could have. 
 
Well we want to ensure that we have the best possible 
agreement that we can have for the province of Saskatchewan 
and for our residents. And it is for that reason that we will be 
signing this particular global agreement with the operating 
agreements as well, and I might add that the first province that 
will be signing all of those agreements in the very near future. 
And I expect that the activities that the member opposite is 
expressing a concern about today will, in fact, begin taking 
place in the very near future. 
 
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1876 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan is one of 
only three provinces who have not signed that agreement. Do 
you not understand, Mr. Minister, that our very short 
construction season makes it extremely important that you get 
together with your federal friends in Ottawa and get this 
agreement settled as quickly as possible. Normally the money is 
available in February. It is now the middle of June and the 
money is not available yet. Are you not aware, Mr. Minister, 
that there are over 200 people in Regina alone on the waiting 
list, and another 200 more in Saskatoon, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
wants to take the time of the Assembly to ask the same question 
which the other questioner asked twice – in essence the 
question has now been asked three times this afternoon – I will 
quite readily respond with the same answer, but I thought that 
perhaps they might want to provide some other question for the 
Assembly. If they don’t have another question, then we will 
continue to respond with the same answer. And that answer is 
that we have been in serious negotiations with CMHC (Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation). I, myself, have personally 
discussed and negotiated with the federal minister. We are very 
satisfied that we are going to have the best possible deal for the 
province of Saskatchewan. That agreement will be signed in the 
very near future. And the kind of housing activities, the 
processes that the member opposite is concerned about, that 
those matters in fact will be taking place in the very near future 
in Regina and in Saskatoon and around the province. 
 
Now I have answered the question three times. If the members 
want to ask it a fourth time, I will answer it a fourth time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. And he should keep in mind that as long as he does 
not answer the question, it will be asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, your dithering is making people have to wait until 
winter-time, probably, for their grants to be approved, at which 
time they will not be able to get the work done, Mr. Minister 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Is this a supplementary? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I said, new question, Mr. Deputy Leader, 
it’s good to have you back. Mr. Minister, can you confirm that 
under the new RAP (regional assistance program) guide-lines, 
which you are negotiating in order to get the best agreement, 
that have been suggested by Ottawa, thousands of 
Saskatchewan people who used to be eligible will no longer be 
eligible, in fact will be left out in the cold? 
 
RAP used to provide a $5,000 grant and a further $5,000 loan to 
a family with an income of $13,000 a year or less. And that 
assistance, Mr. Minister, was gradually reduced as their income 
level increased to a cut-off point of $23,000 a year. However, 
the new guide-lines that are being proposed will cut off all the 
assistance above $15,500. because of your tremendous 
negotiations, in Saskatoon . . .  14,500 in Saskatoon and 15,000 
in Regina. Anyone making a dollar above that level will no 
longer be eligible for assistance. 
 

Do you agree, Mr. Minister, with this decision which you are 
negotiating to make thousands of Saskatchewan families 
ineligible for assistance under this very worthwhile program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, this particular government, 
through Sask Housing, is providing far more housing assistance 
today than the former NDP administration ever did. And that’s 
the first point that needs to be made. And we dealt with this 
issue, Mr. Speaker, in estimates just a couple of days ago. And I 
quoted the statistics at that time, the comparative statistics that 
show that this government is indeed paying much more 
attention to the housing concerns of the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Our priority is there, rather than buying 
potash mines and uranium mines like the former government 
did. 
 
Now I indicated to him that when the agreement is signed, that 
in fact the information will be made public, and at that time all 
of the details relating to all of the housing programs will be 
made public. And I think it’s appropriate that you don’t make 
those kinds of things public before you’ve actually signed an 
agreement. 
 
It certainly does make sense, Mr. Speaker, to target subsidy 
dollars – in essence to target the dollars of the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan to those lower income people that are most in 
need of assistance. I think that’s a principle that we all would 
accept, and that is exactly what we are attempting to do through 
the rehabilitation program. 
 
Now there will be differences of opinion as to where the income 
cut-off level will be. And as I indicated just a moment ago, I’m 
not about to talk about the negotiations publicly before we have 
actually signed an agreement, but I can indicate that this 
government is spending more on housing and is doing more to 
meet the housing needs than the former administration ever did. 
 

Cut in Federal Transfer Payments 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question, in 
the absence of the Minister of Finance, to the Premier, and it 
deals with the Mulroney government’s plan to arbitrarily cut 
federal transfer payments to the provinces for health care and 
post-secondary education. 
 
The legislation to make these cuts law, Bill C-96, was approved 
by the PC majority in the parliamentary committee without 
amendment on Monday of this week, and it now goes back to 
the Commons for final approval. It may well be law then in a 
few short weeks. 
 
Can the Premier tell the Saskatchewan taxpayers what specific 
action your government plans to take in the next few days to 
convince the Mulroney government to either postpone this 
legislation or amend it at the report stage in parliament? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. 
Member what we have done, not only recently, but compared to 
others. We provided an 11 per cent increase in our health 
budget in the province of Saskatchewan,  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1877 
 

which is very significant. Correspondingly, my colleague, the 
Premier of Manitoba, provided a 3 per cent increase in his 
health care budget. 
 
So when we look at the corresponding expenditures in health 
care, the province of Saskatchewan is very committed to health 
care – hospitals, nurses, physicians, nursing homes, all the rest. 
And if we look at the last four years, the money that we’ve put 
in there, compared to Manitoba or anybody else that suffers the 
same kinds of economic conditions, in fact, not even as bad as 
we did, our record will stand quite clear as one as a major 
commitment to health care in our negotiations with other 
provinces and with the federal government. 
 
So let there be no mistake, this is the largest commitment to 
health care that we’ve seen in the history of Saskatchewan, and 
we’re very proud of it, and we’ll compare it to any other 
jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 
obviously didn’t make my question clear. The question dealt 
with Bill C-96 and whether or not you were prepared to see the 
federal government cut back its transfer to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to all other provinces. 
 
You will be aware, Mr. Premier, that the Government of 
Manitoba appeared before the parliamentary committee; the 
Premier of New Brunswick made a submission. Can you, Mr. 
Premier, explain why your government decided not to appear 
before the parliamentary committee in the face of the fact that 
passing this law will mean many fewer dollars coming to 
Saskatchewan than would be the case if this law did not pass. 
Do you acknowledge that if C-96 passes, Saskatchewan gets 
less money from Ottawa; and do you acknowledge that other 
provinces have appeared before the committee; and will you 
explain why you have taken no action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of observations. 
The first is that I expressed my concerns with respect to 
cut-backs right on national television at the first ministers’ 
meeting in Halifax and made it very clear and laid out our 
position. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in this province we would 
have been penalized by the federal government had we not 
removed direct billing. 
 
Under your administration you had direct billing, and you 
would have had a penalty, and you would have been charged a 
great deal of money as a result of that. As a result of our 
administration there is no more direct billing, and there’s no 
penalties in the province of Saskatchewan; so therefore we 
don’t get that penalty. 
 
When you look at the combination of what we’ve done with 
respect to health care, the expenditures that we’ve put in it, and 
the deliberations that we’ve had with the federal government, 
the health care budget in the province of Saskatchewan will 
rank with any in the country, and certainly a lot better than it 
was under a previous administration here. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 48 – An Act to 
establish the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency and govern its activities and to provide for an 
appeal board with respect to certain assessment matters be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I first 
noted the introduction of this Bill, I was not intending to say 
much on it. Indeed, I was intending to let it go to committee so 
that we could consider the legislation. But having now taken a 
look at the Bill and having, Mr. Speaker, studied the interim 
report of the Local Government Finance Commission which 
recommended the agency which is being proposed in this Bill, 
and having discussed it with both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities), and with the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), I think it has become clear to me 
that what the Bill is doing, according to what the minister has 
stated, is not exactly what was originally intended by the 
recommendations which were made by the interim report of the 
Local Government Finance Commission. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I think it is important to point out certain 
flaws that are becoming more and more obvious in this 
legislation and as my colleague, the member from Shaunavon, 
indicated when he spoke on it the day that the minister gave 
second reading; it appears more and more every day that this 
Bill is intended only to cosmeticize a political problem of the 
government, rather than meet the objective of providing a truly 
independent assessment agency. 
 
I will want to point out, Mr. Speaker, why this Bill does not 
provide a truly independent assessment agency as was 
recommended by the commission, as was requested by local 
government associations, and, I think, as has been generally 
accepted by the public. 
 
I find it with some interest that as of yesterday, neither the 
SSTA, nor SUMA, nor SARM had had an opportunity to look 
at this legislation. I found that particularly interesting in light of 
the fact that the minister spent so much time in his remarks 
talking about the consultation process that had taken place. 
 
And it is true that there was some consultation, and actually 
very good consultation, with regard to the recommendations of 
the Local Government Finance Commission on property 
assessment in Saskatchewan. But the consultations stopped 
after the consideration of these recommendations. None of these 
associations ever received a draft copy of the Bill – as far as I 
know – for their consideration, and some of the provisions that 
are in it now are of some concern to local government, and so 
they should be. 
 
And I simply, for the benefit of the minister and the House, 
want to point out what some of those concerns  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1878 
 
 

are. It was recommended on page 5 of the commission’s report, 
Mr. Minister, or page 43, and it’s referred to in the Bill on page 
5 to some degree. But in the commission’s report it was 
recommended that there be an independent assessment agency – 
and I stress the word “independent.” 
 
I find it somewhat interesting and distressing to see in the 
legislation that there’s provision here that in fact a member of 
the Legislative Assembly could be appointed to this 
commission. Now how that strengthens the independence of the 
assessment function when that condition is applied in the 
legislation, I find difficult to understand, and so do local 
governments find it difficult to understand. 
 
The commission report had recommended that there be 
representatives from SUMA, from SARM, and from the SSTA; 
that there be two representatives from the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, two representatives from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and one 
from the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. That’s 
what the commission recommended. 
 
Well, the minister who was in charge shakes his head. 
Obviously, after the report was provided to him, he hadn’t read 
it. But it is right here. The school trustees, Mr. Speaker, with 
whom you have some understanding, I know, were concerned 
about the fact that there was only going to be one SSTA 
member represented. But they compromised, because when the 
discussions on this thing took place with the commission, they 
compromised, and they were prepared to accept one 
representative on this assessment management agency. 
 
When the Bill was introduced in this House, Mr. Speaker, that 
provision was not incorporated in the Bill. There is no 
representation for the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association. The Saskatchewan school trustees are concerned, 
and I support them in their concern. 
 
So what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is simply that this so-called 
consultation that took place seemed to be an exercise only, 
without any final result coming out of it that would meet what 
obviously were the expectations of the people who are going to 
be affected most of all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the independent . . .  the property assessment 
agency, as recommended by the commission, also said that the 
chairman of the commission should be chosen by the board of 
directors who are members of that commission. The legislation 
here indicates that the chairman will be appointed by the 
minister through order in council, in consultation with the 
people who are members of the board of the so-called 
independent assessment agency – another recommendation 
which is not followed. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if it’s truly going to be independent, then 
the heavy hand of government in the appointment of some of 
the representatives of this commission, like the chairperson, 
ought not to be there. If SUMA and SARM, and if the 
recommendations had been followed, SSTA also – if they had 
been allowed to appoint somebody, have appointed members 
along with the government  

members appointed by the minister or the cabinet, if they’re 
appointed. I assume that they’re certainly people of high quality 
and ability. It seems to me only fair that they ought to be able, 
therefore, to get together and choose a chairman among them. I 
do not see why it is necessary for the minister to appoint the 
chairman, or the chairperson, whichever the case may be. 
 
And so some of the principles incorporated in this legislation, 
which was supposed to result in an independent assessment 
management agency, some of those principles have to be in 
question, and that’s why I decided that some of these 
shortcomings have to be pointed out. 
 
It is true that the Bill states, Mr. Minister, that SARM and 
SUMA will be able to recommend members that will be a part 
of this commission board, but the legislation does not make it 
very clear. And if we can clarify it in committee – I would 
appreciate that – whether the people who are going to be 
recommended by SUMA or SARM – and if the minister will 
reconsider, hopefully by the SSTA – whether they will then be 
automatically accepted by the minister and appointed, or 
whether the minister will indeed be asking for three, four, or 
five names and then choose his select two that he wants to have. 
 
Governments in the past have made that kind of approach – and 
will in the future – but I think that kind of approach is not the 
correct one in this case. Now if I am wrong in my interpretation 
of the Bill on that, I would appreciate if the minister would put 
on record when he concludes his remarks, and make it clear that 
when the municipal organizations nominate two people to go no 
this board, those two people will be the two people who will be 
appointed. I think it’s important that the minister make that 
clear because that is of some concern to municipalities. And I 
have discussed this with several municipal people who have 
indicated to me that they were somewhat concerned, and I think 
that they should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are mainly the concerns that I wanted to 
raise. There are a number of questions which I will want to 
address in committee, because there are certain clauses in here 
which I think might be improved, and some of them which are 
not very clear. 
 
I wanted to raise those issues because they really are issues that 
deal specifically with the principle of what this Bill is supposed 
to do, and the Bill is supposed to set up an independent 
assessment agency. And I’m not sure that, as it is right now, it 
does that. There is too much government influence in it, and 
therefore it jeopardizes the independence that it ought to have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will therefore conclude my remarks with those 
comments. And if the minister has any comments that he would 
like to make to clarify any of the issues which I have raised, I 
would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to 
make concluding remarks on this very important piece of 
legislation which indeed does establish an independent 
assessment management agency in our province, something that 
should have been established some time ago. 
 
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1879 
 

We all recall that, under the former NDP government, they ran 
the assessment here in the province with an iron glove. There 
was no independence. There was no involvement of anybody 
else. They were the ones who directed assessment in the 
province. 
 
We have decided, after much consultation, that in fact it does 
make good sense, good management sense, good assessment 
sense, to establish an independent assessment agency. And that 
independence is in fact established by virtue of the fact that 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
will in fact have a majority of representation on the board of 
directors of this particular agency. 
 
(1445) 
 
It will be an agency that answers unto itself. It is not an agency 
or an entity of the government or of the Crown in any fashion. 
It is separate; it is independent. So we are, in fact, responding to 
what the various interest groups and organizations here in 
Saskatchewan have requested. And I think that is a very 
forward-looking step. 
 
As it relates to the membership coming from SUMA or SARM, 
the two members that would be nominated by those particular 
organizations, the members suggest that in the past 
governments would ask for four or five and then pick the two 
that they wanted. Well that may have been, that may have been 
the process of the NDP in the past, where the NDP did ask for 
four or five, and then decided which two were most acceptable 
to them. 
 
That is not, that will not be, the process that this particular 
government will follow. Whoever the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association nominates will, in fact, be what we 
will accept, and whatever the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities says with regards to the two that they want 
on, we will accept. And it’s unfortunate that the member 
opposite would not stand to his feet and say that we have what 
we have here is in fact a good Bill. 
 
I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we are taking the steps 
today that we have laid before the Assembly to establish an 
independent assessment management agency. It is the kind of 
forward-looking managing of issues approach that we want to 
see in our province. I’m pleased that it’s a Progressive 
Conservative government which is responding to establish this 
independent assessment agency. 
 
I do expect that everybody in this Assembly would want to 
support this particular Bill. It’s unfortunate to see that the 
members opposite have made some of the comments that they 
have, but we will see. We will see when, in fact, we call for the 
vote on this particular Bill. I certainly would encourage all 
members who are here today to support this forward-looking 
piece of legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 

 

Devine Young 
Tusa Hopfner 
McLeod Weiman 
Andrew Rybchuk 
Schoenhals Domotor 
Hardy Muller 
Folk Glauser 
Smith (Swift Current) Gerich 
Myers Petersen 
Dirks Swenson 
Embury Tchorzewski 
Sandberg Thompson 
Maxwell Engel 
Smith (Moose Jaw) Koskie 
Hodgins Lusney 
Morin Yew 
Muirhead Sveinson 
Parker Hampton 

— 36 
 

Nays 
— 0 

 
Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole 
at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 49 – An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Assessment 
Management Agency Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 – An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading 
of Bill No. 55, An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act. This Bill is designed to allow for property that is 
now public and being transferred to private hands to be 
removed from the Meewasin Valley Authority. No private 
property in the R.M. of Corman Park is under the jurisdiction of 
the Meewasin Valley Authority; however, there is some public 
property in the R.M. that does come under the authority’s 
jurisdiction. Saskatoon Chemicals is owned by Prince Albert 
Pulp Company Limited and, therefore, on public property. In 
consultation with the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority) 
regarding the sale of the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited 
to a private firm, it was therefore agreed that this property be 
transferred out of the authority so as to be consistent with all 
other private property in Corman Park. This Bill does provide a 
statutory easement to the authority for a portion of land along 
the river bank for their use and their enjoyment. 
 
As I have indicated, this matter has been thoroughly discussed 
with the Meewasin Valley Authority, and they have no problem 
with the amendment. Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second 
reading of this Bill, and I would urge all members to support 
this piece of legislation. 



 
June 11, 1986 

1880 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to the 
minister’s remarks. I want to adjourn debate on this Bill until 
we’ve had an opportunity to make some contacts with people 
who are affected. In saying that, I’m not questioning what the 
minister has said, but I think it’s only appropriate we do that. 
And so I beg leave at this time to adjourn debated. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 54 – An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
speak to a small, yet important, amendment to The Horse 
Racing Regulation Act. As you are aware, our government has 
a history of responding to the needs of the province’s 
horse-racing industry. Most significantly, in December, 1983 
we established the Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission. 
This body was created because the horse-racing industry told us 
they needed an independent and unbiased regulatory agency. 
We were pleased to respond to that need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with this amendment to The Horse Racing Regulation Act, 
we are responding to another need. As you know, separate pool 
wagering is a new fact of life for this province’s horse-racing 
industry. Under the separate pool wagering, racing fans at one 
track bet on races at another track, but those bets are recorded 
and distributed separately from the bets at the track where the 
race is run. This separate pool wagering, which is permitted by 
the Criminal Code of Canada, was tried and introduced by the 
industry to add another dimension to the horse-racing industry 
in Saskatchewan and to help the industry hold or increase to 
declining revenue. 
 
However, while separate pool wagering is now part of the 
industry in Saskatchewan, there is no provision for the province 
to tax betting under the separate pool wagering system. The 
result is that separate pool wagering now returns approximately 
10 per cent more to betters, and is therefore more attractive to 
the racing public. This in turn puts strain on live racing in 
Saskatchewan, as betters may move away from betting on live 
races run in the province in hopes of winning more money on 
races which take place in other communities across western 
Canada. Under these circumstances, Saskatchewan’s 
horse-racing industry, which is already facing some difficult 
times, could find itself facing further hardship. 
 
To improve this situation and to place separate pool wagering 
on the same footing as other betting, as requested by the 
horse-racing industry, this amendment will make it possible for 
the provincial government to tax separate pool wagering at a 
rate of 10 per cent – same rate at which the pari mutuel betting 
is taxed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendment we are proposing is fair, 
and helps address the concerns of the industry. I move second 
reading of The Horse Racing Regulation (Amendment) Act, 
1986. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues want to look 
at it and just see what is entailed in this, and therefore  

I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to ask the Minister of Agriculture to 
please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to introduce to the Assembly and the members of the 
opposition: Mr. Jack Drew, deputy minister, Saskatchewan 
Agriculture; Mr. Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister; Mr. 
Henry Zilm, assistant deputy minister; and Mr. Wes Mazer, 
director, administrative services branch, Saskatchewan 
Agriculture. 
 
(1500) 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, this is a good time to be discussing 
agricultural estimates. Farmers are anxious to have some of the 
concerns raised, and we hope that in the next couple of hours in 
the time we spend here that we’ll possibly find some answers to 
some of these concerns they’re raising. 
 
I think there is a larger difference in the philosophy and the 
outlook and the approach to agriculture this time around than 
I’ve seen watching and looking at three different stripes of 
governments. 
 
I got involved and was actively farming when Toby Nollet was 
the minister of Agriculture. He was around a long time, a real 
gentleman, and somebody that set kind of a level for ministers 
of Agriculture. 
 
Then we had the election of the Liberal government, and I can’t 
really say that during those years in agriculture that they 
disappointed me in agriculture as much as your government 
has. I was disappointed in the Liberal’s approach to 
small-business men, and I, as a contractor there rather than as a 
farmer, was hurt and offended and aggravated enough that I got 
into politics because of some of the actions that the Liberal 
government had in relationship to their dealings with 
small-business men and, in particular, contractors. 
 
But this last term, now that we’ve watched the four and 
one-half years that you’ve had a chance to orchestrate 
agriculture – you’re the third minister we’ve had in these four 
years. I think, taking it on yourself and deciding to be the 
Minister of Agriculture has, I think, been a grave mistake, Mr. 
Premier. I want to outline some of the reasons why I believe 
that. 
 
Agriculture is more than just a sideline in Saskatchewan. 
Agriculture is the number one industry. And with all due 
respect, Mr. Minister, you can’t successfully wear two hats on 
this one. I noted when you introduced your staff that you 
introduced the officials, as you have a deputy   



 
June 11, 1986 

1881 
 

minister and then two assistant deputies – I believe you called 
them assistants – I suppose I can read that in Hansard tomorrow 
and just see what it was. 
 
But the handling of the department and taking it onto yourself 
. . .  I think the thing that most farmers are concerned about, I 
think, it removes it one step from the political process, and it’s a 
direct comparison; it’s a direct comparison to what’s happened 
with our Crown corporations, for example. By not having a 
minister in charge, and by naming the person in charge and 
putting a lay person in the position where a minister should be, 
is moving in the direction where I see politics when I go across 
and visit with my relatives and friends and people I know down 
in the United States. 
 
I have a close family, and my roots come from the United 
States, and my people, my folks, were born down there and 
some of the relatives stayed there, some came up here to 
Saskatchewan. And I get down there a lot. And you’re trying to 
identify closer . . .  Maybe you should have changed the name 
of your party and gone along with Dick Collver and Mr. Ham 
and emulated that position they were offering there. But what 
I’m basically trying to say, by getting the system in place, 
where you put the private sector in charge, removes it one step 
further from where the people can get at their elected official. 
And I look across the room and I even look at the chairman 
here, and here’s a person that could have been a Minister of 
Agriculture . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I don’t think you should draw the 
chairman into your arguments in your debate. I would 
appreciate it if you would leave the Chair as neutral as possible. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I was just trying to be complimentary, Mr. 
Chairman, and I will withdraw that remark. But there are a 
number of people that could have been involved and been 
politically sensitive, politically sensitive to the concerns and 
needs of farmers. 
 
And so when we look at the whole farm issue, and we look at 
somebody . . . and I read with interest some of the articles that 
were written in some of our newer circulations. The story was 
there that this is as much time you give to the Department of 
Agriculture; this is as much time as it takes to be Premier; and 
this is as much time as you are in your executive duties. And 
consequently nobody is that much of a superman that they can 
do four or three jobs . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  Some of 
your colleagues say, oh, yeah, and think it’s great. 
 
But from that point of view, I feel quite strongly about where 
you have put agriculture and the priority you have given it. By 
deciding to keep it yourself it has created some serious 
problems. Shortly after you took over the portfolio, you still had 
to send the former minister of Agriculture to a major 
conference. Saskatchewan’s position was given second fiddle 
and second place. I honestly feel that in the negotiations with 
Ottawa, and with taking Ottawa on and coming out with some 
major announcements and major programs that would benefit 
Saskatchewan farmers, we’ve been served second rate on this 
one. 
 

I’m not questioning your ability as you being able to be 
Minister of Agriculture yourself if you wouldn’t have that extra 
load. What I’m saying is that the issues that are burning in a 
crisis time we’re facing in agriculture are such that that is the 
one statement I want to make at the outset. And as we go 
through the rest of the estimates, I hope you will give at least 
this aspect of it your attention and concern and that we will deal 
seriously with these questions that are there. But if you want to 
make a small comment on that issue. 
 
The other starting question, the lead one that I have: do you 
consider this a serious time for farmers, and is there a crisis? Is 
there a time when . . .  do you expect a major shake-up, or do 
you think that the average farmer will get through this crisis and 
will be able to survive with the kind of programs you have in 
place? With the thrust that you have there, do you feel that 
we’re in a unique time in Saskatchewan’s agriculture, or is this 
just part of a trend? How much of a crisis are we facing at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
last question first, we have faced some serious economic 
problems in agriculture as a result of a combination of things: 
high interest rates that went as high as 22 per cent; low grain 
prices; we looked at some weather problems that were very 
unique – two or three years of drought on my farm and the hon. 
Member’s farm or area; grasshoppers. And the combination of 
those things did hurt Saskatchewan agriculture, and particularly 
southern Saskatchewan. And as a result we are carrying a debt, 
and the debt is on the backs of farmers who had to cope with 
either the severe economic conditions as a result of high interest 
rates or the combination of weather conditions that backed them 
into the corner. 
 
Today I see a little bit of light at the end of the tunnel, and I’m 
sure the hon. member recognizes that – as a result of we’ve had 
good moisture conditions across most of Saskatchewan, 
particularly south of No. 1 Highway where they need it. I met 
with the stock growers in Carlyle the other day, and they had 
never seen it so green for a long time. 
 
So that’s one positive factor. The second is that we’ve got fuel 
prices now down to where anywhere in Saskatchewan you can 
buy them for about 22, 23 cents a litre, given the rebates on 
both sides, federal and provincial and so forth. That’s 
significant. 
 
Interest rates are half of what they were. They were 22 per cent 
when we took over. They’re now running somewhere between 
. . .  well at the financial institutions it’ll run 10, 11, 12 per cent; 
but, with various programs we have, it’s either zero per cent 
interest on cash advances, or it’s 6 per cent or it’s 8 per cent, 
and fixed for terms as long as 15 years. 
 
Feed grain supplies are relatively good, and we see good 
margins in the livestock industry because of the low-priced 
grain. We see some possibilities coming down the pike with 
respect to improvements in the grain pricing. Obviously, I think 
and believe, we’re fairly close to higher-prices domestic wheat, 
which would take it up to about $10 a bushel. I see some help 
coming down the  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1882 
 
 

way – and we’ve argued about it in here – with respect to 
additional help on the export market as we deal with the 
subsidies that Americans and Europeans are applying. 
 
So if we can look at lower costs and a great deal more moisture, 
plus higher domestic price wheat and some help on the export 
market for wheat, and relatively good margins in the livestock 
industry – and I talked to the dairy convention last night; 
Carlyle, I was with the stock growers, and I visited with others 
– that I say, yes, we’re carrying a burden, and while there’s 
some light at the end of the tunnel, it’s a lot different than it 
was, say, going through the cycles in the ‘70s because we didn’t 
have that big a debt. So that’s why, obviously, that we have 
introduced various pieces of legislation to protect farmers, to 
make sure that they can help their way through. We’ve got farm 
panels dealing with farmers – they’re peers dealing with each 
other – and obviously a billion and some dollars out at 6 per 
cent money and many other programs. I’d list them all, but I 
won’t bother. 
 
So we have provided, federally and provincially, across all of 
Canada . . .  various people have done things to cope with the 
economic conditions. But we see conditions a lot better this 
year than we did last year or the year before, both in terms of 
interest rates and fuel costs and moisture, which is very 
important. 
 
Grasshoppers are bad again this year. It looks as if we’ve had a 
very large hatch all at the same time – my colleagues and 
professionals advise me, in some areas, like maybe in yours, 
90-95 per cent hatch. It gives us a chance – while we don’t like 
to see that – it gives us a chance to hit them. And if we can take 
a good crack at them, it’ll be better than last year where, as you 
know, they sort of hatched all year long. 
 
So we have put many things in place. We see some net benefits 
internationally because of lower interest rates and now lower 
fuel prices; oil prices are down; some support in prices because 
of stabilization mechanisms; new ideas with respect to 
domestic-price wheat and some exports. So generally, yes, we 
have a debt, and that’s what bothers me more than anything 
with the farmers that are carrying that, because of the former 
price of land and the interest rates have caught them, and they 
had to make those payments at higher interest rates, and it’s not 
easy to get out from under that. Even in better economic 
conditions you can go into it. If you’re neutral going into them, 
it’d be a lot better, but you’re carrying that on your back, and 
it’s difficult, particularly for younger farmers. So I see the 
seriousness of it, and it is significant, and we do have to make 
sure that it’s looked at. 
 
Now that leads to the second part of the little difference in 
philosophy. I believe it’s important, if we’re going to deal with 
this question of debt, particularly, that we do it at the national 
level. One of the reasons that I became the Minister of 
Agriculture is to put the power and the smack behind that 
portfolio. And I helped – we may argue over how much – but I 
helped get agriculture on the national agenda. 
 
So at the first ministers’ conference – and I don’t think even I 
can recall where first ministers has agriculture as  

the number one item on the agenda – so it was being discussed 
in terms of interest rates, commodity programs, stabilization 
programs, disaster mechanisms, international trade, the farm 
Bill in the U.S., and other kinds of things. So by having the 
Premier take the lead in agriculture, you used the words: you 
maybe put it on a sideline; I would tend to think it’s probably 
the opposite because you can’t give it any more power than 
that. 
 
From time to time, premiers have been ministers of Finance – I 
believe under a CCF or an NDP – or they’ve been ministers of 
Energy, or whatever. I’ve been minister of energy and 
negotiations, and what not. You take on a portfolio as if you 
believe it’s important that you do so, and several 
administrations from various political parties have done that. 
 
In this case, given the circumstances that we’re both familiar 
with, and the need to have some action, I believe it was 
important that I take it on. I’m relatively comfortable with it 
because of my own background, academically and as a farmer, 
myself. So I could raise it, and now we’re in a position where 
we can make the kind of decisions that need to be made. So 
when you say we need to have this or that or several programs, 
I won’t go through them, but we have put the pressure where 
the pressure should be and come out with large stabilization 
packages, got the feds to take the tax off farm fuel, no capital 
gains in drought payments and flood payments, and so forth. 
 
(1515) 
 
So in terms of philosophy, agriculture is number one priority, 
has always been with me, as a professional and as well as a 
politician, and certainly as Minister of Agriculture and Premier. 
So I wear all those hats. It is absolutely the number one priority 
for me here because it’s so important to the province. And I 
think, symbolically, I showed that by taking on the portfolio. 
 
You mentioned legislative secretaries and whether they should 
go to meetings and whether they really represent the minister. If 
I recall, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was 
legislative secretary to the minister of Agriculture when he was 
in government. Well I don’t think that you would want to 
pooh-pooh your responsibilities at that time, and you would go 
to meetings, nationally or internationally – I believe that you 
went internationally. Now the minister would ask you to do 
that, to speak in his stead, or to attend meetings and so forth, 
and you felt comfortable about doing it, and that’s exactly what 
parliamentary secretaries and legislative secretaries do. 
 
And in my case, I’ve a good working relationship with the men 
that I have around me, working either as my Legislative 
Secretary to the Premier’s office, or in Agriculture, or the 
combination thereof, and they understand the industry. They’re 
farmers, all of them, and they know the industry, and they can 
report to me – good working relationship. And just as you were 
legislative secretary, they’re legislative secretaries reporting 
back. 
 
I’ve had bouquets from the wheat pool, from stock growers, 
from the dairy producers, from all kinds of  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1883 
 

farmers saying, I’m very glad, Mr. Premier, that you took on 
that portfolio so that we could get it up there at the national 
level and at the international level, and we knew that you were 
on top of it and had the power and the stroke in your office to 
make sure to make some changes. So, it’s resulted in a wide 
recognition of agriculture across Canada, certainly in 
Saskatchewan, but across Canada as being a very powerful and 
important issue nationally, locally, and internationally. 
 
So while we have problems, I believe it’s one of the other 
things that we could do to address those problems. I won’t get 
into – at least not yet – a partisan debate about how you look at 
agriculture philosophically and how I do, your programs versus 
mine. If we want to get into those, we can; fair enough. I mean, 
yours speak for yourself and you can defend those, and I’ll 
certainly defend those that I have and quite briefly just say that 
the programs and the policies that we’ve initiated fill a book 
just naming them – fill a book. And you’ve never seen that in 
the history of the province, nor the country, for any agricultural 
minister or premier involved in agriculture in any four-year 
term that you can think of. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Getting into the general thrust then, where I feel 
that we have an exceptional change from the direction that 
Saskatchewan was used to going with CCF and then NDP, and 
the Liberals a little bit in between there until we got to the 
situation where you’re at – and the distinction that I want to 
draw and place at the bottom, I think, was best summed up by 
the former minister of Agriculture when he said that it was his 
role to (and I want to quote exactly the words he used) that 
“we’re going to shore up success.” 
 
And I feel that the successful farmers have been shored up. I’m 
not arguing that the person that is farming 4 to 6,000 acres 
hasn’t been shored up. I’m not saying that the farmer that 
decided to get into a feedlot and feed out some cattle hasn’t 
been shored up. Other people have benefited as well from those 
programs. 
 
And basically, when you get right down to the programs that 
spell dollars in a pocket, or bring him some net return that he 
can measure when he’s filling out his income tax and take the 
tax credits and the tax breaks, and the program you mentioned, 
your $25 an acre, those are basic programs that to me – and I’ve 
had that put to me on a number of occasions. And I had a very 
interesting debate with some people very close to your home 
town the other night when I attended a wedding. And the area 
of concern that farmers are facing, and farmers are facing 
square on and saying, yes, it’s great if you’re successful; it’s 
great if you have a decent size operation; it’s great if you’re 
farming enough land and you benefit from the big bucks and 
you benefit from the good tax breaks. 
 
But the main trust I have is that the moneys that are directed to 
help farmers get into farming, the moneys that are there to shore 
up those that need shoring up -–not those that don’t need it – I 
think this is where we are philosophically different. And I’m 
saying that the amount of money it costs your administration to 
lend out a billion-plus dollars to farmers in Saskatchewan, the 
amount of money that that’s going to cost over three years, 
would have been better directed at a targeted  

group that needs it more. 
 
And you have many letters on record that I’ve sent you about 
farmers that are just about to go under, and farmers that are 
really struggling to survive that could have benefited from that 
kind of program; would have been helped more than the guy 
that took his $100,000 and reinvested it in a MURB (multiple 
unit residential building) or a tax break or something else. 
 
I see that some students from Gravelbourg have arrived. Could I 
interrupt this procedure, Mr. Chairman? Could I have leave to 
introduce them? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you. Interesting that during Agriculture 
estimates that we have a class here led by the Premier’s 
sister-in-law, Marie-Rose Archambault. I’d like to extend a 
special welcome to you and your chaperons, Jeanne Brisebois, 
Elaine Haman, and Paulette Pinsonneault; and 22 grade 4 and 5 
students from Gravelbourg. 
 
Welcome here. I hope you enjoy your time with us this 
afternoon. We’re presently doing the Department of Agriculture 
estimates. We’re going to go through some of the expenses on a 
line by line. At the start of the estimates we have a general 
debate about philosophical ideas and what approaches we have 
to agriculture. 
 
So I’d like to extend, and have my colleagues and the members 
of the legislature join in wishing you a good stay here, and I’m 
looking forward to meeting with you at about 4 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I wondered if I could 
welcome the students as well, not only as Minister of 
Agriculture, but having a good family relationship with Mrs. 
Archambault, I’d like to welcome her and the teachers and the 
students here. I was recently at the graduation at College 
Mathieu in Gravelbourg and found it very warm and very 
hospitable. And I just want to say that it’s nice to see you here. 
I’m glad you’re able to join us, and I’m sure you’ll learn a great 
deal about agriculture if you sit and listen to the estimates. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — I suppose if we could involve some of the 
students here they’d be anxious that I’d ask some questions 
about grasshoppers and controlling grasshoppers and some of 
the issues that are facing them. I know that one or two of them, 
I’ve talked to their dads just recently in the past couple of days, 
and that is an issue I intend to get into a little later on. 
 



 
June 11, 1986 

1884 
 
 

As I was saying, Mr. Premier, the main thrust of the 
Department of Agriculture has been one where you’re aiming at 
making it comfortable for those farmers that enjoy the 
programs. I think one statistic that I might mention, seeing 
Gravelbourg’s here, that I talked to one of the elevator agents 
there that he personally processed through his elevator about 23 
applications that got the maximum. So Gravelbourg is one of 
the communities in my riding that’s made up of fairly 
reasonably large farms that are doing very well. But then there’s 
a lot of young farmers getting involved that are struggling and 
trying hard to make a success of it. 
 
So I think that comment as far as what would emphasize the 
difference in our philosophical approach is, that I think the 
Department of Agriculture’s role should be one not only to look 
at the segment in agriculture in Saskatchewan that is having 
trouble getting involved or getting started farming, and on the 
other hand having programs in place. I think back on programs 
that have been introduced by former governments – both the 
former Liberal government and the Blakeney government 
during those 11 years – that were designed specifically with 
ceilings. They were programs of design that – saying if a farmer 
farms eight years, he’ll get that much of his interest paid off; if 
he only stays in the program four years, he’ll get half as much. 
 
The grants and the money that was flowing through the 
Department of Agriculture and using your facilities to make 
moneys available were usually in the past directed to the half of 
the population that was considered the bottom half of the 
income scale. I think if you’d look carefully and step back and 
look at what you’ve done in the last four years – the tax breaks 
to the cattlemen when he got an income tax credit of $25 a cow 
and so much for a pig and so much for sheep – those were 
given. Those were moneys that would flow to farmers that were 
paying large taxes. 
 
The young farmer getting started that was carrying a debt load 
like you mentioned earlier, that had the big debt load, and he 
was in cattle – he wasn’t getting any advantage from that 
program at all; if his expenses exceeded his income and wasn’t 
paying any income tax, there was no way he was going to 
benefit. But his father, or his uncle, or somebody that’s been 
around awhile and didn’t need the money, was getting a real 
shot in the arm when they were paying their income tax and 
getting that tax break. The same thing applies for a loan of $25 
an acre. Sure it helped this fall. Sure it was great last fall when 
. . .  especially in the South where they didn’t have a crop, and 
in the North where they couldn’t sell their tough and damp 
wheat, it was nice to get an injection of cash. 
 
But the people that took advantage and got the money that 
re-invested it and then used it just as an income on the 
re-investment aspect of it, they benefited from it; but the guy 
that needed it the worst, and this year when he has to pay a third 
back and is getting 81 cents a bushel less, it might have been 
the last straw that’s going to sink him and the millstone around 
his neck where he’s got so much debt already. And I think that 
that kind of money that you put into that program – if it would 
have been directed to help all those that need it and just help 
those people that aren’t paying income tax and get him into that 
bracket – I  

think, would have been one that would have done an awful lot 
more good. 
 
I want to get into some of the farm problems after you respond 
to that aspect of your assistance plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member hasn’t 
quite got sufficient information to document his statement with 
respect to programs that we may have that don’t help 
low-income farmers or beginning farmers. It’s precisely the 
opposite precisely the opposite, and I’ll give you the figures 
here in a minute. 
 
I mean, we talk about a philosophy . . .  it may be just fair to 
point out that you have the philosophy that the government 
would buy the farm from the land bank. Well it’s an NDP 
policy; it certainly wasn’t a Tory policy; the land bank was 
NDP. So if you shake your head, it doesn’t matter. The facts 
are, and it was very unpopular all across rural Saskatchewan, 
and it still is. 
 
Now there’s a difference in philosophy. You wanted the 
government to buy the farm from anybody that wanted to sell it 
to the government or was in trouble, particularly during high 
interest rates – 22 per cent interest rates in the spring of ’82 and 
not a penny to help the farmers, low-income farmers. Where are 
all those people you were going to help? I mean, they hit the 
young people right in the head – 22 per cent interest rates and 
not a dime out of you guys. Not a dime. 
 
Now you said you’d buy the farm. And you’d go round and say, 
well, we got it, we bought it for 150 bucks an acre, and now it’s 
500, and you made some money on it. And the young people 
didn’t like that very much. And I’m sure you recall the spring of 
’82, what happened in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the taxation – taxation. I mean, we no 
longer have succession duties – succession duties – and gift tax 
on farms. So when farm family members die, there is no death 
tax. And that was your philosophy, and you imposed it. You 
imposed it; you brought it in, and you had it there and for 
farmers all over Saskatchewan. We had young people, and if the 
dad would die, the young guy would want to take over the farm. 
Not only didn’t you help him with high interest rates, but you 
charged him a death tax on that family. You charged it for 
seven years. It’s no longer there. And I’ll remind the public that 
you never gave back a cent. So in terms of your philosophy, I’ll 
take on . . .  or anybody in Canada can take on the NDP 
agriculture philosophy. I mean, you’re a long ways from the 
CCF. 
 
And that leads me to the next argument. It’s nice for you to 
stand in the legislature and talk about how the Liberals weren’t 
all that bad. You and I both know you don’t win your riding 
unless there’s a split three ways, and I understand that. And you 
have to shore up the Liberal support a little bit so that they get a 
little bit more for you to get re-elected. You get elected with 
30-some per cent of the vote. In fact, you brag about it in the 
Moose Jaw paper. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out, the member 
opposite raised it, comparison and philosophy. For his  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1885 
 

own political advantage he wants to shore up the Liberals 
because he can’t win unless there’s a split. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member from Quill 
Lakes is interrupting the Minister of Agriculture, and I’m sure 
that in due course he will have an opportunity to ask his 
questions. Please refrain from hollering in the House, and allow 
the minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members don’t like 
to listen. They can raise it and we can listen, but when I raise a 
response, they holler in their seat. The children in 
Saskatchewan, every time they come to the legislature, have to 
listen to these people holler from their seat. They have no 
respect for the legislature. Their leader has no control over their 
voice. The member from Quill Lakes has a reputation all over 
Saskatchewan that all he can . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’m warning the member from 
Quill Lakes again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — To please be quiet and stop hollering from 
the seat so the minister can answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
raised the philosophy of the Liberal Party and how he supported 
it. I have to respond to that because my philosophy with respect 
to agriculture is different than the NDP’s. And I went through a 
couple of them that are extremely different – wide variances. So 
you raised it; I respond to it. 
 
Now to get on to your allegation that we missed people with our 
agriculture programs. You couldn’t find anything that’s farther 
from the truth with respect to young people and folks that don’t 
have a whole bunch of assets. When I look at the programs we 
have.. You take the fuel protection – that helps everybody. And 
we cut the taxes on fuel or have rebates; you took it off. We put 
it on and made it bigger, along with the federal government. 
That applies to everybody. 
 
You look at interest rate protection. If you don’t think that 
doesn’t help young people . . .  And if you look at the 8 per cent 
money, Mr. Chairman – if the hon. Member is interested I’ll 
give him the reply – on the 8 per cent money, and when we look 
at the young people that are getting it, 27 per cent are less than 
$50,000 in terms of annual income, and another 35.8 per cent 
are between 50 and 100,000. 
 
And if you look at net worth on the programs we’ve put 
together, 36.8 per cent are less than $50,000 in net worth, and 
18 per cent are 50 to $100,000. So you’re looking at almost 50 
per cent of the program that we put together are for young 
people and the low-income people that needed the assistance. 
When they got hit with high interest rates and there was nothing 
there before, that’s precisely who we went for. 
 
We said, in this province, we will make sure when the  

young people buy the farm from, say, you as a father, they will 
get access to long-run, low interest rates. And that’s precisely 
the people that wanted it. This is not the government buying 
your land, but we will provide you access to credit. And it was 
bought hook, line, and sinker all over the province, and there 
are thousands upon thousands upon thousands of young farmers 
with low net worth that have access to low-interest money. 
 
When you look at the cash that goes out, Mr. Chairman, the 
cash advances, like zero per cent interest to the livestock 
industry, whether they’re in the dairy business or the pork 
business or in the beef business, that applies to everybody. And 
who was cash poor? The young people that can’t get access to 
credit who were being charged high interest rates in the bank. 
Never before in the livestock industry was there a cash advance. 
That applies to the very people that you were talking about. 
 
When we look at the farm land security board, we look at 
counselling assistance, that’s designed for those young people. 
And those individuals with low net worth and who are having a 
problem, they can meet their peers; we’ve got assistance; we’ve 
provided thousands and, well, millions of dollars to those very 
people that you were pointing your finger at, that you say that 
we didn’t address. 
 
So when I go back and look at the net worth, I go back and look 
at the age, I go back and look at the net income—you look at 
the demographic distribution of the people that have been 
helped in agriculture – it’s precisely those that need that that are 
receiving it. 
 
Now if you want to compare that, we can stand in here for a 
long time comparing that to a land bank system where you 
wouldn’t help in interest rates, none at all; or no help with 
respect to farm fuel; and no changes in legislation that would 
allow protection for these young people; no interest rates that 
were zero per cent or 6 per cent or 8 per cent. I mean, fair ball. 
But, I mean, you know yourself that the land bank and 
succession duties and that NDP death tax were not popular and 
did not help. And as a result, virtually every district, every 
riding, every constituency in the province opted for 8 per cent 
money to help young people and the kinds of programs we’ve 
initiated. 
 
I’ll give you another example. Rural gas distribution cuts the 
costs in half for energy and farmers. You don’t think that helps 
young people in the livestock industry and others? So I’ll just 
touch on a few of them. But in terms of your statement that our 
programs are not designed for the young in agriculture, for 
those who are beginning, I’d stack them up against land bank 
and succession duties any day of the week. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You have to go back an awful long way in 
history to come up with your succession duty tax, Mr. Premier. 
I don’t appreciate the personal attack on whether I can win my 
riding or not. I survived against your brother-in-law, thank you, 
when a lot of constituencies didn’t. And I’ve won three times as 
many elections as you did, and you lost more elections than I 
did. So let’s not get into that little political harangue. 
 
And you know, you’ve been Premier longer in any term in  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1886 
 
 

Saskatchewan than any premier ever was since non-wartime 
years. You’ve hung on to power longer than anybody else has, 
other than during the war and other than when we had the last 
Conservative government. 
 
And I’d remind the kids, because I don’t get political when I 
visit with them when they’re alone – but I’d remind the grade 4 
and 5 students up there that the last time we had a Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan, and the only other time we had it, 
they hung onto power beyond the fourth year. And when there 
was an election in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, maybe you’ll 
stand up and tell them how many seats they won after that. Not 
one. Not one seat. 
 
So if you want to get political and you want to talk about it . . .  
and if you don’t want to talk about the programs and the 
questions I ask you, and you go back to 1977 succession duties, 
prior to that time, when we took them off; and all over the 
province, and all over the country all the provinces had them, 
and Saskatchewan was the first to remove them, then let’s talk 
about that. 
 
But I’d sooner talk about issues that are present today and the 
amount of money that your government has made available. 
And what I said is your basic programs that were your root and 
your party philosophy were designed to shore up success, were 
designed to help those that didn’t need help. 
 
Programs of tax credits. When you’re making programs 
available and you’re announcing new programs and you’re 
passing legislation to pass on a tax loophole and a tax credit and 
a tax discount, you’re saying that that program is designed for 
the wealthy that pay tax and not designed for the young farmer 
that is struggling, paying his interest rates, paying his debts and 
making his payments on his land and his equipment which eats 
up his income and he has no tax to pay and consequently 
doesn’t get any benefit. And all I’m saying is that if you would 
have targeted your programs to that group, then everybody in 
Saskatchewan would have benefited. 
 
You mentioned, and I’ll get back to it . . .  I made a note. If you 
care to send that paper over with the statistics on how many 
farmers were involved in the program, I had that down a ways 
on the list when I go through the various programs that you’ve 
got in place. But you were quoting from statistics saying that 
the money’s available on the interest reduction program and 
what percentage. 
 
If you want to send that over, I’ll be getting to that down the 
line a piece. But seeing you touched on that, I wouldn’t mind 
knowing the numbers of farmers who got access to credit and 
what income brackets they were in. I wouldn’t mind having that 
in advance so I can look at it because I’ve got some questions 
along that line. 
 
The other area I wanted to raise with you, Mr. Minister . . .  and 
that spells out about seven or eight issues here that I have listed 
that I felt were the farm problems that farmers were facing 
during this period of time. And I just want to throw in one more 
comment in the general introductory remarks that we had here 
before I get into specific areas, and that is that it’s strange . . .  I 
find it really strange . . .  And I’ve talked to your president of 
your party about this who 

 is a good buddy of mine, a car dealer at Weyburn, and other 
agencies and dealers around, and it’s really strange that when 
Saskatchewan gets around to electing a right-of-centre 
government, like Ross Thatcher was, and now again during 
your period of time, I can’t think of a period in Saskatchewan’s 
history that takes in this four-year period or the seven years 
from ’64 to ’71 when the business men that’s providing services 
to the farm community, the small-business agency or car dealer 
or what, those guys were in worse trouble and had a tougher 
time of it. 
 
And I can’t understand why, from ’64 to ’71, by the time ’71 
come along the crunch was on. Right after 1971, your present 
Minister of Finance is the only one that’s still around since that 
time, but your present . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  I’m 
dealing with Agriculture, Mr. Member from Meadow Lake. 
And your present member from Finance is the only one that was 
here at that time, but he was on a committee with me that I 
chaired. The other Liberal member was Don MacDonald, a vet 
in Moose Jaw, and then we had some NDP members. And we 
travelled around rural Saskatchewan meeting with a business 
community and meeting with the people that are serving the 
farm sector. And they were in serious trouble. 
 
Today that same group are in big, big trouble. They’re having 
trouble making ends meet, and how do you try and sell this 
philosophy that you’re the friend of the business men, and 
you’re the friend of that person – when you guys get elected, 
they start hurting and suffering and are in real big trouble. So I 
think that’s just another example that you have to look at the 
total economy and not just the friends of the Conservative 
Party, the few wealthy people around, and see how we can 
shore up those guys. 
 
You’ve got to broaden your approach and if some advice . . .  
And hindsight is great. I can give you this advice now because 
your term has expired and you’re not going to be able to come 
up with those kind of programs, but you’ve got to use a brush 
that gets the average guy. You’ve got to help the young farmer 
getting started, the small-business men that’s getting into it; 
you’ve got to direct your programs at them. And I can assure 
you that those guys that have been around for a long time, those 
farmers that have been farming for a long time, they’ll figure 
out ways of taking advantage of it. They’ll figure out ways of 
how they can benefit from the program as well, but the program 
has to be directed and channelled at those people. 
 
Now you use examples and saying how unpopular land bank 
was, and I’m not going to get into that debate because I’m not 
going to debate what we did. If you want to talk philosophy and 
match what we’re putting out for the people in the next election 
and where we’re going to go and what directions and what 
solutions we think we’re going to have – but you try and accuse 
us of not trying and not getting involved and not putting 
programs out there that were attractive or taken on – you tell me 
one time in your history as Premier when you had more people 
in the galleries and had more people up here booing you and 
criticizing you than even during the time, right at your 
honeymoon when you were first elected, as you had farmers up 
here when you destroyed the land  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1887 
 

bank. 
 
When you wrote the legislation that did away with the land 
bank, you had more people in this Chamber. and I counted more 
than 1,100 people showed up in these buildings, and that’s 
when you came out with the chains and the ropes and tried to 
limit access to this building, was when the farmers came. And 
farmers aren’t known to be the kind of people that’ll get up and 
carry banners and wave placards and get in line, but the farmers 
came out to show how surprised they were because they didn’t 
expect you to tear up their contracts that they thought they had, 
and the agreements they had. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Premier, you’re going to have to live that one down, because 
those 2,700 farmers brought their friends with them, and people 
along that thought they had themselves a rental agreement. 
 
I’ve never been involved in trying to buy up land. I was 
involved trying to get a guy on the farm, and the program was 
designed to help a guy get into farming. And I can give you a 
list today, Mr. Premier, of successful farmers that wouldn’t 
have gotten into farming if they wouldn’t have had a chance to 
rent some land. And if that were all bad, tell me why under your 
cousin’s government in Ottawa, under the Conservative 
government in Ottawa, why the Farm Credit Corporation is 
deciding and talking about and sending out letters and circulars 
and information, and is talking about a lease option, if it’s so 
bad. 
 
(1545) 
 
If renting . . .  You’ve made leasing land and renting land from 
the government a swear word. You’ve made it a bad thing – this 
is the most terrible thing that could happen, is somebody will 
rent land from the government. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, I can take you to half of my constituency 
which is Crown land, and fellows like Boyd Anderson and . . .  
(inaudible) . . .  I can name off the most successful ranchers in 
my constituency. They’re on leased land, and on large, large 
blocks of leased land, Crown land that is now administering and 
running land banks – so you’ve got to call those guys land bank 
farmers, because they’ve got . . .  
 
They’re share-croppers. Like your former minister, the first 
minister of Agriculture you had, was going on and on about the 
share-croppers. Well I want to tell you, those share-croppers 
love the deal they’ve got. When you put up the Crown land for 
sale, I didn’t see them rushing into buy it. There was no big 
stampede on. They weren’t around, as many people as there 
were. 
 
In fact, that’s another question your staff can start preparing for 
me: how much Crown land have you sold and under what 
programs, or the number of acres, and how many people 
participated in purchasing Crown land? I’d like to get that 
information – Crown land, meaning both land bank land and 
lease land that’s been under the old lands branch. 
 
And I think that the option to lease – be it my tractor or my 
combine or equipment, rather than putting out the bucks to buy 
one – is a viable option, and farmers are  

using that as a management tool. And as far as getting into 
farming, nobody was forced in the past. And I’m proud to say 
that there’s a lot of those guys are still busy farming and are still 
making their payments and renting their land and surviving on 
it and growing. 
 
I can name off some of the guys that have criticized you, Mr. 
Premier, publicly on the radio with your crop insurance 
program – I just heard, listened the other day – and got his start 
with land bank land and is a very successful operator, covers a 
lot of acres in a day. 
 
So I think that making that general assumption that just to lease 
land is a bad, bad program, and the government shouldn’t be 
involved in renting out land or being the landlord through some 
kind of an agency or other in making land available on a lease 
option basis. I don’t think that’s all bad. I think that if I’d have a 
son that wants to farm and he’d consider getting involved in a 
lease option, I kind of think that wouldn’t be a bad deal at all. 
 
But some of the things that I have listed here right off the top of 
my head that I think are really serious farm problems that exist 
today . . .  And I’ve made a little table here where I’ve got 
problems, and on the other side it’s government’s response. 
And that half is blank. You know, the government response side 
of it isn’t that well taken care of. 
 
But when I look at farm problems today, the number one thing 
that farmers are talking about are costs – be it fuel, fertilizer, 
chemicals, pesticides, taxes, drought, farm supplies, price of 
equipment. And I should have brought it along and I’ve got it in 
my brief case – but I’ve got an O ring that I paid for yesterday, 
a little rubber neoprene type O ring. And even the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena wouldn’t believe what that cost me. 
 
And I don’t know if there should be a study on gouging on 
farmers or not, but I paid $30.30 for an O ring yesterday. And I 
didn’t buy it at the Co-op; I had it shipped out on the bus from 
Regina from one of your best friends, Mr. Premier. And I think 
that’s gouging. And somewhere along the line we should get 
into Consumer Affairs parallel with Agriculture and talk about 
how do we control that . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  
Shopping around is . . .  if you have an exclusive 
distributorship, you can’t shop very much. 
 
To tell the farmer that the option for low prices last year was to 
make a loan, I felt didn’t hit the target. And last year when our 
prices were down and we were getting 4-something a bushel, 
we decided to borrow some money. This year with 80 cents a 
bushel less, we’re going to have to pay a third of that back. 
That’s even going to hurt some of us guys that have been 
farming for 30 years or more. 
 
I, for one, think the commodity price thing when the price is 
going down on one hand . . .  and you mention that there’s a 
possibility of getting a domestic price up around $10 that’s been 
recommended. 
 
The other recommendation that came there, and I think we need 
to talk about, is how do we get onside and come across from 
Saskatchewan’s point of view and say, in no  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1888 
 
 

uncertain terms, look, you’ve got to put up at least $2 billion to 
shore up the price of grain on the deficiency payment end of it. 
I think you’re only half there, Mr. Premier, on the request 
you’re making. The commodity price issue is a big one, and 
when you look at the cost . . .  You say you think you’ve got 
fuel costs in hand. We’re still a far cry from what my buddies 
are paying down across the line in United States. 
 
Our chemical and fertilizer costs, we had some solutions before 
you. In all the emergency debates in any situation we’ve had, 
we’ve yet to have the government agree that we could come out 
unanimously having a resolution from this legislature saying 
that we agree that this is how you can control that cost. 
 
And the number one that’s affecting farmers now, in spite of 
you answering the other day that they all hatched at once, I 
talked to an awful lot of farmers in the last three days that have 
sprayed more than three times. And how many times are they 
going to have to spray before you decide to go beyond the 1 per 
cent of the land that’s on the road allowance when you get 
down to the larger acres? 
 
I’ve had a farmer show me this morning where he looked at a 
field on Monday morning, not a grasshopper around; came back 
this morning and the field’s gone. The crop was about 3 inches 
high, and it’s off. He said, now if they’d have got it when it was 
about 2 inches high, it would have come back. But once it’s in 
that third-leaf stage, I don’t think anything but a re-seeding is 
going to be the solution there. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Chairman, how we can deal with this. I 
brought my questions for crop insurance along as well, and I 
was wondering if we can parallel some of these questions and 
talk in the general aspect of this; if we can cover some of the 
issues that farmers are talking about crop insurance, along with 
this general debate. Have you some crop insurance people along 
with you that you can answer some of these, or should we go 
through this same thing again there? Could I get a decision on 
that? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Well, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is a 
separate department whose estimates will be coming up later. 
So I believe they’ll have to be very, very strict with any 
introduction of questions as they relate to crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Because I was just thinking that during the 
general questioning of this aspect, crop insurance estimates 
would go that much quicker if we’d have dealt with them as 
part of the farmer’s costs and his input and the problems he’s 
facing right now. 
 
And a simple question I wanted an answer for was: if a farmer 
re-seeds, does he have to wait till it’s adjusted before he can go 
at re-seeding? You know, can I get that one little question in 
and then we won’t ask any more crop insurance questions 
related to that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Well, that’s very much a crop insurance 
question – very much so. 
 
Mr. Engel: — But it’s very much an Agriculture question  

too. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I understand that, but all crop insurance 
questions are Agriculture questions, as you well know. So I’m 
afraid I’ll have to rule that question out of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my hon. friend has 
been all over the map here. I’ll attempt to kind of tighten it up. 
He said we should have a broader philosophical approach to 
appeal to people in Saskatchewan, particularly in agriculture. I 
mean, despite how he wants to describe prices and economic 
times and drought and so forth, our broad philosophical 
approach was quite popular in 1982. And in rural 
Saskatchewan, particularly in agriculture. I mean, despite how 
he wants to describe prices and economic times and drought 
and so forth, our broad philosophical approach was quite 
popular in 1982. And in rural Saskatchewan, I will just venture 
to say, Mr. Chairman, that it’s still quite popular. Virtually 
every seat but four in rural Saskatchewan adopted our program 
of 8 per cent money and loan interest loans over land bank. 
 
I can also say that when we look at the problems we face in 
agriculture, if – if – you and your administration had been a 
little bit more sensitive to the high interest rate problems in 
1981 and 1982, we wouldn’t have half the problem today. If 
you would have had an 8 per cent program for young people or 
some interest rate protection so they didn’t have to go from 8 
per cent to 20 per cent, as your relatives and neighbours did – if 
they would have had some protection, we would have alleviated 
half the problem in agriculture. 
 
So we’re looking at repairing the damage caused by the latter 
years of your administration. And that’s very important, that we 
. . .  We saw, as most rural people did all over Saskatchewan, all 
over Saskatchewan, that it was important to deal with those 
interest rates. And as a result – you didn’t – and the problem 
compounded year after year, and you wouldn’t deal with it. 
 
Now your solution was to sell your land to the government. 
You’re wrong on two counts with respect to land bank. One is 
you said that we cancelled the contracts, and that’s not true. So 
don’t misled anybody. We did not cancel the contracts. If you 
had a contract with land bank, you’ve still got the contract. The 
only way you can get out from under it is if you wanted to buy 
the land or you wanted to move yourself. But we honoured 
every single solitary contract. So don’t misled the public and 
say we ripped up all the contracts. That’s not the case. 
 
So when we look at it as an option, we have Crown land that is 
here and it’s leased out to people. That’s quite different than the 
government going out and buying a million acres more of 
people who are in some trouble and say, I’ll take your land and 
I will own it now, and watch the land values go up from $100 
an acre to 500, and then go around the province saying, well 
isn’t this pretty smart on behalf of the government to make all 
this money. Well that’s why it was so unpopular. 
 
And today you stand in the legislature, and I know you kind of 
get a little ornery and you say, well I got to defend that land 
bank system. Well, frankly, I could take what you’ve said in 
Hansard and I’ll take it to any riding anywhere at any time and 
say that you think the land bank system is an answer over low 
interest loans, or the kinds of  



 
June 11, 1986 

1889 
 

programs we’ve come in to help people, and . . .  Well, we’ll let 
the people decide. 
 
But you have said now you want to get back into the land bank 
system. You endorse it, and you said that it’s a good idea. And 
I’ll just take that at its face value because I’ll tell you, from one 
end of the province to the other, or to the country, that you can 
say that you are . . .  In fact, that’s what’s on the people’s minds 
when they think about you. They say, you know what, he really 
does want to have land bank land. He will go around the 
province, say, oh, we got a new program, something else, and 
we’ll copy the Tories. But really, in the back of his mind, he 
really does like the government owning the land. And they 
believe that from a democratic socialist, because that’s your 
bent, that the government should own it. And they know that. 
And they know deep down in your gut, when it comes to what 
you really want to do, it’s to take control of the farm. 
 
And I was going to add, if you hadn’t spent all the money 
taking control of the potash mines, you’d have had an awful lot 
more where you could have helped them in interest rates, put 
some money here in the bank so we would have some to help 
others. But your philosophy caught you, and it’s still catching 
you. And it catches you today in the legislature, despite being 
universally thrown out as a policy to save young farmers, or any 
farmers, you still have to come back to your old philosophy that 
says, you know, really that’s a good idea that the government 
should own the land and the government can lease it out, and so 
forth. 
 
Now you went into it because you can’t help yourself from 
defending. Well fair ball. That’s the way . . .  what you believe. 
And the people really know that’s the truth, anyway. You can 
say, well I’ve changed, I now will go for low interest loans, or 
I’ll do some other things. But they know in their heart of hearts 
that you haven’t changed; you’re set in your ways. And fair 
enough. I grant you that you can believe whatever you like, just 
as long as we’re clear: you endorse the land bank system as an 
answer to farm problems, and I don’t. And philosophically, we 
disagree. Fair enough. I mean, we’ll agree to disagree about that 
agricultural solution. 
 
With respect to programs, if I could just share with you what an 
average farmer, a farmer that has a section to a section and a 
half, say a little bit of pasture land, 500 acres, has 
100-and-some cows, 125 cows, and any kind of a note that he 
might have, say, on his farm purchase program at 8 per cent 
money and operating account of, say, $100,000, if he was living 
in your area, what he’s got in 1985 and ’86, and you – when I 
get finished, just take a minute – you tell me that this doesn’t 
help young people. 
 
The drought assistance was $48 per cow — $6,000. The 
livestock drought assistance in ’85 was $60 per cow; that’s 
$7,500. Cattle movement for average farmers, low income or 
high, was $1,000. Cash advance at $125 a head, saving of 12 
per cent, $29,000 in cash flow, a net benefit of $3,500. 
Production loan, 6 per cent money, $25 an acre, $25,000; a net 
benefit of $1,500. Farmers oil royalty pass-through, 650 cash 
net saving. Cow-calf to finish market insurance plan, net benefit 
$67 per fed  

animal, pay-out $149; $13,881 cash flow for a net benefit of 
$6,000. Farm purchase program of a 4 per cent saving is 8,000 
net. Agricultural credit loan, 4 per cent on a 100,000 is $4,000 
net. Livestock investment tax credit – and I will touch on that 
tax credit – is $2,325. And the natural gas energy program that 
used to cost $2,000 would now only cost him 1,100. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Chairman, and my hon. colleague, when you add that up for 
an average farmer in southern Saskatchewan, that amounts to 
$98,993 a year. The net benefit, when you add it up, is $41,718 
for an average farmer with a section and a half and 500 acres of 
pasture and 125 cows and a normal sort of loan arrangement, as 
a result of the things that we’ve done. 
 
Now we didn’t see any of that in your administration at high 
interests. You didn’t see any protection of high interests. You 
didn’t see those kind of cash advances. You didn’t see any of 
that protection. I’m talking $98,000 in cash flow above what he 
would have normally got – a net benefit of $41,718 if he took 
advantage of the programs that were there. In your area, in 
southern Saskatchewan, and you’re saying we got a 
philosophical problem – well that doesn’t include obviously, 
expenditures on crop insurance or the new ag college or some 
other things. 
 
If we go back and look . . .  And you mentioned the tax credit, 
and I’m glad that you did, and I’ll send you this information if 
you like. You said the tax credit only goes to those that have a 
whole bunch of money. Well we’ve broken it down with respect 
to who got the benefit. Forty-nine per cent of all the 1985 tax 
credits for livestock were less than $500 per applicant or 20 
head or less – 49 per cent. So these are small producers, young 
people, and 49 per cent of that tax benefit went to families that 
had 20 head or less. 
 
Seventy-seven per cent of that tax credit went to people who 
had 20 to 48 head or less than $1,200 per applicant. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, it seems to me – I’ll send that over – it seems to me 
that the hon. member’s argument that this was designed for 
anybody that was not in trouble is just not the facts. The case is 
that our programs are designed, if you take the average farmer 
in southern Saskatchewan, in Assiniboia or Gravelbourg area, 
you could get cash flow up to $98,000, and obviously that was 
most important to young people or those who were in some 
trouble, because they could apply for it. 
 
And if you look at even the tax incentives which all the farmers 
have asked for, a tax incentive to give them a break to feed 
cattle and hogs here as opposed to shipping them outlive or as 
feeder cattle or feeder pigs, it’s a good idea to do that. Those tax 
benefits, 77 per cent of it – 77 per cent of those tax benefits in 
1985 went to people who had less than 48 head to market. Now 
what that shows me, as well as the income distribution of our 
loans and so forth, we targeted it at the very people. 
 
Now I go back. You talk about broad appeal. Don’t you ever 
believe that we didn’t do a lot of homework in designing these 
programs to appeal to the very young  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1890 
 
 

people that you are talking about; the people that I used to teach 
at university; the people that I went to college with and the 
people that I grew up on the farm with. We went to the kitchen 
table and we said: what kinds of things would help you? And 
you’ve never seen anything like it in your life with respect to 
help and assistance and incentives and encouragement to the 
livestock industry. 
 
So again, I would be glad to compare the programs with – I 
know your philosophy, that it’s different than mine. Yours is 
that the government should buy the farm, and mine isn’t. Mine 
is that the government should help people when they’re in 
trouble so that they can own their own farm. And it’s a 
significant difference. I believe that industry should own the 
mines, industry should drill the holes, industry should create, 
and small business should. 
 
When you talk to the farm machinery dealers . . .  and you go 
back and say well if you have low-priced grain or a drought, 
that’s Grant Devine’s fault; it’s the Premier’s fault because the 
price of wheat went down or the grasshoppers come. That’s 
about as much association or common sense in your 
association. You can’t do that. 
 
And you can try it on children, if you like, you can try it on 
them, but normal people don’t. They know if you try. They 
don’t judge a government on good times or bad times, because 
you lost in the good times. You know, everything was rolling: 
$7 Durum, high-priced, all this, and you lost every seat but 
eight. It’s not on the good times or the bad times, it’s on how 
you deal with them and if you’re fair to people and you can bow 
your neck and listen and respond. 
 
So if we have some difficult times, we respond. If things get 
better, obviously you take advantage of that, you put some 
money in the bank so you can do some other things. You didn’t 
do either, in my view. You didn’t help them when they were in 
trouble; you bought their land – and that was all that they had – 
you did the wrong kinds of things with your money. You 
bought potash mines, borrowed the money, and we’re still 
paying the bill. And you could have used that money in 
agriculture – a different philosophy. 
 
So philosophically, I suspect, we’ll always be quite a ways 
apart, not in wanting to help people, but in how you help 
people. And how we help people – and I’ll go through these 
packages and others – is significantly different. And obviously 
it was well accepted. And today again, I remind you if you are 
haunted by that old feeling that you want to go back to land 
bank and you’ve got to defend it, I understand that. But make 
sure that you know as well that the people of the province 
understand it too. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And that’s exactly right, Mr. Premier. We’ll 
write and we’ll advertise and we’ll put our program out to the 
people, and you put yours – and you put yours. And on that 
basis, if yours is so good, if you’re so good, how come you 
didn’t call an election this spring? How come you didn’t call an 
election this summer? If your program is so acceptable amongst 
the farm community and amongst farm people, how come 
you’re afraid to call an election? 
 
Now I know why you’d like to drag in all kinds of stories and 
try and say . . .  and I want you to show me in Hansard  

where I said we’re going to get involved in one or the other, in 
any kind of program, be it land bank or whatever. I want you to 
show me where I said that that’s our solution, because I didn’t 
say that. I just said that you tore up the land bank contracts. You 
changed the agreement they had, and what their rents’ going to 
be, and what kind of a program they’re involved in. You 
changed that contract for them, and they came in by the 
hundreds telling us you did. 
 
And the question I’d have for you, that you can get the 
information across to me: how many people of the 2,700 that 
were involved and got farming and were on land bank land are 
still farming today? You know, or how many of those aren’t 
farming today, that were renting their land rather than buying it 
at the big price? 
 
There was an option out there. And then when I’m the next 
minister of Agriculture, if the next premier decides to appoint 
me to that, there’ll be an option, there’ll be an option out there. 
And if we want to take the time of this Chair to outline what our 
agricultural policy will be, I’d love the opportunity. But that’s 
not what we’re here for. 
 
We’re here to say basically why the people of Saskatchewan are 
so upset with you that you would be afraid to call an election. 
There’s a reason for that – there’s a reason for that, Mr. Premier 
– and that difference will always be out there. And the people 
will say – and I’m glad your party spent all the money they did, 
saying that the NDP haven’t changed. Because I want to tell 
you, that’s the best news that Saskatchewan would ever want to 
hear – we’re the same. We’re the same as we were when there 
was Coldwell and old Dr. Susey in Gravelbourg and those 
people that were the founders of our party. I’m made of the 
same stuff and I’m glad you recognize that. 
 
I’m glad you recognize that, because there’s a philosophical 
difference there, that you haven’t told me. You haven’t told me 
why you decided to increase every farmer’s tax he pays on his 
land, you know, the municipal tax that these small farmers are 
paying. That tax benefit’s gone. I met with a reeve – two reeves, 
in fact; one of them’s a director – and they were telling me that 
one of the key issues in helping them determine what their mill 
rate’s going to be is that they know that the farmer gets that 
benefit back and he saves that amount of tax. 
 
And in a lot of cases in those two R.M.s, those two R.M.s down 
in my constituency, they claim that that was a 30 per cent 
discount in their municipal tax. You took it away from them. It 
didn’t benefit . . .  The percentage benefit to the guy with 6,000 
acres of land, on the property improvement grant and on the 
home quarter tax, was less than 1 per cent; it was meaningless. 
So you decided to take it off. You took it off because it didn’t 
mean anything to the guy that had 70 sections, or some 70 
quarter-sections of land – it wasn’t meaningful to him. 
 
But the guy in your average case here . . .  And it’s interesting 
that you’d use that kind of an example, as an economist. 
Because the numbers you use, you say a whole bunch, and 
that’s great. But I asked you for that . . .  there’s two papers you 
promised to send me across, I still haven’t got. But the numbers 
you gave in your example of  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1891 
 

that farmer that benefited to the tune of 40,000 or 40-some 
thousand, as you said, how come he isn’t of the majority where 
you said that 49 per cent of them had 20 head or less? Why did 
you use an example with a guy that had many cattle if the 
majority of the people that applied on the credit had 20 head or 
less? So that kind of throws a monkey wrench into the numbers 
you’re using. 
 
You know, I don’t see how you could match those two numbers 
up in saying that 49 per cent of the people that got the tax credit 
benefits had 20 head or less, and yet the example you use was 
the guy with 150 head of cattle. You know, anybody with 150 
head of cattle – any management scheme at all will sell more 
than 20 head a year. 
 
So I think that you can put together as an economist . . .  And 
then this is an example that lots of people use – that figures 
don’t lie, but liars figure – and I’m not sure which category our 
agricultural economist fits into. But you can put a little package 
together that says that we get $49,000 benefit to a farmer, and 
then turn around and say that the program we had benefited the 
guys with 20 head or less, 49 per cent. So, you know, unless 
you give me some concrete answers and some definite 
examples, that bragging of that kind of program . . .  
 
Most farmers are saying to me, oh for the days when we had $8 
durum and $7 wheat. You know, they were the ones that then 
were voluntarily anxious to grab up more money, and the banks 
decided to charge more and more interest rates, and they still 
borrowed more to buy this machine and that machine. That 
enthusiasm and that activity isn’t there any more, even at the 
credit union’s normal rate being 11 per cent, half of what it was 
when you took over – the bank rate’s half of what it was. 
 
So that enthusiasm to get out and to show a profit and to count 
on the future as being great, something happened in the 
meantime when we finally got a little cheer-leader that’s patting 
Brian and Reagan on the back saying, keep up the good work 
boys, you know; what you’re doing to us is great. I think our 
farmers are saying that that’s the time they want some argument 
with their returns in a concrete way that brings some results. 
Show us some results. You said you got some results. 
 
I would like to use one more example, Mr. Premier, and then 
I’m going to let one of my colleagues in for a few questions 
here while I meet with some students. But the one example that 
I want to use that points to the philosophical difference between 
your party and our party is this little book right here. And I 
don’t know if you read it or not and if you’ve familiarized 
yourself with “A study team report to the task force on program 
review on agriculture”; short title, “The Nielsen task force 
report.” 
 
This is the section here that deals with agriculture – just this 
section. There’s two or three other sections that I haven’t 
studied in detail as much as I’ve looked at this one. But this 
book here should have had the same title and the same colour as 
your estimate book, because the real Tories are showing up in 
this book here. 
 
The committee that Nielsen put together to draw up this report, 
and the study team that’s involved in doing the  

report, the terms of reference, and the list of team members, are 
prominent in your party, Mr. Minister of Agriculture; the 
private sector members that are involved and the public sector 
members; the professional support people that Nielsen put 
together. This book speaks Tory language. And I want you to 
stand up and say that and tell me where you’ve publicly 
denounced this report and where you have indicated that you 
don’t agree with, and you’re going to fight the changes that are 
proposed by Ottawa in this report. 
 
I think some of the first ones that you’ll know and the 
recommendations in there: does your government support the 
Nielsen report’s recommendation to have farmers forced to 
change from a cash basis of accounting to an accrual basis? Do 
you support that concept, and do you think that that’s the way 
we should go as far as the farm income tax is concerned? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
has again wandered all over the place. Maybe we could just 
bring him back. He said he liked it when there was 7 or $8 
wheat. And that was quite nice to have on the international 
market so that we could sell our wheat for that amount of 
money. Well, who’s going to argue with him. We like to have 
$7 wheat. I can certainly say that no NDP administration in 
Canada has ever caused wheat to go to 7 or $8. They had 
nothing to do with it. 
 
So for him . . .  He might fool a few kids, or some children by 
saying that it’s his responsibility, that when at some point in 
time when the NDP were in power, there was 7 or $8 wheat, 
and it’s all to their credit. I mean you may fool a few people 
some of the time, but you won't fool the majority of them when 
you’re trying to leave that impression. So I don’t know why you 
brought it up. You said you liked it. Well fair enough, you can 
like it. 
 
Secondly, there’s no inconsistency in me going through 
programs that take the average-size farmer, which is a section 
and a half, and a pasture land that is 500 acres, and a herd of 
cattle. I can take the herd of cattle out of there if you like, and 
I’ll just base it on 20 head if you want, and go through all the 
programs that we can have for people in your area or mine or 
any others, and they’re both as accurate as you can find. And 
you’ll get access to all of them and you can make up your own 
because you know what the program is. You can apply for it 
and you’ve probably done the pencilling yourself. So whether 
you’re small or large or whatever, it was a significant amount of 
money. 
 
With respect to the Nielsen task force. I mean, if the hon. 
member wants to spend – for his own, I suspect, partisan 
reasons – Agriculture estimates on the Nielsen task force, as if 
it’s going to be part of his campaign platform, well look, I can 
go through them. And there’s some things in there that I don’t 
like at all and I’ve told him. I disagreed with him on Churchill, 
for example, and what happened – what happened? The 
Minister of Transport says we’re going to spend more money 
on the Churchill port, and we did. So you can’t say that there 
will not be action on any one of them because already the 
governments of western  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1892 
 
 

Canada, and certainly this province and the federal government, 
have taken a diametrically opposite view with respect to 
Churchill and put money into it. 
 
With respect to changing the accounting system, I don’t agree 
with it. And I’ve told him so. So I mean we can go through 
them all and you can add them up and we’ll have a check list. 
 
So with respect to . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  Well, the 
hon. member was sort of all over the map. He’s now leaving to 
take a break. I’ll just let it go at that and respond to any other 
questions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I want 
to indicate to you that certainly agriculture is facing one of the 
worse crises today since the great depression. And the Farm 
Credit Corporation indicates that a quarter of all Canadian 
commercial farmers are indeed in severe financial difficulty; 21 
per cent of the Farm Credit Corporation loans are in arrears – 
21 per cent – over 10,000 farms are technically insolvent; and 
the number of farm bankruptcies has more than tripled since 
1979, to over 500 per year in 1984-85. And we find also that the 
value of Canadian farm equity fell more than $3 million in three 
years while the total farm debt remains in the area of $21 
billion. Those are some of the statistics that have been brought 
forward in some of the research that has been done by Farm 
Credit Corporation and other organizations. 
 
I guess what I want to ask you, Mr. Premier . . .  As Minister of 
Agriculture I’m sure that you have done an analysis here in 
Saskatchewan. I wonder whether the statistics which apply 
generally to agriculture across Canada – my statistics are not 
restricted solely to Saskatchewan, but I’m sure that you have 
had an opportunity to look – and I wonder whether you could 
indicate to us here how many farmers, what percentage, or how 
many farmers are indeed in arrears in respect to the Farm Credit 
Corporation, whether you have that information; and whether or 
not you could indicate whether you have any idea in 
Saskatchewan of the number of farmers that are essentially in 
an insolvent position? In other words what I really want to 
know is whether you can give us sort of an analysis of the 
general financial picture in the agricultural field because 
certainly across Canada I think it’s a very serious problem. 
 
And as I talk to my constituents, one of the very major 
problems – and I know you have no control over it – is the 
continuing falling price of their commodity and the 
ever-increasing input costs, and the provincial government can 
do some things in respect to it. But I talked to one of my very 
most successful farmers and he took in his quota this last fall, 
and he indicated that he had about the same delivery – he keeps 
good records – and he said, his income on his return was about 
one-third less than what he had the year before, and the margin 
is every decreasing. 
 
And I don’t think that we can stand by and watch a major sector 
of our economy be destroyed. And we can debate what policy 
should be in place and we can discuss the merits of some of the 
programs that you’ve put in, and we will, but I think the 
problem is of such magnitude that we  

have to, as a nation, own up to the responsibility. And that is the 
federal government, I think, has to come to grips with it, some 
way of supporting similar to what they’re doing in United 
States and in the European Common Market. I don’t think . . .  
As efficient as our farmers are, I don’t think that they can 
continue on that basis to compete where there’s huge subsidies 
being paid to the European and the United States grain 
producers. 
 
I guess what I would like you to do is: if you would in fact, in a 
factual way, indicate an analysis of the relative health or 
position of the farmers here in Saskatchewan; whether you 
could indicate whether you have any statistics to indicate the 
number of farmers that are in arrears, the number of farmers if 
in fact there are, who are basically in an insolvent position. And 
I ask you, I guess, do you agree with the general principle that 
the magnitude of the problem is such that we need immediate 
response by the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can respond in 
three or four ways. And my first response – and I don’t mean 
this in an antagonist way, and I’ll say that right at the outset, but 
when the problem was developing in the late 1970s and early 
1980s when interest rates went from 10 per cent up to 22 per 
cent, we got into a problem where if we’d of had some action at 
that time, it would have made it much easier to people to live 
through drought and grasshoppers and so forth. And I raise that 
with the hon. member because while we may have some 
difference in philosophy, it’s just the question of the hurt. The 
international interest rate of 22 per cent just cut into people’s 
incomes, and that’s when you saw the margins go, regardless of 
prices and others. 
 
With respect to bankruptcies, I have figures. Saskatchewan, 
despite the drought and the grasshoppers, has the lowest farm 
bankruptcy rate in Canada. The province’s bankruptcy rate is 
less than one per 1,000 farms. This compares with Alberta with 
over one, and Manitoba, over two. And I’ll give you some 
numbers: 1985, Saskatchewan had 41 bankruptcies, Manitoba 
had 69, and Alberta had 82. Now obviously we have almost half 
the farmers in the prairies, so on an percentage basis, we’re very 
low. And in 1984, Saskatchewan had 48 bankruptcies, 
Manitoba had 62, and Alberta had 74. So on a percentage basis 
on a relative comparison in terms of drought and grasshoppers 
and so forth, the bankruptcy rate in Saskatchewan was not only 
the lowest in Canada but significantly lower than you would 
expect under conditions that we’ve experienced. 
 
When you look at wheat prices – I believe that you touched on 
it – we’re likely to see higher domestic-priced wheat which 
would run in the neighbourhood of probably $10 a bushel 
which could add 70, 80, 90 cents a bushel to the overall crop 
here in Canada. At the same time we’re looking at additional 
funds to compensate for the export subsidy, and that’s what the 
western premiers obviously asked for in terms of $1 billion up 
front. 
 
Finally you mentioned the federal response and if we should see 
one. Briefly in my representation to the federal government in 
agriculture, I’ve asked him to reduce or take off the tax on farm 
fuel. I asked them to raise the  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1893 
 

domestic price of wheat, and I asked him to freeze freight rates 
and elevator tariffs. I asked for at least $500 million in a 
western grains stabilization package. I wanted to see 6 per cent 
money in farm credit, as we see it here. I wanted to see a 
drought payment that would be large, a flood payment. I asked 
them to have the capital gains tax removed. I wanted him to 
take some action to restrict beef imports that were subsidized 
from Ireland and the EEC (European Economic Community); 
and I asked for assistance with respect to crop insurance. 
 
Now on those dozen items and in response to your question, if 
the federal government has been responding, we got about 2.2 
billion in response. They took the tax off farm fuel, and that’s 
worth about 80 million to us. The wheat prices are raised, I 
mean, we’re looking at domestic price, and that’s worth a 
couple of hundred million dollars. Freight rates are froze; that’s 
worth about 40 million to us. Elevator tariffs have been frozen; 
that’s worth 10 million. The western grains stabilization 
package was 580 million, which we got the lion’s share of, and 
I expect another significant payment this fall. We did receive 6 
per cent money in the Farm Credit Corporation – although I’m 
not totally satisfied with the way that’s being put together with 
commodities – but it’s 6 per cent money. Our drought relief was 
about $58 million; flood was a 14.8; the capital gains tax 
removal was worth about 40 to $50 million a year to us on an 
annual basis; and the crop insurance payment recently was $640 
million. Now that, plus the billion dollars that we’ve asked for, 
you’re looking at not 2 billion and not 3 billion, but indeed $4 
billion. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the co-operation and the 
action from the federal government to farmers in the Quill 
Lakes area, or farmers in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, or farmers 
any place, the programs we’ve initiated that I outlined, that 
were worth $98,000 in cash flow or $41,000 net on an 
average-sized farm, plus what the federal government has put 
together here – 12 things that add up in my calculations in 
excess of $3 billion, plus the billion that we have asked for in 
terms of export deficiencies. 
 
I mean, Mr. Chairman, in all respect, that’s . . .  you’ve never 
seen such action with respect to either co-operation or direct 
assistance to farmers. And quite frankly, I hear that when I 
travel in the Quill Lake area or when I travel any place else in 
rural Saskatchewan, and many other jurisdictions are looking at 
the same things that we do. 
 
Farm credit numbers, in terms of those in arrears, I don’t have it 
because it’s FCC; it’s federal, but we’ll endeavour to get it for 
the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I really want to get not to a regurgitation 
of what you’ve been saying all afternoon. What I really want to 
do is to get at the crux of the question, and that is the economic 
status or situation of farmers. 
 
I’m asking you: surely, as Minister of Agriculture, you can 
indicate some of the statistics as relates to how many farmers, 
who have Farm Credit Corporation loans, how many of those 
are in arrears? How many are considered to  

be in substantial arrears? Are there any estimates of so many X 
number of farmers which are in fact in an insolvent position? 
 
What I want to get at, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, is: you 
have the research capacity and staff and you're here at 
estimates; and what I’d like you to indicate, out of the total 
number of farmers here in Saskatchewan, some of the statistics 
relating to their financial position because that’s the basis under 
which we have to start operating. It’s no use of you standing up 
here and patting yourself on the back and saying, good work, 
Brian, also and at the same time that the basic problem of our 
farmers – and I think particularly our young farmers – many of 
them are still in serious problems. 
 
(1630) 
 
I don’t think that it is possible for people, as good farmers as we 
have here in Saskatchewan, to be able to produce wheat and sell 
it at $3.18 at Watson, and they’re getting over $6 in the United 
States. I don’t know how you expect them to compete on that 
basis. 
 
So what I’m asking you is, first of all: can you generally 
indicate the nature of the financial position of farmers in 
Saskatchewan, and can you, in particular. . Have you done an 
analysis in respect to the young farmers in Saskatchewan which 
I feel are having the particular problems because many of those 
have bought land at a relatively high price, and also high 
interest rates, and as a consequence with the decreasing price 
for commodities are finding problems? So can you just, in a 
way, indicate what the banks are saying, those that hold the 
mortgages, the position of the mortgages, and also the farm 
credit report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will endeavour to get the farm 
credit numbers because this is a provincial estimate, not federal, 
and I will as quickly as we can get . . .  
 
In terms of the numbers that I can provide you right off the top 
of here, we have about 65,000 farmers in Saskatchewan, give or 
take a few. We have in the neighbourhood of 1,000 people who 
have applied for the guaranteed operating loan, and those are 
people who are in some financial trouble and have applied for 
that new source of funding, and about an additional 500 who 
have been to the farm land security board that were in some 
difficulty and said, we have to have one avenue or another, 
either we’re going to go out of farming or we’re going to have 
to have some help, and so forth. 
 
Now that’s 1,500 farmers that have applied in sort of the real 
bankruptcy cases, or those that might be close to bankruptcy, 
and said that if you can give me some help, I can stay alive. 
They’ve had some judgment; they’ve had some . . .  (inaudible) 
. . .  in terms of their peers. A guaranteed operating loan, a farm 
land security board, about 1,500 people. Okay, 1,500 out of the 
65,000 is a percentage of about 2 to 2.5 per cent of the 
population that were strapped into a situation where they had to 
go before a board and get assistance because they were in 
financial difficulty, either with a credit union or a financial 
institution, and so forth. 
 
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1894 
 
 

Now in general terms, we’ve had about 5,000 new farmers 
come on with respect to 8 per cent money. And these are young 
people that are using this program to access long-term, fixed 
rates of interest so that they can apply that money to buying 
mom and dad’s farm, or the family farm, and so forth. 
 
In a ballpark situation, I look at it out there and I say that we’ve 
got somewhere between 10 and 15 per cent of the farmers who 
were in a position that they are going to need some help, and 
they’re looking at various kinds of programs. You’ve got 
another 25 or 30 per cent that are sort of flat, that are saying I 
don’t know whether I’m up, down, or sideways, depending on 
market prices and input costs. And then you’ve got probably 
well over 50 per cent of them that don’t have any difficulty. 
And you have a large per cent – I’m not sure what it is – that 
don’t have loans at all . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  Pardon 
me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — A third. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — About a third of the farmers that don’t 
have loans. 
 
So you’ve got that ball park range. So you’ve got about 2 – 2.5 
per cent that have taken access to the various kinds of programs 
we have. Our bankruptcy rate is lower than anybody else’s in 
western Canada, and indeed the nation. 
 
We look like we’ve got about 5,000 new farmers taking 
advantage of the 8 per cent money, and that’s our new people 
that weren’t in agriculture before. So that gives you a ballpark. 
 
And with respect to the FCC, I’ll get the number. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well what we’re looking at just from the 
statistics that you have is not a particularly rosy picture. We’re 
looking at 1,500 farmers, on your own admission, and a very, 
very severe financial position. That’s what you’ve said. 
 
You’ve said another 10 to 15 per cent of them have some 
considerable difficulty. And I have down here another 25 to 30 
per cent that aren’t quite sure here which way they’re going. 
And some 50 per cent, or whatever figures . . .  It didn’t seem to 
add up to 100, but I don’t suppose that matters, with the degree 
of accuracy of facts of the Premier. 
 
But in any event, what I’m saying, and I think I concur: can the 
Premier, in his analysis as Minister of Agriculture, be more 
specific as to the particular classification of farmers who are 
more likely to be in difficulty? Is my assumption correct that it's 
many of the younger farmers who are having severe difficulty, 
not because of their managerial skills but because of the 
circumstances in which they found themselves in the economy? 
 
I wonder if you have done any analysis of the situation in 
respect to those that find themselves in either severe or rather 
difficult circumstances financially on the farms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, difficulties in 
agriculture are not limited or isolated to one age category.  

It will go across ages, and it will go across demographics and 
go across regions. 
 
Where we find farmers in difficulty – and I go back to the very 
cause of the problem – is that where farmers had large operating 
loans relative to the size of their operation. Whether they were 
young or middle-aged or senior, if they went out and bought 
land or bought machinery or borrowed money to build 
something in the middle to the late 1970s and got hit with 22 
per cent interest rate, it didn’t matter what age they were, they 
got into trouble. 
 
And that’s where I throw the ball back to 1979, ’80, ’81, and 
’82, when we were seeing that problem emerge and develop. If 
something would have happened at that time to protect them, 
we wouldn’t have half the problem we’ve got today because we 
would have allowed them some breathing room so they 
wouldn’t have to face a doubling of the interest rate. 
 
Now I mention this to the hon. member because he was a 
cabinet minister at that time, and he watched interest rates go 
from 10 per cent to 22 per cent, and he didn’t do a thing about it 
– nothing. Now that had a major impact, not only on young 
people, on people all across the board. And as he knows, his 
government bought land from people of all ages – seniors, 
moms, dads, middle-age people, relatively young 30 to 40, and 
from young people – who got in trouble because of high interest 
rates. 
 
And my argument goes back, if he would have provided interest 
rate protection rather than buying the farm, we wouldn’t have 
half the problem we’ve got today. So in terms of who’s in 
trouble, it’s anybody that didn’t receive help when interest rates 
were 22 per cent, obviously got a monkey on their back and it 
was a financial burden, and we’ve had to deal with it as a result. 
And any other administration that dealt with it earlier obviously 
looked at some benefit as a result of it showing up. 
 
Now despite that – despite the 22 per cent that was there in ’82 
that nobody did anything about – we have the lowest 
bankruptcy rate in Canada in agriculture, and we have 
obviously the lowest in the prairies, despite drought and 
grasshoppers, as a result of the programs that we’ve put 
together. 
 
Default with respect to our loans was 19 per cent of the clients 
last year. It’s down to 16 per cent this year as of May 31, 1986. 
So obviously the impact that we’re having in terms of farm land 
security board, the various kinds of legislation, the 6 per cent 
money, the zero per cent money, and the various kinds of 
programs they can access, is having a significant impact. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One of the programs that you introduced was 
the production loan program, and I was just wondering, did the 
government do a study into agriculture for a determination. Did 
you do any investigation? Did you do a study which you might 
be able to file supporting the need for the production loans 
program, the $25 per acre? I was wondering what were the 
statistics that you looked at in respect to the general farm 
condition at that time which triggered or initiated the $25 per 
acre. 
 
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1895 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it was in response to the 
very serious question of a shortage of cash flow across 
agriculture, and it was not limited to areas that either were 
flooded out or froze or dried out or eaten up by grasshoppers. It 
was across the board. 
 
So to address that cash flow problem that resulted from 22 per 
cent interest rates which nobody would do anything about, it 
carried on, and then you look at the drought and the frost and 
the midge and the various kinds of insect problems and so forth, 
that it applied right across Saskatchewan. And as I said, there’s 
no demographic description. There’s no geographic isolation. 
There’s no age discrimination when applied across agriculture. 
 
So we said that we would go and help the cash flow problem of 
farmers that you’ve talked about. I mean, they didn’t have a 
drought in the Quill lake area, but farmers that you’ve just 
mentioned are having some difficulty. Well I suspect that the 
program we designed helped farmers in the Quill Lakes. Some 
might have suffered from frost, a large number of them might 
have been disappointed that their once cabinet minister didn’t 
protect them against high interest rates; then they have a 
problem. 
 
So you know what it’s like in terms of reduction and margins. 
The very margins that you mention are the reason that we have 
applied it right across the board to agriculture, to make sure that 
we could help people in all commodities, not just hogs, not just 
beef, not just grain, but in all of livestock and in all of 
agriculture and in all of grain, right across the board. Because 
those interest rates did not discriminate, they applied to 
everybody in Saskatchewan, and therefore to be fair we applied 
the 6 per cent money to all legitimate, bona fide farmers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, let’s take a look at the Grant Devine, 
Premier Devine’s fairness. Let’s take a look at it. Let’s say how 
you’re out there really helping those that need it. Because you 
have said in your own admission here that 33 per cent of all 
farmers have absolutely no debt, no loans. And do you know 
what you did. They have cash advances if they’re farmers, and 
they can take it in and they can get cash advances to get money. 
No interest whatsoever. 
 
And you gave them the same amount as you gave to someone 
who is having difficulties. And you say, I am fair. Yes, you’re 
fair. Do you realize that the people of Saskatchewan, many of 
the farmers are laughing at you. 
 
I have farmer after farmer in my constituency who has taken 
this money — $25 at 6 per cent – and they said, we don’t need 
it but we’re going to have to help pay for this, this mismanaged 
program, because there are going to be many who are not going 
to be able to pay. And many of the farmers have actually said, 
I’ve taken it. And I’ll tell you they’ve gone to the credit union 
and to the banks. 
 
And you’ll know some, Mr. Chairman, who have taken this 
money. They needed it so badly that they took the money at 6 
per cent, and they walked across the street after they got it and 
they gave it to the credit union manager. And they said, invest 
this for me for three years  

at 10 and a half per cent. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, I can 
get affidavits if you don’t believe it, because that is what’s 
happening. 
 
Now you say you’re addressing and you’re helping farmers who 
need assistance. Well I’ll tell you, this program here doesn’t 
help the people who need it. I wrote a letter to you in respect to 
a young farmer who is having problems. I’m not going to 
mention the name in the legislature, but you’ll know it; you’ll 
have correspondence. And I’ll give you what they . . .  This 
farmer has problems, there’s no doubt – financial problems. 
 
But do you know what they say? Mr. X’s financial affairs have 
been under review by counselling and assistance for farmers, 
and a group of his peers have been unable to determine viability 
to his farm operation. Agricultural credit corporation has an 
obligation to be responsible in the use of taxpayers’ money, and 
under these circumstances we will not be providing a 
production loan. 
 
You deceive the people of this province. You announced the 
program; you said it applies to all farmers. That’s what you 
said. You weren’t fair. But those lowest on the economic scale 
and that need the help, you have abandoned. That’s what 
you’ve done. And wealthy farmers have gone into banks, have 
taken this money; and they don’t hid the fact, nor are they 
ashamed of it. But they are ashamed to have a Minister of 
Agriculture and a Premier that would put out a program so 
basically unfair. 
 
With a province in debt by $2 billion, this man says, I’m going 
to help agriculture, and he goes out and he gives to the good 
operator with no debt whatsoever. And there are, in his own 
admission, 33 per cent of them. 
 
(1645) 
 
They walk in and they can make money from the money that 
they receive—invest it and you can actually make money on it 
because they don’t need it to operate. There are farmers after 
farmer who said that. I’ve talked to people in the rural areas 
who say, how can you believe that there would be no evaluation 
of whether or not they have any capacity to pay back. 
 
The other fear is that 20 per cent of the money that has been 
passed out will not ever be repaid. But what you’ve done is you 
haven’t analyzed and you haven’t addressed the problem areas 
in agriculture. That’s what I was asking the Premier for. Find 
out who, in fact, are beyond saving and I don’t say that you 
should be throwing money at those that are beyond saving. I’ll 
say that. That’s fair enough. But I’ll tell you there’s a group of 
farmers – if we had taken that money and analyzed those that 
needed it most, I’ll tell you we could restructure some of their 
debt and help them into a viable position, rather than having the 
33 per cent; can take them into the credit union and to the 
banks, invest it for me for three years compliments of the 
Premier, compliments of the people of Saskatchewan, because 
the taxpayer has a $2 billion debt under your lack of 
management. 
 
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1896 
 
 

I’ll tell you, out in Quill Lakes they are laughing at you. But 
they’re laughing at you more than in Quill Lakes, that’s the 
problem. You can’t run a province; that’s what they’re saying. 
There is no administration in this government; that is the 
problem. 
 
So I say to you, how do you justify, Mr. Premier, many of the 
. . .  A significant percentage of the farmers do have indeed 
some financial problems. This is not going to save them. But 
what you have done is take a large amount of money, and many 
of those with absolutely no debt have been able to take it and 
invest it and make money. 
 
I took a look at it, worked out a bit of an example, and I guess 
anyone can figure it out. But you say that the average farmer 
across Saskatchewan got about $20,000 under your program. 
That’s what the press release says – about $20,000. As of April 
11, a total of 50,000 Saskatchewan farmers had received $991 
million – averaging out to $19,800 per farmer. 
 
So taking it on that basis of $20,000 rounded off, for a given 
farmer at $25 an acre, it would be about $800 a farm. And I 
want to say, Mr. Premier, that the total saving on interest would 
be, if we calculate the $25 at 6 per cent, and assuming that the 
farmer could get it at 10 per cent, the 4 per cent difference, it 
would come to about $800 saving per farmer on a $20,000 loan, 
on a 4 per cent difference – from 10 per cent down to 6 per 
cent; if the farmer could have gone out himself and got it for 10 
per cent, but he’s getting it for 6 per cent. So on that he saves 
$800 on that 800 acres on that $20,000 that he gets under your 
program. 
 
Well, you know, what you have done is you announced a big 
program and you say: billions of dollars into agriculture, Mr. 
Premier. But you keep deceiving the people of Saskatchewan 
and I’ll tell you why. You know what, on this 800 acre of farm, 
do you know what it comes out to on the calculation of a 
subsidy to help farmers, to those at the bottom that really need 
some help? One dollar a day. That’s what they say on the 
example that I use. That’s what they would be getting as a 
subsidy from the provincial government, from the Premier, 
from the Minister of Agriculture, who is standing up and 
saying, oh, I am doing so much, I’m pouring a billion dollars 
into agriculture. You aren’t. 
 
You know, what you gave to the farmers? One dollar per acre. 
That’s approximately what they’re getting. Maybe a dollar and 
a quarter. I give you . . .  stretch it, but that’s what it comes to. 
It’s an acreage payment of $1 to $1.25. That is what you’re 
giving to the farmers – not helping those who have . . .  not 
those at the bottom who have some problems. You haven’t 
analyzed. You won’t even own up to the fact. I don’t think it’s 
different in other constituencies than in mine and some of the 
other ones that I visited across the province in a tour. 
 
But I do find that many of the farmers that are in trouble, be it 
all there are some at all age levels, as you said . . .  But let’s be 
frank. It’s more of the young farmers and those that got started 
with the difficult circumstances of the economy. So let’s not 
fool ourselves, but we can take this example . . .  
 

Though first of all, if you break it down on the average of 20 — 
$20,000 – that means you could have eight payments of $25 on 
800 acres. And if the farmer had to borrow it on his own at 10 
per cent, but he’s getting it now at 6, he saves about $800. 
That’s what he saves. And he has an 800 acres, is his coverage. 
So it’s $1 per acre is what he’s saving. 
 
Now if you take the farmer who doesn’t need it, what can he 
do? Well what they have done . . .  and many of them have, and 
maybe you say there’s nothing wrong with that. And I’m not 
. . . I want to make it perfectly clear to you, I am not . . .  And 
don’t stand up and say that I’m accusing farmers of abusing a 
program, because you better not. Because I talk to farmers, and 
I’ll tell you what I told them. I told them, yes, if that Premier is 
prepared to put out that money of that nature with no strings 
attached, and you’re going to be responsible for the 
mismanagement of this province because you own property, I 
said fine, you can take advantage of it because this guy is not 
going to be around very much longer because the 
mismanagement is so great. That is the concern, Mr. Premier, is 
that you do not have any mismanagement. 
 
I can venture that those farmers, the 33 per cent which you say 
have absolutely property free farms, totally paid for, do you 
think that they actually did not have the capacity to raise cash to 
put their crop in? Are you telling me that or are you saying that 
the farmers that come to me . . .  And I’ll tell you, one of the 
best Tories in Quill Lakes – and there’s not many of them but 
there’s one – he’s a brother to a candidate that ran for you 
federally. 
 
And I’ll tell you, he said I really have to question this program, 
Murray. He said, the problem with this program is that all you 
do is walk into the elevator, sign a note. And he said, you know 
what’s going to happen with such a loosely administered 
program? He said, all of us who are good managers, built up, 
we have no loans – what he has done he hasn’t targeted, he has 
no direction to this program; he’s throwing it out. 
 
And they know the community. And he says, that money, much 
of it, some of it will never be repaid. And they say, who will 
repay it? It’s going to be the ones who survive; the ones who 
are going to have to pay it are those with the property. 
 
And so what they are saying in respect to this program, it’s not 
a billion dollars help to the farmers. What you have done is 
encouraged and enticed them into a billion dollars of additional 
debt. That’s what you’ve done. You haven’t helped those at the 
top of the ladder who are debt-free because they didn’t need 
help. They didn’t need help. And what they have done is taken 
it and they said, well since you can’t even manage the affairs of 
the province—look at the financial mess, look at the basis of 
this program, this pretense of being fair, with no red tape — 
they said, we have to take advantage of it. 
 
They have debated it. Go into coffee shops across this province, 
and I’ll tell you, they’re saying, sure. But take a look. Those 
that are thinking are saying, imagine, in four years $2 billion of 
debt. And those that take a pencil and analyze it, do you know 
what they say? There is $1 to $1.25 subsidy per acre. Well, isn’t 
that a massive infusion  
  



 
June 11, 1986 

1897 
 

of assistance to the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
You haven’t analyzed the position of the farmers. You haven’t 
taken a look to see whether there is a group of good operators 
that an infusion of cash or restructuring of debt could be of 
great assistance to. Why would you pay to those, who have no 
debt whatsoever, the same amount as those who are in need of 
restructuring of their debt but are good operators? 
 
And you know, you talk about other ways. You put in 8 per cent 
money for farmers, you said. Well, I’ll tell you, farmers aren’t 
buying much land today. That program is still. There may be 
. . .  Sure, you can bring up statistics with the big operators, 
including sons, and doing the transfer and restructuring of their 
debt through your program, and you can call them new farmers, 
but the farmers know full well what you’re doing. And so what 
I’m really saying, Mr. Premier, is that you haven’t put a billion 
dollars into the farming economy. 
 
So I say, Mr. Premier, essentially there are . . .  a crisis 
situation. Let there be no denying. It has been said by farm 
credit, it’s been said by some of the banks and said by some of 
the research, and the major problem is that we have to . . . It’s 
no use you saying, keep up the good work, Brian. What we 
need to know and farmers need to know is whether or not, and 
whether you are onside for federal support in a deficiency 
payment. You wont’ keep farmers in production, a sufficient 
number of them, by only the $10 domestic wheat. That will 
help, but realize it only covers 10 per cent of the total 
production – about 10. That’s right. So as a consequence, it’s 
not going to solve the problems. You know it. 
 
And so what we’re asking you, and I’ve asked you here and the 
major farm groups have said, what we support is a deficiency 
payment. We tried to carry on here in the session with a 
resolution and a sensible debate on the crisis in farming, 
recommending that the federal government bring in a deficiency 
payment, and we couldn’t even get your support, Mr. Premier. I 
say to you, Mr. Premier, that it’s absolutely important, 
absolutely critical, that the farmers get a commitment from the 
federal government. 
 
I ask you: will you use your good office . . .  will you in fact 
push hard to get the commitment from the federal government 
for a deficiency payment? Because agriculture, after all, is the 
heart of this province. It’s the essential generator of the 
economy. 
 
I want much more to say on this here, Mr. Premier. I intend to 
. . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Strike at Lanigan Potash Mine
	Funding for CMHC Regional Assistance Program
	Cut in Federal Transfer Payments
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Yeas
	Nays
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 54 – An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE

