


















































April 23, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 23, 1986 
 

807 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Today I would like to introduce a group of 
students visiting from Rosetown Division 3 School. We have 24 
students from grade 8, accompanied by five adults: Mr. Ted 
Brumwell and Gail DeBoice as teachers; and Jim Dirks, Roz 
Walker, and Karen Crawford acting as chaperons. 
 
I’m pleased to have the students with us today. I hope you enjoy 
the question period and the activities in the Chamber. I would 
be pleased to meet with you following question period for 
pictures and to answer any questions that you may have. 
 
I’d ask all hon. Members to welcome these students from 
Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, a group of 40 students from Maple Creek. They 
arrived later than they had planned. They had a bit of bus 
trouble when they started out this morning. They’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Dale Elderkin and Mrs. 
Linda Johnson; the chaperons are Bernice Lambert, Teri 
Gerbrandt, Brenda Moorhead; bus drivers, Aza Gold and Omar 
Murry. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we may thank them for bringing the rain, 
that started in the West, to this part of the province, and we 
hope you brought lots of it with you and left a lot at home. I’ll 
be meeting with you at 3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments, 
and I do hope you enjoy your stay in Regina, not only the visit 
to the legislature, but the other visits you have planned for the 
day. I would ask members to welcome them please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Ombudsman Report — Child Abuse 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Social Services and it deals with the 
annual Ombudsman report. In his report, Mr. Minister, the 
Ombudsman is extremely critical of your department with 
respect to the issue of child abuse. The Ombudsman states, and 
I quote: 
 

In it’s various forms, child abuse is occurring at a rate that 
tests the imagination. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is can you confirm that the 
Ombudsman found the problem of child abuse in some 
Saskatchewan foster homes to be serious enough last year that 
he prepared a special report with a number of recommendations 
and presented that report to the full cabinet; and further can you 
confirm that you and the  

provincial cabinet have refused to act on that special report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of child abuse is 
something that I think all members of society and certainly 
government must take very seriously. It’s a matter that I have 
been gravely concerned about once I took on the responsibilities 
as Minister of Social Services. 
 
The issue I believe that the member opposite is referring to has 
to do with the matter of corporal punishment as it pertains to 
foster parents. This is a difficult and a sensitive issue. At 
present our policy is that we would expect that foster parents 
would treat their children as other parents in the province 
would. We would place no more onerous restrictions than any 
other parent would place upon themselves. 
 
I believe that is a reasonable policy position to take at this 
particular point in time. Unfortunately there will always be 
those parents in society at large, and perhaps there may be some 
foster parents on occasion who do not appropriately discipline 
their children, and of course we know that there are those 
instances in society where some parents may actually abuse 
their children purposely. It is a difficult situation. 
 
The member opposite may not know, but we are presently 
involved in a comprehensive child-in-care review which 
encompasses . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the members 
opposite would be so kind as to be quiet I would be happy to 
continue responding to the question. 
 
The child-in-care review is a comprehensive review. We’ve 
been fortunate that we have not had, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the kinds of difficulties that other provinces 
have had in this particular regard. I think of the judicial inquiry 
in Alberta, for example. I can inform the member opposite that 
the child-in-care review does have two members from the foster 
parents association on the child-in-care review team. That 
review team will be meeting with all of the foster parent locals 
in the province. The review team will also be sending 
questionnaires out to all of the foster parents. So we certainly 
are concerned about the issue, and we want to do the best we 
can to look after the children in care. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister refused to answer the question about whether there had 
been a report to cabinet and whether cabinet had dealt with it. 
My supplementary is simply this, Mr. Minister. And I remind 
you first of all the words that were in the annual report of the 
Ombudsman. And it refers to the foster care system as “an area 
of urgent concern . . . ” It refers to cases involving cases of 
physical and sexual abuse of foster children. And then the 
report states, and I quote again: 
 

My recommendation (with respect to these problems) was 
the unsuccessful subject of Ombudsman Reports to the 
department, the minister and the provincial cabinet in 
1985. 

 
In other words, Mr. Minister, the Ombudsman has been asking 
for action on these problems through a special  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

808 
 

report of your government since last year, but you have failed to 
act. Why doesn’t the abuse of children in some Saskatchewan 
foster care homes concern your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member 
opposite that the report that the Ombudsman prepared had to do 
with the recommendation that there be a review, a public 
review, of this whole matter of corporal punishment as it related 
to foster parents. This government reviewed that particular 
recommendation and decided that a public review of the issue 
of corporal punishment as it pertains to foster parents was not 
the best way to deal with this particular issue. We believe that 
the policy at present is an appropriate policy. 
 
There may on occasion have been those foster parents who were 
excessive in their punishment. As we all know, parents at large 
are occasionally excessive in their punishment. Any particular 
person who is involved in the purposeful abuse of children, 
whether it be sexual abuse or whether it be any other kind of 
abuse, we would naturally want those particularl people to be 
brought to justice. 
 
As it relates to the matter of the report and the recommendation 
for a public debate on the issue of corporal punishment in foster 
homes, we did not believe that that was the appropriate way to 
deal with this issue. We felt the appropriate way, in fact, was to 
deal with it in the context of the larger child-in-care review 
which presently is under way in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A further question for the minister. And 
here again, Mr. Speaker, we see the minister saying that he is 
right, and the Ombudsman is wrong. He has also refused, time 
and time again, to undergo the scrutiny of an independent 
review. And I ask the minister: what are you afraid of? Why are 
you afraid of an independent review of this area of your 
department if you are so right? What are you afraid of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the members 
opposite in my former answers that the Ombudsman’s concern 
pertained to the issue of corporal punishment being used by 
foster parents. We believe that the policy at present is a 
reasonable policy, that we should not single out foster parents to 
be dealt with differently than any other parent in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also realize that the care of children, whether it be by foster 
parents or by any other parent, is at times a difficult issue. We 
are aware that there is abuse of children in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we regret that deeply. This is a phenomena 
that we find across the world, and certainly Saskatchewan is not 
exempt from that, unfortunately. 
 
We believe the best way to deal with the issue of how children 
should be punished or should not be punished; how they should 
be dealt with; how they should be controlled; what kinds of 
supports there should be for foster parents — that particular 
issue should be dealt with in the larger context of the 
child-in-care review, which is presently being conducted and 
includes substantial input  

from foster parents, and indeed, there will be input from foster 
children themselves in this child-in-care review. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. The minister 
indicates now that he is not afraid of the scrutiny of an 
independent review, or he implies that it isn’t fear that stops 
him from doing it. I want to say to the minister that if you are 
not afraid of criticism or an open debate, will you make 
yourself available and vote in favour of a motion which we will 
be putting forward immediately following question period and 
before orders of the day, which section 19 of The Legislative 
Assembly Act and Executive Council Act provides for, that we 
are allowed to call before the Legislative Assembly witnesses or 
experts to debate and to give information to the Assembly? 
 
And I would ask the minister that when we rise with this 
motion, whether you will give your support to bring the 
Ombudsman here to the Assembly so members can clear up 
whether you are telling the truth or whether the concerns of the 
Ombudsman as portrayed in his report are legitimate. Will you 
support that kind of a motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the matter of whether or not 
there should be corporal abuse in foster homes is really the 
issue at question here, because that’s the recommendation that 
the Ombudsman made. The Ombudsman has said that he 
questions . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Give the minister an 
opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The Ombudsman has said that he questions 
whether or not foster parents should be able to use corporal 
punishment as a means of discipline, as a means of control, in 
foster homes. And he believes that that should be an issue of 
public review — that particular, single issue itself. We say it’s 
more appropriate to deal with that particular issue on which we 
know there are extreme differences of opinion . . . It’s more 
appropriate to deal with that issue in the context of the larger 
child-in-care review. 
 
The member opposite seems to suggest that somehow we don’t 
want policies reviewed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would 
remind . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, and I would ask the members 
to control their voices a little and give the minister the 
opportunity to answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: I would remind 
the members opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to caution the member for Quill 
Lakes to control his voice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would remind the members opposite that 
it was this government that instituted the ministerial advisory 
council on child protection, chaired by eminent Dr. Peter 
Matthews from Saskatoon university, which in fact reviewed 
this entire matter of children in need of protection. 
 
  



 
April 23, 1986 

809 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The rules in the Legislative 
Assembly do not allow me to tell the minister what to say. I 
cannot force any minister to answer the question, and I would 
ask for order while the minister answers the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the gist of the question was 
that somehow this government does not want its policies to be 
reviewed. I’m simply reminding the members opposite that it 
was this government which instituted the minister’s advisory 
council on child protection, chaired by Dr. Peter Matthews from 
Saskatoon, with 15 eminent people from the province of 
Saskatchewan, which toured the entire province; received over 
100 briefs from people and organizations here in the province; 
which made recommendations to this government. And we are 
implementing many of those recommendations. Now for the 
member opposite to suggest that somehow we don’t want our 
policies to be scrutinized or reviewed simply contradicts the 
facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I asked a short question, 
and I have seen in the House of Commons where the Prime 
Minister has been sat down for not answering the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member asked a very 
lengthy question, if the member will recall, and I would ask him 
to ask a short question this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, we will compare the length of the 
answers in . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Does the member have a question? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question to the minister is short. I 
want to ask him whether he will support a motion that we will 
put forward to call to the Assembly the Ombudsman, under 
section 19 of The Legislative Assembly Act, that we will put 
forward after question period. Will you support that motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of 
responding to some hypothetical motion that I have yet to see. 
But I can tell the Speaker that I will support whatever policies 
are necessary to do the best that we can on behalf of children in 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the responsibility I took 
upon my shoulders when I became Minister of Social Services. 
That is exactly why we instituted the ministerial advisory 
council on child protection. That is why we are involved at 
present in the comprehensive child-in-care review in the 
province, and I believe that’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Authorization of Crop Insurance Letter 
 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the minister responsible for 
crop insurance, and it has to do with the confusion that you’ve 
created around the crop insurance program. I have here a letter 
which was sent to a number of farmers recently about changes 
in crop insurance. 
 

This one is dated March 27th and it states quite clearly that 
farmers who used air reels to harvest their crops in 1985 will be 
getting an additional $8 per acre payment. The letter is signed 
by a one Ron Osika of Crop Insurance Corporation, and it 
includes a declaration which the farmer filled in and sent to 
crop insurance to get his special payment. 
 
Did you, as a minister, authorize sending this letter and the 
declarations, and how many farmers received it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I reported yesterday, the 
crop insurance directors, those on the board of directors, 
reviewed the situation with respect to air reels and said, if we’re 
going to pay for air reels in terms of crop salvage, then we’re 
going to have to pay for every other piece of investment and 
taxpayers’ dollars and farmers’ investments that might have 
resulted in a large crop being harvested, which include double 
swatch attachments, straight headers, spray on crop, and so 
forth. 
 
So it was reviewed by the crop insurance board of directors and 
they said, we can’t make the payment because, if you do, it’s 
unfair to all those people who have made the investment in 
various ways to salvage more crop. As a result of that, I agreed 
with them, and I made the statement yesterday, saying that 
under these circumstances it would be unfair to the thousands of 
farmers who have invested in either its grasshopper spray, or 
direct headers, or straight combining, double swatch 
attachments, whatever, that might have been used to harvest 
increased production, and their recommendation makes sense to 
me, so I elaborated on it yesterday. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I wasn’t asking about the confusion you created. 
Did you authorize this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the letter went out under 
crop insurance and I assume that it was passed by the board of 
directors of crop insurance. They have reassessed it and said it 
would be unfair to all the rest of them, so they said we were 
going to correct it now. And rather than be unfair to the 
thousands of farmers, they say we’re not going to pay it on air 
reels. 
 
And if the members opposite . . . I mean if you’re telling me 
that you want it paid on air reels and not on anything else, then 
I’ll make that clear that the NDP want to pay on air reels, but 
they don’t want to pay on headers; they don’t want to pay on 
double swatch attachments; they don’t want to pay on crop 
insurance, or on grasshopper sprays, or anything else. Now if 
that’s the position you want to take, fair enough. I’ll make that 
clear. You want that to happen. 
 
Well the board of directors has reviewed it and they said it 
wouldn’t be fair; therefore they’re not paying it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The question simply was: why would you send 
out a letter like this telling the farmers they are going to receive 
a special payment and in just three weeks make a 180 degree 
turn-around and withdraw that coverage? Some farmers who 
received this letter have already gone to their bank or credit 
unions because it says right in there, point-blank — and don’t 
say ahh to me, Mr. former  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

810 
 

attorney general — it says right in there you will receive $8 an 
acre — will receive! That assurance they took to the banks. If a 
farmer had 1,000 acres, he had a legal commitment for $8,000. 
 
I’m not arguing with you about the merits for the coverage of 
air reels. I think it was a stupid idea to start with. What farmers 
want to know is how the idea got to the point where you were 
authorizing letters to go to the farmers telling them they were 
getting extra money before you figured out that there was a 
problem. That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, three observations. One is, 
if the board of directors of crop insurance say in their 
judgement that it wouldn’t be fair, and you agree — now you 
agree and a minute ago you didn’t. You said all right, it 
wouldn’t be a good idea to do it. All right. So they said they 
agree with you, it isn’t a good idea to do it, so they made that 
clear. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You might as well just sit and listen to this. I 
know you don’t like to listen but you asked a question; I’ll give 
you the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly all the students know that the 
opposition doesn’t like to listen to the answers. I think that the 
students deserve to hear the answers, and they deserve to hear 
the questions. The NDP never want to listen to an answer . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The NDP never want to listen to an 
answer. If you want to holler from your seat, you can holler 
from your seat all you like, but I want to tell you the facts. You 
talk about changing your mind. You wouldn’t provide interest 
rate protection to farmers or to home owners. Now you’ve 
changed your mind. Mr. Speaker, they think that it’s a good 
idea. They said that they wouldn’t provide gas tax protection, 
remove it . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The question was . . . He made a 180-degree 
turn. Are you taking the responsibility for this or aren’t you? 
That’s all we’re asking. 
 
Crop insurance sent out a letter. The farmer was promised if he 
had 1,000 acres — 8,000 bucks — now he’s not getting it. 
Today he’s not getting it; yesterday he had it. Are you taking 
the responsibility for it? — it’s that simple. You made a 
complete turn-around. Yesterday I told you you should have 
made the changes. You’ve changed it again. Are you taking the 
responsibility for this, or aren’t you? Or are you going to dump 
it on one of your staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says 
now that he doesn’t think that it’s a good idea to pay for 
headers, for reels . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, so a 
crop insurance board of directors . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to control his hollering. We can’t 
operate in this Chamber with that kind of noise. 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I could use an 
illustration. Okay, I’ll use an illustration. To the hon. member: 
we put a tax on used cars, and farmers said, and people said, it’s 
not a good idea. So I removed it. All right. The crop insurance 
made a recommendation that they would look at air reels. They 
had representation from all over the province saying it’s not fair 
because of all the things that other farmers have done, and they 
made a recommendation to me that we shouldn’t make the 
payment because it’s not fair to those that use headers — or you 
name it — or other people. And we made that decision. 
 
And you agree with the fact that we shouldn’t be paying on air 
reels, and you’ve agreed with the fact that there shouldn’t be a 
tax on used cars. And you said, all right, make that change, and 
we did. Well, Mr. Speaker, of course, if you’re listening to the 
people, you will make those kinds of changes. My point when I 
stood up here last is that the previous administration didn’t 
believe in interest rate protection or taking the tax off gas, and 
they’ve changed their minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Contract with Inner Dimension Design Associates 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. My question is to the Minister 
of Supply and Services. About two weeks ago, Mr. Minister, 
you took notice of questions concerning the awarding of nearly 
$60,000 worth of government business without tender to an 
interior design firm owned by your deputy minister’s wife. 
 
In response to those questions about a week ago, you told this 
Assembly, and I quote: “No contract has been awarded to that 
firm since Mr. Cutts and Miss Devitt became engaged.” 
 
In light of that clear statement, can the minister explain the 
document, a copy of which was sent to you a few moments ago, 
which shows Inner Dimension Design Associates as the interior 
designer on a project at the Lakeside Nursing Home in 
Wolseley, with the Government of Saskatchewan as client? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, or Mr. Speaker, I will 
again take notice of the question, get the details, and return to 
the Assembly with those details. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Last week in 
. . . Mr. Minister, how can you not know the answer to it? Last 
week in the Assembly you stood up and told us that you had 
checked into these allegations, that you had investigated them, 
and that you reported that no new contracts had been awarded 
this firm. On what did you base that unequivocal statement, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, it is quite possible that 
in this case there is a developer building the nursing home at 
Wolseley. The developer will be the person awarding the 
contracts. Obviously you have sent this information over. I 
don’t have the exact details. I will get the exact details. It’s my 
impression that it will be something awarded by the developer. 
But rather than mislead you, I will get you the exact details and 
return to  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

811 
 

the House with them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister. One question 
which you will know the answer to, and I ask for that: on what 
did you base last week’s answer in this Assembly? And where 
does your information come from? You made a clear, 
unequivocal statement, and it had been prepared in advance. 
You had taken notice of the original question. On what 
information did you base that statement which now would 
appear to be incorrect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to infer that the 
information is incorrect is simply not an accurate statement. I 
indicated I will check. The information provided was provided 
by the Department of Supply and Services. My statement was 
that the Department of Supply and Services had not awarded 
any contracts to the company in question. Now if in fact the 
Wolseley nursing home, as I believe is the case, is being 
handled, developed, and built by a developer who is free to 
award contracts to whomever that developer feels is correct, I 
will look into it, and I will determine if that is in fact the case. 
At any rate I will determine what the facts are and return with 
them as I indicated. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. I invite the minister to have 
a look at the document which I gave him. The client is said to 
be the Department of Supply and Services, not the Department 
of Health which never does any building, nor is it a 
privately-owned institution. We haven’t come to that yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you the last question, on what you based 
your answer, for a purpose. I want to know where you get the 
information from. Was it your deputy minister whose answers 
were in question who gave you the information, or did you get 
it from somewhere else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, as you are well aware, 
and as I’m sure the member is well aware, many, several 
projects have been developed by proposal call by various 
developers. I believe, but I’m not absolutely sure, that the 
Wolseley nursing home was developed that way. It is being 
built by a developer who, as I indicated, would be free to use 
whichever subcontractors of any trade that they chose. And 
consequently I will, as I indicated, get the detailed information 
and return to the Assembly with it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in the Assembly you stated 
clearly no contract has been awarded to that firm since Mr. 
Cutts and Miss Devitt became engaged. You stated that they 
were married on June 29, ’85. I want to know when the contract 
was awarded and when the work was performed. It would 
appear from the file number that the contract would have been 
awarded after April 1, 1985. It’s number 140, so it would have 
been awarded some time after that. So I’d ask you, Mr. 
Minister, if you’ll also undertake to report to the House when 
the specific contract was awarded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to 
indicate that nothing that has been presented here today would 
indicate that anything I said the other day was inaccurate. I will 
get the details as I indicated and return with them. 

STATEMENT BY DEPUTY PREMIER 
 

Response to Allegations 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
would like to take this opportunity to make a personal statement 
to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision to tell you this story is the toughest 
decision that I’ve ever come to. But in the view of my wife and 
my family and myself, the speculation that exists in the public 
mind about certain allegations and investigations is far more 
damaging to our family than the telling of this story would be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last 18 days have been nothing short of hell for 
me and my family. Thousands of parents understand and 
appreciate the difficulties faced when raising a family. Jean and 
I are no different. In raising our four children we have faced 
some trying times. The great misfortune is that we must do it in 
the public eye. However, the meat grinder that I have been put 
through over the last 18 days is beyond description. 
 
Jean and I have four children. Two of them are our natural 
children, and two of native ancestry were adopted some 11 
years ago. We have attempted to treat all four of them equally 
as individuals within a family unit. We have also attempted to 
raise them in a Christian home with love and understanding. 
 
Unfortunately, our oldest daughter, who was about five years 
old when she came to us, was and is emotionally disturbed. My 
wife and I have worked ever since then with her. We have done 
everything in our power, Mr. Speaker, to help her over the years 
without really understanding the depth of her problems. We 
have sought various kinds of professional help in her 
development. She remains, Mr. Speaker, a very emotionally 
disturbed young lady. She has a history of making false 
accusations about a variety of people, doing a variety of things. 
Mr. Speaker, many of them are a matter of record at doctors’ 
offices, at police departments in the province, at the Department 
of Social Services, and at schools our daughter has attended. 
She is an emotionally disturbed teenager, and our efforts to help 
her have not met with success. 
 
This background information, Mr. Speaker, leads me to the 
questions: when allegations are levelled about you and not at 
you, how do you prove your integrity? How do you prove your 
honesty? How do you prove, Mr. Speaker, that you are a decent 
individual? 
 
About two months ago, my daughter was charged under the 
Young Offenders Act. The charge, Mr. Speaker, was assault. 
The details are not important. But as a result of the charges 
under the Young Offenders Act, it was necessary for the 
Department of Social Services to prepare a pre-disposition 
report for the court. This, Mr. Speaker, is where our family’s 
nightmare began. Here we have a young lady in trouble with the 
law and being interviewed by a social worker. The anxiety of a 
disturbed child at any time is pretty devastating, but faced with 
these difficulties, she falsely alleges certain things against her 
family, and specifically her father. And under the present 
regulations,  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

812 
 

Mr. Speaker, the particulars of these allegations have not been 
made clear to me or my family even to this very date. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that as a result of her 
allegations certain inquiries had to be made by both the 
Department of Social Services and the Regina city police. 
Without any attempt by the Department of Social Services to 
verify the allegations made by my daughter, the Regina city 
police were brought in to investigate these allegations against 
me, my family, and others. My daughter, by this time beginning 
to realize the magnitude of the impact of the allegations she has 
made, becomes very anxious. After spending several hours with 
social workers and several more with the police, and all of this 
without the knowledge of the family, she realized that she has 
probably, and probably with the help of the social workers, 
painted herself into a rather serious corner. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, this young lady takes what some 
people would call a very predictable course of action under the 
circumstances. She steals her mother’s car, and a bottle of rum, 
and a butcher knife, and drives to a remote area outside of 
Regina to commit suicide. The attempt was thwarted however, 
Mr. Speaker, when she ran into a power pole with the car, doing 
considerable damage to it and to herself. And this, Mr. Speaker, 
was where she was found at 11 a.m. the next day by myself and 
the RCMP. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, I suddenly find myself and my 
family have become victims of the system. Because of the 
system, either from a policy point of view or because of certain 
professionals acting less than professionally, perhaps even 
unethically — or perhaps both — we find ourselves on a 
treadmill with no control. 
 
I understand that files dealing with this type of case are 
normally held by the department with the highest degree of 
confidentiality. The fact that the file relating to me and my 
family was apparently treated like a news-letter and leaked to 
the press and others, leads me, Mr. Speaker, to no other 
conclusion than that people, the people handling this file, acted 
very unprofessionally or unethically or both. 
 
But to what end, Mr. Speaker? In their eagerness to get at me, 
what have they done to help my daughter? Have they done 
anything in a positive way for my family, my wife, my other 
three children? Mr. Speaker, we have been put through a meat 
grinder beyond description or belief. I was shocked to find that 
someone, for whatever motive, leaked a story to the local press. 
I was even more shocked that the local press would have 
printed it without verification as to fact, and we all know now 
that the press accounts were not accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all believe in freedom of the press, but such freedom 
demands responsibility. Irresponsible statements designed to be 
sensational cannot be condoned. The fundamental principle of 
our judicial system is that all people are innocent until proven 
guilty. It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that certain members of 
the press feel that they have the right to slander people and by 
innuendo convict them in the public mind when charges, or 
even the suggestion of charges, are not involved. 
 

Mr. Speaker, of course we all know that we must be eternally 
vigilant in the protection of our young people. But this whole 
issue, Mr. Speaker, is a two-edged sword and, Mr. Speaker, 
professionals in this field must be held accountable for their 
actions. 
 
All of this time and all of this publicity, and who has gained? 
My daughter? My family? Me? the bureaucrats who handled 
this case? Mr. Speaker, no one has gained; no one has been 
helped. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have come to realize that if these things 
can happen to me and my family, if a person of my influence 
and resources has no recourse, how must the people who don’t 
have these things available to them be treated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I intend to take any and every action necessary to 
protect the rights, not only of me and my family, but of all the 
people who may find themselves in a similar situation. I find it 
particularly abhorrent that the problems our family has 
experienced with our daughter have become a matter of public 
debate. But here we are, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully, when this 
is over, we will be able to help our daughter without further 
unwarranted interference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to spend some time 
with the minister on an important area that has come to light, 
and I know some of my colleagues want to get in on the same 
area because it affects them in their constituency very directly. 
And that is the funding formula for nursing home construction. 
 
I wonder if you can outline the changes that were put in place 
and the day that they came into effect in terms of the proportion 
of funding from the local government, from the province, and 
from the federal government. There were changes that took 
place and if you could outline in a little bit of detail what was 
there, what the changes were and what is in place now, and how 
that has impacted on the local community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think this will supply the answer that the 
member is requesting, that the local sponsor’s share of 
renovation and construction cost was changed effective April 
1st, 1985; and the local sponsor’s share of renovation costs of 
existing special care homes decreased from 80 per cent to 50 
per cent. Previously, if there was a  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

813 
 

renovation the local sponsor paid 80 per cent and the 
government 20. As of April 1st, ’85, we changed that from the 
local sponsor paying 80 per cent to a 50-50 split. and the local 
sponsor’s share of construction costs of new special care 
homes, special care home beds, has increased from 8 per cent 
— it was 8 per cent previously — up to 15 per cent. And of 
course, in each case, plus furnishings. It was 8 plus furnishings 
and 15 plus furnishings. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you give me a list of the nursing 
homes, Mr. Minister, that were more or less caught in the 
transition period? And you’ll know what I’m referring to. There 
were a number of nursing homes where there had been 
commitments made in one way or another, either by verbal 
consultation that went on with people in your department to 
communities . . . Then the policy changed, and you’ll know 
that. And you’ll have received letters, and I can get the letters 
for you and read some of them into the record if we want to. Or 
will you give me a list of those communities that were caught in 
that trap and how they’ve been dealt with? Are you feathering 
in some of them, extending the time period, and how are you 
working that through the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The ones that I had announced prior to 
then, we gave them the option of which way they would want to 
go, because it would depend whether it be a renovation or new 
construction. If it was a renovation it probably would be 
advantageous to take advantage of the new formula; a new 
construction, they would have remained on the old formula. 
That was up to the point of announcement. Other ones that were 
announced after that, of course fell into the new formula. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you give me 
a list of those now? Do you have them with you? I’ll just wait 
then for you to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll have that in a minute or two. My 
officials are just pulling it together. 
 
The ones that were given the option were Arborfield, Big River, 
Dalmeny, Eston, Foam Lake, Lampman, Lucky Lake, Melville, 
Meadow Lake, Rose Valley, Saltcoats, and Saskatoon Lutheran. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you give me the status of the 
Mankota nursing home? Which formula would that fall under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Under the new formula. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And that would mean that the local 
community would put in 15 per cent of the money from the 
local level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. Mankota would be the new formula 
of 15 per cent plus furnishings. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will know the problems that 
this has caused for a number of communities where they are 
having a more than difficult time, and I imagine you have had 
that problem raised to you. Can you outline what amount of 
difference in terms of dollars on that one nursing home, for 
example, that change will have meant  

to the community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In my discussions with communities . . . I 
think we discussed this last year, and I’ll just touch on it again. 
There were communities indicating to me that they could 
contribute more and that’s why we felt that if this was the case 
then we would raise the formula. Certainly there has been . . . 
And I understand that in some communities — and I’ll give you 
the figure for Mankota as soon as I have it; they’re working 
those out — but it does put an added responsibility on the 
community. But I can say that we’re being as understanding as 
we can and not holding them to the line that, you’ve got to have 
it on this day or something of this nature. And there has not 
been one community back out. 
 
I think there’s a great demand within communities, or a great 
pride to see that they can come up with their share of it, and 
communities by hook or by crook, by one way or the other, are 
certainly doing that. But I will give you the Mankota figures 
exactly when they are here. 
 
Sixty thousand dollars is the change in the figure that that 
community would have to come up with as their portion of the 
cost of the nursing home. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And can the minister tell me what 
percentage increase that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — About an 87 per cent increase. It’s 
basically doubled from 8 to 15 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think the minister makes the point 
very clearly that I want to make, that this is a direct transfer of 
taxation, if you want to call it that, or the raising of money for 
public projects, from the provincial government to the local 
area where you are putting in — obviously putting in $60,000 
less — $60,000 less from the provincial level and 60,000 more 
from the local level. 
 
And this is a dramatic change. And I understand you to say that 
the communities . . . Or you’re almost implying that they 
appreciate it because it gives them more incentive to go out and 
raise more money. The logic of that doesn’t leap out at any of 
the local communities. 
 
I wonder: what was it that established 15 per cent? Why wasn’t 
it 12 or why wasn’t it 16? What was the analysis that went into 
the change that it should have been 15 per cent as opposed to a 
different number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well basically in consultation with 
various communities around the province, we felt from 
discussion with them, as they said they would come up with a 
greater percentage. And I can tell you that there are some areas 
of the province that came in and said, we will build it entirely 
ourselves — we will build it entirely ourselves. That 15 per cent 
would be a figure that they could live with and, as I say, there 
have been none that have backed out. 
 
They get their sources at the local level from a variety of means. 
In many cases I see communities where the local Lions Club 
has spearheaded the initiative, or whatever service club may be 
in their area, as well as, of course, generous contributions from 
individuals themselves. So I  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

814 
 

suppose that would be where we arrived at the figure of 15. 
 
I want to explain to the Chair, though, and to the member 
opposite, the rationale behind this, in that we are able by this 
method to put more facilities in more communities. And also I 
think it should be noted that, to try and provide more facilities, 
we raise the community portion, but also on renovation we 
decrease the community’s share so that those facilities that can 
be renovated to look after heavy care patients will be 
encouraged to do that; will be encouraged to do that. 
 
And I think that is efficient use of Health money, to try and use 
those facilities that can be renovated to look after 
long-term-care people, heavy level 3s and level 4s, by lowering 
the renovation grant, and the other side, as I say, by increasing 
the community’s share. No communities have backed out, and 
it’s just allowed us to put more facilities in more communities. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
my colleague has been addressing the question of the change in 
the formula for the nursing homes, and I unfortunately had to be 
out during that period. I don’t want to repeat what he’s covered, 
but I’ve tried to get myself apprised of what he has asked you. 
 
Undoubtedly the formula has been changed, and you have 
shifted to the local communities, or the local boards for the 
nursing homes, the construction of them, a very substantial shift 
in the cost of construction. And I believe he asked you, who 
initiated it? Who came to you and asked you to increase the 
formula? 
 
I would think that if you were wanting to build more nursing 
homes that I find it rather difficult to believe that the SUMA or 
SARM or the individual towns or villages or cities would come 
to you saying, increase the formula for the construction of 
nursing homes. 
 
And I was wondering whether you have a list of all of those that 
you have communicated with in coming to the conclusion that 
the people of Saskatchewan asked you to increase the formula 
for constructing nursing homes. And I was wondering whether 
you could sort of document the process that you used in doing 
what the people wanted here in Saskatchewan by more than 
doubling their contribution in the construction of nursing 
homes. 
 
So I ask you if you would in fact give us a sort of a 
chronological run-down as to the process whereby they 
convinced you to put into place a doubling of their contribution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to the 
member from Shaunavon previously, I had communities come 
to me and say to me: Mr. Minister, if we put up the total cost, 
the total cost of construction, will you allow to go ahead, and 
will you operate that nursing home? Those proposals have come 
from different communities around this province. 
 
I said, I don’t think that’s the correct way to do it, because if I 
followed that type of example, Mr. Chairman, then those 
communities that, due to location, due to economic  

development, who may have a higher taxing revenue, greater 
chance to access funds, may be in a wealthier part of this 
province, would be able to get the nursing home. And I don’t 
think that’s fair. 
 
So I talked to communities around this province, many of them. 
Of the 60 communities that have nursing homes, I believe 
almost all of them have been in to see me at least once, and 
some of them more times than that, and many other 
communities that are wanting nursing homes. So in these 
discussions often I said to them, could you come up with a 
greater share? And they said, look, we’ll go home and think 
about that. 
 
(1500) 
 
Following those kind of discussions with communities, where 
that wasn’t put down as an impossible situation, we came to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Special-Care Homes convention 
in Saskatoon. I remember the day well. I remember calling in 
the Saskatchewan special care homes executive — there must 
have been 25 people or so — into a room, and outlined to them 
the discussions I’d had with communities and the intent that we 
were having as a department to move to 15 per cent. I discussed 
that with them before we moved on that direction. 
 
Since that time, as I said, we have moved to 15 per cent by the 
local sponsor. No nursing homes have been refused. 
Communities are looking towards our year 6 announcement 
saying: certainly, we realize that we have to play some part at 
the local level; and we feel that 15 per cent at the local level, 
with a CMHC loan repayable over a 25 or 30 year period with 
the write-down interest, is a fair way for us to provide facilities 
for our senior citizens. 
 
So I hope that gives the member opposite some indication of the 
type of dialogue that took place. The various communities — I 
can go through the list of them, but they’re in Hansard for the 
member’s . . . for his identification, and he can see these things. 
 
And just to show you — here was one that I was out the other 
day to. They’re getting a nursing home, a small community 
called Rabbit Lake. They never thought they would be able to 
get one. And just to show the support — and they pay 15 per 
cent, and they’re not a very big community. I was in Rabbit 
Lake at their hall when we turned the sod. They’re not a very 
big community at all. 
 
They say this, dated April 15, 1986 — so this letter isn’t very 
old. It says: 
 

Dear Mr. Taylor: This letter is to express our appreciation to 
you for the time and effort you have given to make our 
project, the Rabbit Lake and district integrated facility, a 
dream come true. The building is progressing on schedule, 
with the completion date set for July 165, 1986. 

 
So, Mr. Chairman, I believe when you see little communities 
like Rabbit Lake writing in and saying a dream has come true 
. . . I was there that day in Rabbit Lake. I sensed the sincerity of 
those people. I can see them in my mind’s eye now as we spoke 
in their little town hall.  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

815 
 

They’re very appreciative. They’re paying 15 per cent plus 
furnishings. And I think from the letter you can see they’re 
very, very glad they’re getting a nursing home in their town. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ask a short question, get a long answer — sort 
of a diarrhea of the mouth from the minister. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in respect to nursing homes 
also, is that you have published, I believe, a five-year projection 
list of nursing homes. And what I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, is: is that list real or is it put out for electioneering 
purposes? Is that what you’re scheduling to go ahead with? Is it 
able to be altered? Does it mean anything? Once it’s published, 
is that the schedule for the next four or five years, or are there 
alterations, or can you amend it according to the political whims 
of the needs of your party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if he wants to make 
light of the sincerity of the community of Rabbit Lake, so be it 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Certainly, he said you’d give me 
a long answer. There was a little community; I cited it as an 
example of a small community that are very, very appreciative. 
Now if he wants to mock Rabbit Lake, let him do that. I won’t 
mock Rabbit Lake. I was in Rabbit Lake and I saw the sincerity 
of those people. 
 
But certainly you want to look at the construction program. You 
look back at the three years of construction that’s taken place. I 
invite you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if he wants to sit 
in his place and shout, as he continually does, the member from 
Quill Lakes always shouting, and shouting from his seat in this 
House and that takes more time. If he wants to sit there and 
shout, so be it. 
 
Let me tell you that, that I’m saying to the member opposite, 
Mr. Chairman, if he wants to look at the track record of the last 
three years in nursing home construction, just go to the 
communities. I invite him to come to Wawota — go to Wawota, 
go to Stoughton, go to Arborfield, go to Dalmeny. Just name 
them all around, town after town. They’ve been built. 
 
Look at the ones that are in the planning stage and the sod is 
turned, and they’re being built now. And I can tell you that that 
is the blueprint of what we’re going to build. Certainly society 
changes from time to time, but that is the intention, and I 
believe those will be built. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked you a question and I guess perhaps you 
forgot it again because your mouth starts rattling faster than 
your brain was working again, Mr. Minister. But I want to ask 
you this: is it not true that you put out a list, a five-year list of 
the nursing homes that you project to be built during the next 
five years. 
 
All I ask you, without repetition of the previous, does that have 
any reality in fact, and is that the list that the people of the 
province can depend upon, or is it flexible so that it can meet 
the needs of the individual Tory members that may be running 
in the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a ridiculous kind of 
comment and the type of sincerity that this  

member has towards long-term care. The member from Quill 
Lakes must try and politicize everything. I will indicate to you 
. . . you know, I would like him to get up and give something of 
a concrete nature of what he thinks could be done in nursing 
home construction. 
 
For 1984-85 the following projects have been built: Davidson, 
10 new beds, and three replacement beds for 13; Indian Head, 
15 new beds and two replacement beds for 17; Kelvington, 10 
new beds; Kindersley 80 replacement beds; Kinistino, 14 new 
beds, four replacement beds, for a total of 18; Lloydminster, 50 
replacement beds; Outlook, 16 new beds and three replacement 
beds, for a total of 19; Regina Lutheran, 11 new beds; 
Saskatoon Circle Drive, 50 new beds; Stoughton, six new beds 
and 24 replacement beds, for a total of 30. Those are built. 
 
Here’s the ones that are under construction. Under construction 
at the present time: Arborfield, 36 new beds; Big River, 30 new 
beds; Dalmeny, nine new beds, plus 27 replacement beds, for a 
total of 36; Duck Lake, 30 new beds; Eston, 22 replacement 
beds; Foam Lake, 10 new and two replacement, for a total of 
12; Goodsoil, 12 brand-new beds; Lampman, 19 new beds; 
Lucky Lake, 12 new beds; Meadow Lake, 25 replacement beds; 
Melville, 30 new, plus two replacement beds; Nokomis, 12 new 
beds; Rabbit Lake, that I mentioned previously, 12 new beds; 
Rose Valley, 12 new beds; Saltcoats, 30 new beds; and 
Saskatoon Lutheran, two new, plus 78 replacement beds, for a 
total of 80. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked a question, and I’ll ask it again just in 
case you go through your little dissertation. I asked you whether 
in fact is it not true that you put forward a five-year proposal of 
nursing homes that would be built in the next five years? 
 
I’m asking you a simple question, of whether or not that list can 
be depended upon by the people of Saskatchewan, whether that 
is the firm commitment for the future, or to what extent that is 
subject to change at the whim of the political needs of the party 
opposite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, if you look at the ones that 
I’ve just read out, the ones that have been built, the ones that are 
under construction, I don’t think there’s any change at the 
whim. But just so the member opposite knows, I will give him 
the indication of the ones that already have approval in 
principle, and in most cases most of them have selected their 
architect. And that’s for ’86-87. 
 
Cut Knife, a new 30-bed facility; Dinsmore, 12-bed integrated 
facility; Esterhazy, 10 additional beds; Fillmore, 13-bed 
integrated facility; Fort Qu’Appelle, 10 additional plus 6 
replacement beds; Gainsborough, 12-bed integrated facility; 
Invermay, 10 additional beds; Langenburg, 10 additional beds; 
Lumsden, a new 30-bed facility; Mankota, which we discussed 
earlier, a 12-bed integrated facility; Norquay, 10 additional 
beds; Regina Salvation Army, 30 additional beds; Regina Santa 
Maria Home, 48 additional beds; Tisdale, 40 additional beds; 
and Yorkton, 40 additional beds. That was for ’87-88. 
 
These ones in ’87 . . . that was ’86-87. For ’87-88, having  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

816 
 

given approval in principle, and many of them have selected 
their architect: Cabri, 12-bed integrated facility; Elrose, two 
new and 28 replacement beds; Leoville, 12-bed integrated 
facility; Loon Lake, 12-bed integrated facility; Montmartre, a 
12-bed integrated facility; Moose Jaw St. Anthony’s Home, 160 
replacement beds; Nipawin, 40 additional beds; Theodore, a 
12-bed integrated facility; Wadena, seven new and 19 
replacement beds. 
 
And for ‘88-89, the next year of the program, and again a 
number of these have selected the architect: Canwood, new 
30-bed facility; Craik, a 12-bed integrated facility; Eastend, six 
additional beds; Eatonia, an eight-bed integrated facility; 
Humboldt, 40 additional beds; Ituna, 10 additional beds; Kyle, a 
12-bed integrated facility; Midale, a 10-bed integrated facility; 
Rosthern, 30 replacement beds; St. Brieux, a new 30-bed 
facility; and Saskatoon Sherbrooke, 40 replacement beds. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to Middle Lake, you either indicated 
25 or 35 replacement beds. Could you indicate how many beds 
the previous nursing home had there, and whether in the 
community of Middle Lake, whether there actually, as a result 
of your actions, there is a decrease in the actual beds available 
in the community of Middle Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Middle Lake was open in ’85 — a 
brand-new 36-bed facility. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m sorry. I wasn’t able to get that answer. 
Would you repeat it, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In Middle Lake, I was out at the opening 
of it. I believe it was ’85 if my memory is correct on that. It was 
a brand-new, 36-bed facility. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the other part of the question: how many 
beds were available previously? It seems to me that there were 
55 beds, and the 55-bed unit has been closed. I’m asking you 
whether that was closed and replaced by the 36 beds. Or have 
you in fact met the need of the community by allowing the 
existing beds to continue to operate and as well add to it the 36 
beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I think one has to realize the 
type of facility that was constructed in Middle Lake. There was 
a 55-bed level 1 and 2 facility there which I saw and toured. 
The new facility is a 36-bed heavy care, level 3 and 4. The other 
facility that was vacated and the heavy care people moving into 
the brand-new one — there’s discussion going on with Sask 
Housing at the present time, I understand, to see if it can be 
used as some type of enriched housing. Those kinds of 
questions, of course, you should ask the minister of Sask 
Housing when the opportunity arises. 
 
(1515) 
 
But certainly Middle Lake had a brand-new . . . And I was at it 
personally. I toured it. It’s a state of the art — it’s as good as 
they build in Canada today — heavy care facility. And the other 
facility — discussions are going on as to its future use. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Have you received, Mr. Minister, 
representations from the board at Middle Lake, in fact, to 
continue to operate the . . . I believe it was 55-bed, you say, 
level 1 and 2. Have they made representations to continue to 
operate that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What happened, if you’ll recall, back in 
. . . I think these discussions had taken place prior to 1982. 
There was a feasibility study done, and on the existing facility 
there were some concerns of the fire commissioner. So when 
we came into power we built a brand-new level 3 and 4, 36-bed 
one. There have been discussions about the alternate use of the 
other building. Most recently my deputy and the head of Sask 
Housing have met with Middle Lake. It appears more feasible 
to see if it can be used as enriched housing, and I understand 
that Sask Housing are following up in discussions with them to 
see if that is a feasible alternative use to it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I know as a fact that there have 
been representations to you, and there have been meetings in 
respect to the community of Quill Lake, requesting a nursing 
home facility in the village of Quill Lake. And I’m wondering 
whether you could indicate whether in fact you have had 
meetings on it, and whether you can advise me whether you 
have indeed made a decision in respect to the representations 
made by the community of Quill Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I had met with people from 
Middle Lake. I remember meeting with them personally . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, Middle Lake. I’m still on 
Middle Lake. You asked me about Middle Lake. I had met with 
them and, as I said, most recently my deputy and the head of 
Sask Housing did. 
 
In regards to Quill Lake, I know that members of my staff had 
been out through there some time ago to meet with 
representatives of that area to discuss the possibility. As far as 
any decision having been made, at this point in time there’s 
been no decision made. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I know that indeed the material was presented 
to you, that a survey was done. I know, and I’ve met with 
groups from the community — they have presented it, 
supporting the need for it. 
 
I’d like to ask you: what more does this community need to do 
in order to get a decision? Or will it be announced in the next 
provincial election by the candidate for the Progressive 
Conservative Party? Is that the way that you’re going to deal 
with it? Why can’t you give an answer to the community 
whether or not, on the basis of the evidence that they’ve 
provided to you, whether or not they are in line for a nursing 
home? 
 
And the reason I say that is because under the Thatcher 
government, under the other previous right-wing government, 
there was a hospital closed and the community of Quill Lake 
have in fact a substantial amount of money held in trust and 
would be in a position to make their contribution, should the 
department proceed with the nursing home. 
 
And what I’m asking, Mr. Minister: is there any further things 
that the community group should do in order to  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

817 
 

precipitate a decision on behalf of your department? Can you 
advise me of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Quill Lake will be 
given equal consideration with other communities throughout 
Saskatchewan that are requesting special care homes. I believe 
that the community has put forth their concerns and their 
documented need, as have many other communities. And one 
has to sit down and take a look at those and try to assess where 
the greatest need is and where that facility could be placed. I’m 
not ruling out Quill Lake. They will be given the same 
consideration as the other communities who have been 
requesting long-term care facilities in their areas. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I appreciate that you’re going to be giving 
consideration to this matter. Would it be possible to give me an 
answer to my question, first of all. Is there anything further that 
the community should be doing to impress upon you or provide 
you with any further information in order that you can make a 
final determination. You say it’s going to be considered with 
other communities. What I’m asking you: is there anything 
further that you require from the community in order that you 
can make a decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, many communities use whatever 
avenues they feel that they can access the facility that they 
would like. If they want to come and visit me again, if they feel 
that would be beneficial, certainly they can set up an 
appointment and come in and visit me. I say they can come 
back and see me again if they think that is appropriate. if they 
feel that there has been changes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, if you want to keep shouting from your seat, it’ll take 
longer for me to give you the answer to the question. 
 
I say the community could come back into my office and have a 
visit with me if they so wish. If the demographics in their area 
have changed since the period of time that they last submitted 
it; if they want to submit another update of what their 
demographics are, what their age population, the number in 
Quill Lake and surrounding areas; if they have brought in some 
more supporting municipalities; if there’s been changes — by 
all means bring them to my attention. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you looked at the material and reviewed 
the material that has in fact been submitted to date. And can you 
indicate to me whether your department or your officials could 
advise you whether or not they’re in the ball park and likely to 
get approval in respect to a nursing home. I have asked you 
whether there is anything more they can provide you in order to 
make a decision. You won’t answer that. So what I’m asking 
you is: can they expect a decision? Have they provided and 
made a case for a particular need for a nursing home? Can you 
provide me with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly any documentation that 
comes in to me or to my officials is certainly analysed, looked 
through in detail. Comparisons are made with other 
communities. If they have some updated information that they 
want to get in to me, then they should get that in. 
 

But I cannot give any commitment to Quill Lake or any other 
community at this point in time. We’re analysing these; we’re 
looking at them. And I can just say to those communities, if 
they want to compare their last three years record with the 
previous one, I think they will see that whatever communities 
they are in Saskatchewan, they stand an awful lot better chance 
of getting a nursing home under this government than they did 
under the previous one. The member opposite stood up and said 
they had money for 11 years. He’s been the member for a 
number of years. Prior to that the Speaker was the member 
before he pulled a short run on him and took his nomination. 
Before that they have been represented by the NDP through the 
last 11 years. If they had the money, I wonder why they didn’t 
get a nursing home during that period of time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well one of the reasons is that many of the 
young people are leaving the province now and what we’re 
having in our communities is primarily the older people in our 
communities. Many of the young people are leaving under the 
Tory administration, if you want to know. 
 
Obviously the minister . . . I’ve asked you a straightforward 
question, whether they’re, in your view, you’ve examined their 
application. I ask you: is there any further information that you 
require in order to determine whether their application should 
receive serious consideration and, in fact, a determination that 
they need a nursing home? 
 
That’s a simple question. Surely to heavens you can advise a 
community whether or not what they have submitted puts them 
into the ballpark of receiving a nursing home. Have you given 
the town of . . . the village of Quill Lakes any determination on 
their submission? What have you said to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve done the same with 
Quill Lakes as we’ve done with every other community in 
Saskatchewan. They come in, either see some of my officials, 
come to visit me personally, put forth their best proposal that 
they can for a nursing home — you realize this, and I think you 
and I had a meeting in Canwood where they put forth a very, 
very good position, if you can remember, with those people in 
that area. I can indicate to you that if Quill Lakes feel they want 
to bring in some more up-to-date material, my door is open to 
them. 
 
It’s very interesting to note that the member who stands up here 
and makes a big ploy for a nursing home in Quill Lakes — and 
he has that right to do, though, because he is the representative 
— but it’s interesting to know, he said a few minutes ago in this 
place that they had the money for 11 years. And I want to just 
remind him that part of that 11 years, albeit small, thank 
goodness it was, that he was the minister in charge of nursing 
homes in Saskatchewan. And I wonder how much consideration 
he gave to the Quill Lakes submission at that time. 
 
I can give you the assurance, and I will give him the same 
assurance, that the same treatment is given to Quill Lakes as is 
to any other community that is wanting a nursing home in 
Saskatchewan. And if the Quill Lakes people  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

818 
 

want to come in and see me, just give me a ring, and we’ll set 
up an appointment and get the most up-to-date information 
from their community. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well one can’t really expect to get a definitive 
answer from this minister. We’re going into over two weeks of 
trying to get precise answers, and he has been stonewalling. But 
that’s characteristic of the members opposite. They have this 
huge majority; they don’t think they have any accountability. 
And that is continuing on here today. 
 
I want to ask the minister further whether you have received 
representations from the community of Watson for additions or 
level 4 nursing facilities in the town of Watson, and if you 
could advise me whether, in fact, you have received that 
submission, and whether there’s any disposition, any decision 
on that matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we have committed a new hospital 
to Watson. I believe there are some discussions about some 
long-term care associated with it, but nothing specific has been 
discussed at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if you have made a commitment 
vis-a-vis a hospital, whether it would make any sense to 
examine at the same time the feasibility of working in some 
nursing home facilities, level 4 beds. Certainly in my 
discussions with the community I know that the proposal is to 
attach a new hospital to the existing nursing home and the 
potential of adding on some level 4 beds. And I would ask you 
whether or not it wouldn’t be advisable to at least make a 
decision whether or not you’re going to incorporate it at the 
time that the hospital is being built? Shouldn’t there be an 
analysis of both aspects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I believe the hospital that 
is being added on to the special care home is the first in the 
province for this to happen in Watson. Most recently there has 
been a request that we look at the possibility of some special 
care beds; the designation of how many has not certainly been 
ascertained at this time. I’m willing to discuss this type of an 
option with them. I think we have to look at the feasibility of it. 
But certainly the new hospital is there; it’s committed to go 
there; it is built on the existing special care home, and I think 
there’s some cost savings in that in that we are able to use the 
same kitchen and things of that nature. So we will discuss 
further with them their request for some level 4 beds in this 
facility. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the formula for the financing of 
the hospital — say the hospital in Watson — my information is 
that a new formula was put into place when we were in 
government under the then Health minister, Mr. Herman Rolfes, 
which in fact decreased very substantially the amount of 
commitment that would have to be made by the hospital district. 
 
And what I want to ask you: the previous contribution I think 
was 60-40, and then it was changed on a basis of mill rate. And 
I am advised, and I’d like to confirm with you, whether over 
and above have you in fact altered and  

put a cap on the formula which will limit the amount that the 
Department of Health will contribute to say, a union hospital, 
and the construction of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The formula has remained unchanged. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — My understanding is that it has been altered to 
the extent that a cap has been put on limiting it to 85 per cent, 
that the maximum that would be paid in, regardless of . . . And I 
just want a confirmation on that because that is the information 
that I’ve received, that there was a cap put on that the 
department wouldn’t pay beyond 85 per cent. 
 
Now that’s what I’ve been told, and I’d like a confirmation of 
whether that was, in fact, instituted by you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Fifty per cent and no cap — 50-50 and no 
cap — 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’re saying in respect . . . the formula that’s 
in place for the funding for the Watson hospital will be 50-50, 
50 per cent local and 50 per cent by the department. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials are working on the Watson 
project, so I’ll give you the specific figures for that, 
percentages. They’re working on that now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well would you provide me — I don’t have 
many more questions on this — would you provide me with 
that information as to the formula that you’ll be using in respect 
to the funding of the Watson hospital? And secondly, will you 
give me the general formula that is used by the department in 
respect to the funding of union hospitals? 
 
I don’t believe it’s 50-50 because I believe that when we left 
office, and what we changed, and were in processing of changes 
at least, it was 60-40, and I think we gave them a substantially 
better deal based on a percentage of mill rates on their 
assessment. And it reduced it down very, very substantially. 
And I do believe that you put a cap on it. 
 
But if you’d provide that information I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s a cost protection factor in there, 
if it exceeds five mills over 10 years, and so on. But I want to 
give you exactly for Watson because that’s what you’re asking 
about. Then you want the general formula for small hospitals. 
I’ll provide that to you, and I will give you the figures of 
Watson. 
 
Now what I will be providing for you, so that we’re clear on 
this, is the Watson hospital. I mean, the level 4 beds that we 
discussed three or four minutes ago are still in an embryonic 
form of discussion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they 
haven’t said how many they want, so it wouldn’t be fair to try 
and put that in. And then on an integrated facility there’s two 
formulas too, you understand; you would see that. 
 
  



 
April 23, 1986 

819 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. With regards 
to the information that you have provided in the past couple of 
weeks, Mr. Minister, other than what we debated on in your 
estimates, I haven’t got any clear, concise information, you 
know, just to clear the air. 
 
When I am asked by interested citizens and constituents 
regarding the community health worker program or the nursing 
care facility or the clinics or the various other health programs 
and services for the North, I have not got clear, concise 
information. And basically, I guess what I’m asking you very 
clearly at this point in time, is an itemized copy of what we can 
expect for services, programs or capital construction programs 
via the health estimate. Mr. Minister, is it too much to ask for 
that type of detailed information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll give you as much detailed 
information as I can. We’ll try and break it down for you, and 
I’ll provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I thank you. Then, Mr. Minister, I certainly hope I 
can get this as early as possible. And with that, I have no further 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just as soon as I can have it drawn 
together, we’ll provide it to you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have a 
few questions, Mr. Minister. First of all, I wonder . . . and I 
don’t need this information today. If your officials could pass 
that on to me — the number of patients that were transported 
south from northern Saskatchewan for health-related reasons, 
and the number of dollars that were spent on transporting the 
patients from the North to the South. That would include 
aircraft and cars, both. Could that be provided for me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the member realizes — and I think 
that’s why he indicated that we could have a little time to put 
this together, because a portion of it is MediVac, you know, and 
a portion of it is air ambulance. So I’ll have to pull those things 
together as the cost. But I’ll provide that. To get you correct: 
you want to know the number of people transported and the cost 
of that transportation. Is that the question? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The number of patients that were 
transported south; and the number of dollars, including all types 
of transportation — ambulances, taxis and aircraft. 
 
I want to just ask another question here, and that’s related to 
health services in the North. Could you indicate if your director 
of northern health is in charge of all the provincial health 
related situations that we have up in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So to give you the best information we 
can on this question — and I’m sure the first part you’re aware 
of, that portions of the North are under the jurisdiction of the 
federal government, certain areas . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, I’m just outlining it to you. So some of it would be federal. 
Okay. He’s in charge of  

everything except what is under SHSP, or the Saskatchewan 
hospital services plan. So hospitals, he would not. And, I 
believe, also SADAC, which is the Saskatchewan Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission; he is not responsible for that. But 
your community health workers, the dental program, things of 
this nature, fall under his jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Would he handle the services to the 
elderly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, yes he would. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the other day in 
estimates I asked you a question about a petition that had come 
to you from 28 citizens at Beauval, and I suggest to you, sir, 
that the information that you received was not accurate. I asked 
you where the office was for the senior citizens. You indicated 
it was in the town hall, to the best of your knowledge, and I was 
assuming that you were getting that information from your 
director who is in charge of the program. 
 
And I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that that office never was in 
the town hall. It was in a private home. It has now since been 
moved out of a private home, not into the town hall, but into the 
friendship centre. And I just want to get that on the record and 
get it straightened out that the information that you did receive 
was really not accurate information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m sure you realize — and I don’t think 
you’re accusing me of trying to mislead at all — there’s a lot of 
clinics to keep in mind. And if it was inaccurate information, 
I’ll certainly look into it. I don’t like to have inaccurate 
information. It may have been a mistake, thinking of the 
friendship centre as the town hall, I don’t know, but I will look 
into that personally. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we asked the minister 
about polling that was done by his department a couple of days 
ago, and I wonder if you can now make available to the 
committee the questions that were asked in the poll that was 
done that cost the taxpayers, I believe it was, $37,000; a 
company that is run by, I believe, a Ken Waschuk, a 
well-known Conservative pollster. Can you tell us what 
questions were asked on that poll, what time period it was done, 
and where the results of that . . . who was apprised to the results 
of that polling when it was completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I indicated to you earlier, that 
questionnaire or research that was done was on the Christmas 
alcohol, and the follow-up on that and also the sampling of a 
way to develop a communications strategy, a consultations type 
of strategy which we have put in place — put that in place with 
the consultation that has been taking place that I have described 
previously, of the meetings on long-term care. So that’s what 
the outcome of the research was. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister would make 
available to the committee a copy of the questions that were 
asked, or a list of the questions that were asked on the poll. 
 
  



 
April 23, 1986 

820 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t think that’s necessary. It was an 
internal poll. I don’t think there’s any necessity to . . . or shall I 
say not any kind of a poll of the internal type of research into 
this and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can’t be heard in this House at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the important thing is . . . The 
members of the government benches are yelling so loud that we 
can’t hear. I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if you could settle it down 
in here. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Does the member have a question? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you can hear all the 
hollering, and the people watching will know that the chairman 
is having a difficult time keeping any semblance of order in the 
Assembly. But we’ll try to carry on with all the noise going on. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, that this kind of polling for tens 
of thousands of dollars paid for by the taxpayers . . . and who 
knows what was in the poll. We’ve heard you tell your version 
of it, but we’ve heard other stories where you told us that St. 
Paul’s Hospital had no hospital beds closed, and then when 
pushed on it, of course we get a different answer. 
 
There will be people who will assume that these are political 
polls being done within your department — paid for by the 
taxpayers, the money going to a Conservative polling company. 
Forgive the people of the province if they assume — because 
you won’t release the information and the results of the poll — 
that it was basically a political poll done in advance to an 
election planning. 
 
And I say to you that the people will assume that, because 
obviously if you’re hiding the information that was on the poll 
and you won’t table it in the Assembly, and if the public is not 
accurate in assuming that this was a political poll, why won’t 
you table all of the relevant information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have indicated to the 
member on many occasions in this House the relevant 
information that came out of that research. It was research 
tracking the Christmas alcohol and advertisements. And I’ve 
indicated time after time that the results of that — if the 
member wants, I’ll go back over them again. 
 
Secondly, it had to do with a method of setting up 
communication strategies which I believe have been very, very 
successful. That’s the results of the poll. And I’ve explained it 
on a number of occasions, and I will continue to explain it if the 
member insists on asking the same questions over again. That is 
the answer that I can supply to this House and this committee. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I will accept the refusal of giving 
the information on the polling. I will accept that you’re 
stonewalling the committee and won’t give the information. 
Obviously we don’t have any other choice because all we can 
do is ask the questions, and when we don’t get the answers, 
then we have to move on as we have done for the past two 
weeks in many areas in your department. And here we have an 
important issue where  

tens of thousands of dollars were paid to a polling company, 
and the minister refuses to give the information as to the 
questions asked, to table the answers that he received that were 
paid for by the public — paid for by the chairman and other 
taxpayers through a flat tax, through a used automobile tax — 
because that’s where the money comes from to fund the Health 
department — through an increase in their income tax, through 
an increase in their property tax by removal of the property 
improvement grant. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I don’t think taxation is a 
matter of consideration for these Health estimates, and I would 
ask the member, if he has a question, to get on with it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The chairman is . . . Well I suppose it’s 
difficult to ask questions about expenditure of money if you 
don’t talk about how it’s raised. 
 
But the minister will well know that in getting the billion 
dollars that you are spending, part of it on polling — I believe 
$37,000 on polling to a Tory polling company run by Ken 
Waschuk — that there is an assumption out there that that’s a 
political poll. And the minister will know that that is the 
assumption of the public. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate to let the people know that this 
money that is being spent — $37,000 — comes out of their 
taxes. And that’s obviously relevant and germane to the debate 
that is going on. And it’s been done here tens of times over the 
last two weeks, where we’ve talked about income and where the 
government gets money for health care — through taxes, 
obviously. How else would you get it? 
 
And we can try and hide that under the rug, that the $37,000 
came from an increased tax on the provincial population. You 
know that. It obviously comes from the people of the province 
and an increase in the flat tax, and that money goes to Health — 
a billion dollars. Where do you think it comes from? It comes 
from the taxpayers. Obviously it’s part of the issue here that 
we’re dealing with. 
 
And I say to you, to try to sweep under the rug the fact that we 
get taxes that pay for Health and polling for the Tory Party — 
$37,000 through the flat tax and other tax increases — to try to 
hide that under the rug, and try to shut the opposition down, 
shows you how arrogant this government is. That’s what it is. 
An arrogant, massive majority that is trying to keep the Health 
estimates from being answered. 
 
And I say to you that the opposition have a tough time when the 
minister stonewalls, and we have a difficult time talking about 
tax increases. When we do, we’re told that you can’t talk about 
tax increases. Well I say that these are interesting times we live 
in when a massive majority government can tell the opposition 
what questions to ask. 
 
But I just want to close this area by saying that when we’re 
having record tax increases, and on the other hand where the 
minister is using that money to do political polling — which is 
the assumption of many people — that is another  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

821 
 

reason we should have an election. And so I just say to you that 
it’s impossible to do estimates, Mr. Chairman, if we can’t ask 
about tax increases. 
 
Well I was waiting for an answer to the question about political 
polling. But, Mr. Chairman, if there’s no answer there, I have a 
number of other questions that we will be moving to. 
 
The issue that I want to ask you about is the communications 
service contract that was let to SJM Communication Services, I 
believe it was. Can you explain what the money that was paid to 
that group was for, what services were rendered for that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well basically their involvement was in 
carrying out the very successful workshops that we had around 
the province and helping to organize those, and developing 
materials and strategies for those workshops, and distribution of 
materials and things of that nature that have made these 
workshops so successful. 
 
And as I indicated to the member opposite previously, my 
office literally had thousands of very positive evaluation forms. 
I’ve had people, hospital directors . . . I remember one in 
particular who had been in the service of hospitals for over 25 
years and indicated to me that he had attended many, many 
types of workshops facilitated by the government. He came up 
purposely to compliment me and say, this had been the best one 
he had ever attended, and that was in Yorkton. My deputy has 
received many accolades also of the efficient way in which 
people from all sectors of society were brought together in these 
consultation workshops. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member from Shaunavon 
asked a question. the noise that is coming from there, I’m sure 
you can’t hear the answer. Would you please allow this 
committee to work. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I was saying to you before the noise 
level on the other side of the House got so high that you 
couldn’t hear, Mr. Chairman, was that these consultation 
committees have been very, very successful. It brings people 
from all walks of life together to discuss a very important topic 
in Saskatchewan, that of long-term care, and this consulting 
firm did a lot to help bring those together. And as I said, both I 
and my deputy have received many accolades on the way these 
have been carried out and administered and the type of dialogue 
that has taken place, as well as the suggestions and directions 
that have come from this grass-roots type of consultation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The speeches that were being sent out, I 
can tell you the administrators in my area who were getting 
them were less than impressed in your calling that consultation. 
I can tell you that getting a two-month old speech which cost 
thousands of dollars . . . And I read some of those speeches, and 
I’ll tell you that that speech writer, if you paid him for that 
drivel that was sent out to those administrators, I’ll tell you, 
we’ve got problems. Those speeches that you sent out were 
terrible. I read one of them, and I couldn’t believe the politics 
that was involved in them. I know what I would do with those  

speeches that you paid thousands of dollars for, and the politics 
you were trying to play with them. 
 
And I will say, as well, that the meeting in Swift Current where 
you called in over 100 people and paid for the meal and then 
didn’t show up for the meeting, and the member for Morse 
attended, I’ll tell you, the administrators who came to me after 
that meeting and told me what a political meeting it was — 
what a political meeting it was — paid for by the taxpayers to 
try to get Tory candidates elected, I’ll tell you, people are 
getting a little tired of paying for your campaign. 
 
Now it’s one thing to do your polling, if that’s what’s 
happening in the department, and people believe that because 
you won’t give them the results of the polling that was done. 
 
And that meeting in Swift Current where the member from 
Morse carried on and the minister didn’t show up, at great 
expense to the taxpayers, and I might add, a great waste of time, 
the administrators that I talked to from my area were telling me. 
They were saying that this political game you people are 
playing leading up to the election that you believed was going 
to be called at that time in April, simply is causing them to 
believe that an election should be called right now so they can 
vote you out. Because they agree with the nurses and the 
chiropractors and the doctors, that we’re having a tough time 
with our medicare system in this province because money is 
being spent inappropriately; money in Health being spent for 
polling. 
 
Political polling is what the people assume — political speeches 
that are then sent out to all the administrators to try to make 
them believe that that’s consultation. Then we have political 
meetings being held around, for example, at Swift Current and 
all the administrators are called in to come and listen to new 
health initiatives. And do you know what it is? It’s a political 
meeting. I wasn’t there but that’s what the administrators told 
me. That’s what they told me. 
 
They said that it was a political meeting, the likes of that 
they’ve never seen since they’ve been involved in being 
administrators of hospitals. That’s what they told me And then 
they said the final insult was when one of the ministers showed 
up, not the Minister of Health, not the Minister of Education, 
and not the Minister of Consumer Affairs from that area, but the 
member from Morse, to talk about health care. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you they were disappointed because they knew 
more about health than did the member for Morse. That’s what 
they said. That’s what they told me. And they said that it was a 
great expense. They said it was a waste of their time because 
their boards had to pay for them to be away . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member from Maple Creek can shout 
from her seat, but if she wants to get up and get involved in this 
debate she had every opportunity to get up and tell us why she 
wasn’t at the meeting. And I will sit down and if she wants to 
get in and explain it, I’ll let her. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, it seems very strange for 
the member to stand and really give not correct  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

822 
 

statements in this House. I wasn’t able to go to that meeting 
because I was fogged in in Regina here, and couldn’t get there. 
That was the reason and he knows that very well. He knows 
that. He was informed of that. 
 
To make light of my colleague . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well if you’re going to keep shouting . . . Mr. Chairman, I give 
the introductory remarks at those meetings. They start early in 
the morning. I couldn’t be there. That is the simple truth. 
 
Let me indicate to you . . . And they make light of my colleague 
from Morse. I had phone calls from people saying that my 
colleague from Morse did a very admirable job. He did it on 
short notice. They say: why wasn’t the Minister of Education 
there? The Minister of Education was sick that day or she 
would have been there filling in for me and she would have 
done a credible job also. 
 
But let me indicate to you, my officials who were there 
indicated to me that that meeting ended on an accolade to this 
government and this Health department for holding such a 
meeting. And if he thinks they’re not supported, can you tell me 
why — and I ask this House. And the first one we had in North 
Battleford we had 250 people. From that point on every one of 
these consultation meetings has been in the neighbourhood of 
500 people. 
 
I could bring in document after document after document of 
people who indicate to me and to my officials; thank goodness 
for inviting us; we learned something about the need for 
long-term care; we were pleased to sit down with other 
professionals, other interested people — there’s mayors, there’s 
reeves, there’s home care people, there’s nurses, there’s 
doctors; there’s a complete cross-section. And I can indicate to 
you that those people are very, very pleased with that type of 
consultation. They are saying, it’s the first time that we’ve ever 
been asked; it’s the first time we’ve ever had a chance to 
participate; and thank you very much and keep that up. 
 
And if they want to criticize spending money to consult with 
people of Saskatchewan, people at the grass roots, people who 
pay the bills, people who have their own people in the 
long-term care facilities, people who work in home care, you go 
right ahead. You stand in this Assembly and you criticize that 
all you want. I will tell you that it is that type of consultation, it 
is that type of going out to people at the grass roots that they 
appreciate, and it is going to be exactly that type of action that 
will re-elect the Devine government this time as it did in 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I’ll tell you, if your performance in 
this Assembly is what you’re basing your re-election plans on, I 
think that you’re going to be sadly mistaken. Because I can tell 
you that what you just put on the record, bragging about the 
meeting in Swift Current . . . I am going to send to every 
administrator in the south-west who attended that, where you 
brag as arrogantly as you continue to do, over and over again, 
about the great job you’re doing. 
 

Now, Mr. Chairman, can you imagine the irony of this minister 
getting up and bragging about the great job he’s doing, about 
the great job he’s doing. We have nurses demonstrating on the 
steps of the legislature; we have doctors calling for his 
resignation; we have administrators telling us that the meetings 
that he is having around the province are nothing but political 
election planning meetings. And I’ll tell you that when they 
listen to the minister say at a day meeting in Swift Current, 
because it’s fogged in Regina he can’t make it to Swift Current 
— I’ll tell you that that’s a government that is isolated and out 
of touch with reality, because there’s a four-lane highway built 
by a New Democratic government from Regina to Swift 
Current. 
 
Now that is a tired old government that says you can’t get in a 
car and drive down a four-lane highway built by the New 
Democrats to Swift Current because you don’t get time. You 
can’t do it. You’ve got to be in an airplane. You got fogged in. 
What are you saying, that it was too foggy to drive between 
Regina and Swift Current? A two-hour drive/ it was a whole 
day meeting. If the plan was supposed to leave at 7 in the 
morning to be there at 8, you could have been there at 9, driving 
down the highway. 
 
I say to you that this is a government that is out of touch with 
reality, out of touch with reality. And I’ll tell you the arrogance 
that is shown here in this committee, where you will get up and 
brag about the speeches that you send out as being 
consultations; about the meetings such as I heard about in Swift 
Current as being consultations. I’ll tell you that the people of 
the province do not believe it. They don’t believe it. They say 
that that is political propaganda, those meetings were a strategy 
leading up to an April 28th or April 30th election and I’ll tell 
you, even that, it was wasted . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You were wrong again. The polls weren’t right by April 30th. 
You had to back off. You had to back off because you were 
afraid to go . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we’re not 
touchy at all about elections. We’re ready to go. We’ve made it 
public over and over again that we want to fight an election on 
health care, Mr. Chairman. You know that. You know that 
you’re concerned about health as well, with 8,000 on the 
waiting list in Saskatoon — and that’s why some people aren’t 
running again. I know that. That’s not public knowledge — 
why many people aren’t running again in Saskatoon — but I 
know why. Because I’ll tell you, there are honourable people 
who are members from Saskatoon who won’t have anything to 
do with 8,000 waiting list in Saskatoon. 
 
Now I don’t want to get political here, Mr. Minister. I don’t 
want to get political about this, but I’ll tell you: if you continue 
to run these polls out of your department and don’t release the 
numbers, and tell the people in the south-west that because it’s 
foggy you don’t have time to drive down the Trans-Canada to 
Swift Current; and if you’re telling them that your speeches are 
consultation; and if you continue to brag about the great job 
you’re doing when doctors are calling for your resignation and 
nurses are demonstrating — I say that that is an arrogant 
government that has to be removed from office at the first 
opportunity. 
 
And I want you to tell me: why didn’t you go to the  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

823 
 

meeting in Swift Current? What was the reason? Because I’m 
still not clear on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can tell you in this Assembly, I’m going 
to be in Swift Current and in Shaunavon and a lot of that area in 
the next while. And I will be out there, and that member will 
regret some of the words he’s said . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well here we go shouting again. Mr. Chairman, if they 
would be quiet, I will answer. 
 
I answered the member opposite, of the day, at the consultation 
meetings, I give the lead-off address. When I came to Regina, I 
could not get out of Regina. It was fogged in. My colleague 
from Morse said he would handle the address — did a very, 
very good job. The people, as I understand, understood the 
situation and — although he may like to get up and give 
incorrect statements, as he does time after time — the people 
that attended that workshop, the people that have attended all 
consultation workshops have been pleased with them. 
 
They have been initiatives that have come out of the 
consultation workshops that are benefiting Saskatchewan 
Health. There was a New Directions paper right from those 
consultations that has resulted in many people having input into 
an improved and expanded home care program, which will 
result in a new home care Act for Saskatchewan which will 
soon be brought into this legislature — coming from that 
consultation. the whole things of the patient care enrichment 
program, the enriched staffing program that is going into the 
hospitals and special care homes, came out of those type of 
consultation meetings. 
 
Now if he wants to make fun of the consultation, and say that 
people don’t appreciate getting speeches and don’t like to know 
what is going on in the Department of Health, he has every right 
to say that. That simply is not correct. People time after time 
have indicated to my department and to me that they appreciate 
very, very much going to those consultation meetings. People 
from Meadow Lake to Hudson Bay to Shaunavon — all over 
this province — have attended those consultation meetings. 
And I can tell you that they are pleased with them; they’re 
pleased to be given the input, to put some direction into what 
way this government should be moving. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I found it 
interesting. The minister says he’s going to be down in my 
constituency a lot. Well, I’ll tell you, if the indication in Regina, 
where these birds are well know, is any indication, I welcome 
them all down full-time to Shaunavon. Because, I’ll tell you, 
when the people get to know them well, as they do in Regina, 
they’re not terribly well liked. They’re not terribly well liked. 
And I invite every one of them . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. Has the member 
got a question for the minister, related to Health? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, obviously people will 
make comments before their question. I could make a 
half-house speech now if I like. It’s been done in the House 
before, and I may do that now. And it’s perfectly in order. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I may do that. And we may be here 
for another week. And we can obviously do that. But for this 
massive government majority to try to say that members can’t 
speak in the committee and make statements, I think is getting a 
little bit . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There was no suggestion of not 
being able to speak, but at least let’s get on the subject of the 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well that’s another issue — being on the 
topic. You were saying we had to ask a question right away, 
and I will be asking a question at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
(1615) 
 
But I want to point out that if the minister was threatening to 
come to my constituency, I invite him down. I invite him down 
to talk about health care. I invite the Premier down to talk about 
health care, because I . . . And the whole bunch of them. I don’t 
know whether there’s 19 or 25 of them. It’s hard to tell from 
one day to the next how many ministers there are. 
 
But I’ll tell you, I’ll pay for your gas to come down to 
Shaunavon and spend full time campaigning, because you’ve 
been living in Regina full-time for the past four years. And I’ll 
tell you, you’re not going to win a seat in Regina. You’re not 
going to win one seat. 
 
And I make you a deal: I’ll pay for the gas of all the cabinet to 
come down to Shaunavon and campaign full-time. Because I’ll 
tell you, when people get to know you birds, they kick you out. 
That’s what they did in Regina North East. That’s what they 
did. 
 
Do you know how many per cent you got there? Twenty per 
cent. Because of health care. Because of health care, Mr. 
Chairman. That’s why. Because where people saw the waiting 
lists, they don’t like you. They don’t care for you. They 
demonstrate on the legislature steps. The doctors in Regina 
demand your resignation. And I say, I welcome 19 cabinet 
ministers and the Premier to come to Shaunavon full-time and 
talk about health care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well we’ll see how many you send down. But I welcome all of 
you. Because every time the Premier or a minister comes to 
Shaunavon, it seems like our popularity goes up a little bit. Our 
popularity . . . As soon as they see you people, they just get 
terribly irritated. They get so irritated, the same as they do in 
Regina. Like, we have 19 of them in Regina, and look how well 
you’re doing there. 
 
Well what I want is about . . . What I need is 19 of you in 
Shaunavon. I’ve decided. I need all of you down there, working 
hard against me. And I see the Minister of Finance is yelling 
from the back, and obviously he’s working on his nomination 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. This is entirely 
irrelevant, what I am hearing. I’ve been listening to this  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

824 
 

and let’s get on the estimates, the Health estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I only respond to it 
because you allowed the minister to mention coming to 
Shaunavon, and I’m now picking him up on his invitation. 
 
And I’m extending it to the other birds who are across the way, 
who are so popular in Regina, especially the Minister of 
Finance. And he’s now competing with me, because he wants 
them all to go out and help him with his nomination. Not only 
his staff out of his office, but he now wants the members of the 
Assembly. I hear him saying those kinds of things. 
 
Well I say that members who are shouting from over to my left 
— it’s hard to believe they’re to my left — but I tell you that 
the people of this province are not going to let this minister off 
the hook this easily. And we may let him go today simply 
because he has stonewalled so long. 
 
For two and a half weeks we have got no answers on political 
polling; nothing on political polling that people assume he is 
doing in his department; nothing about the large amount of 
money that is going to a political hack from Manitoba for 
speeches that are being written — and I say terrible speeches. I 
think they’re some of the poorest speeches that I’ve ever seen. I 
know that he had people in the department who were doing the 
speeches beforehand and I’ve compared them. And I’ll tell you 
the people in your department were writing much better 
speeches than the old Tory hack from Manitoba, much better 
speeches. And I think that you should be careful about who you 
hire. 
 
And I just want to conclude this section, Mr. Chairman, by 
re-inviting all the cabinet down to Shaunavon during the 
campaign. I enjoy their company. They have done well in 
Regina for the member for Regina North East, but I think they 
should share them. I think they should share them in 
Shaunavon. And I know the former minister of Energy has been 
down there. That’s helping me a bit. The Premier’s been down a 
couple of times. That helps a little. 
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, in all fairness, when the 
minister says he’s coming down that I want to lay out the red 
carpet. I want to lay out the red carpet and I’ll buy them supper 
when they come — the first night. And the longer they stay the 
better it is because I want to tell you that you’re welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and I appreciate the offer of you coming down and 
helping out during the campaign. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I don’t know 
where he got the campaign in this. I’m going down to 
Shaunavon talking about the development of the rural medical 
practice study. I was in Wilkie on Monday doing the same 
thing, and I’m going to go to Shaunavon. Mind you, I may talk 
to a few people while I’m there also. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, I want to make one more 
little comment, and that is about your federal meeting you’re 
having, I believe on April 28 — and that’s coming up very 
quickly. I wonder if you have had time now since we’ve 
brought it up about the 154 million that you knew nothing about 
when we started these estimates, and we  

brought to your attention. Did you get a chance to have a look 
at those over the last two and a half weeks, and can you tell me 
what your estimate is? Is it 154 million that Michael Wilson is 
planning to take away from Saskatchewan, or do you have a 
different number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, as I said previously, and 
I’ll repeat it again. I’m going down to talk to the federal 
minister. We’re looking at what the EPF funding for this year 
will be. Indications are it may be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $9 million — that portion towards health. I’m 
going to have a discussion with my counterpart down there. I’m 
going to urge that he talk to his counterpart, the federal Minister 
of Finance. I will push forth the suggestion made by 
Saskatchewan on many occasions that I think it would be in the 
best interests of health care in Canada if the Health ministers 
and the Finance ministers could sit down together and look at 
the whole aspect of responsibility for health and funding of 
health care. That will be the approach I will take when I go to 
Ottawa again on the end of this month. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think what is characteristic here, 
Mr. Chairman, of this government is the fact that this 
government won’t stand up for Saskatchewan. We have seen it 
on the price of wheat; we have seen it on the price of wheat, Mr. 
Chairman, which directly affects the taxes paid by farmers and 
goes into the Department of Health. We’ve seen that. The 
Premier went to Ottawa to get more money for farmers and lost 
81 cents a bushel. That’s success. And then he says to 
Mulroney, keep up the good work, Brian. We’ve seen that. 
 
We know what this government does when it gets to Ottawa. 
It’s hard to negotiate hard when you’re down on your hands and 
knees. I’ll tell you, it’s very hard to negotiate toughly with 
Mulroney when you’re down on your hands and knees, as this 
government is. 
 
And I say that was the problem in Prince Edward Island. You 
were trying to say the same thing, tying your wagon to the 
federal government. And you people should learn that the 
federal government is out to get you, to take money away. They 
have released to the public that they intend to take $154 million 
out of Health, and the minister won’t say anything. 
 
This isn’t a new revelation. He has had weeks now to make a 
comment on it, to argue publicly — to argue publicly that the 
cuts shouldn’t come. Not a word from the minister; not one 
press release; not one word of consultation with the 
administrators on this kind of cut-backs. The cut-backs are 
there; he’s announced them. Michael Wilson says in his budget 
he’s going to take 154 million from Saskatchewan health care. 
He said it in his budget. 
 
Have you heard one word from this minister on that, publicly? 
Have you heard him say one word? And then I say to you, Mr. 
Chairman, do you wonder why the doctors and nurses are upset 
with this man? Do you wonder why the doctors, who don’t have 
enough money to operate now, are upset with the minister when 
he won’t say a word when the federal government wants 
another $154 million? 
 
  



 
April 23, 1986 

825 
 

It’s not only the doctors and nurses and chiropractors and the 
people on waiting lists who are upset with him. It’s not only the 
people who are on the waiting lists who are upset. I say to you 
that the general public don’t like to get kicked around by 
Ottawa — don’t like to get kicked around by Ottawa. 
 
And this is his story. That what is the problem in Canada is that 
we have to have, if we’re going to survive in western Canada, 
strong provincial governments that will stand up for us on 
issues of health care, agriculture, and education. And you’re not 
doing that; not a word from you on a $154 million cut. I haven’t 
heard you defend the province on minute. 
 
So I say to you, when it comes to standing up for 
Saskatchewan, the people of the province will well know that 
when you go to Ottawa, it will be a trip all right; you’ll have a 
trip down there, paid for by the taxpayers. But we will be 
watching closely for an announcement when you come back 
that that $154 million is in place. That’s what we will be 
wanting when you come back, and we’ll want a public 
statement that it isn’t going to occur. 
 
And we would like you to stand up and say public: Michael 
Wilson, you’re wrong. What we would like, Mr. Chairman, is a 
ministerial statement when he gets back saying, Michael 
Wilson, you were wrong to propose that kind of a cut-back; you 
were wrong to attack the senior citizens two years ago. Not a 
word on that issue from this government. Not a word, not a 
word at all. 
 
But I’ll tell you, you should be getting the public behind you. If 
you would have come into this Assembly and said, look, I’ve 
got a problem . . . members of the legislature, I’ve got a 
problem, that bloody federal Tory government is trying to take 
$154 million — $154 million. If you would have come in here 
and said that, we would have been with you. We would have 
been with you. We would have signed our name on a petition 
where every member would have joined ranks and went against 
Ottawa’s proposal to cut health care funding. I’ll bet the 
chairman would have signed it. I’d be willing to bet the 
chairman of this committee would have signed a petition as a 
member of this legislature to fight that vicious plan by Michael 
Wilson to take $154 million out of the province. I know they 
would. I know the member from Regina North East, my 
colleague, would have. I know the member from Athabasca 
would have. The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and 
Cumberland and Pelly and the Quill Lakes and Elphinstone and 
Regina Centre, they all would have been behind you. 
 
And it’s not too late now. If you would stand here today and 
say, look, I need your support in going to fight Michael 
Wilson’s cut-backs, you would have our support today. We’re 
not so political that we won’t get on to an issue to protect 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. We won’t be so political that we 
would not support you in going down to Ottawa in a strong 
stand, moving an emergency resolution which you could do in 
this committee. By leave, we could move a resolution right 
now, if the minister would, and we would support it, saying 
we’re going to fight those cut-backs. 
 

And, Mr. Chairman, I think that you probably today would 
allow it, where yesterday you wouldn’t. I think you would. I 
think you’ll have changed your mind, and we may test that in a 
moment. But I think we made a mistake yesterday when we 
didn’t pass that resolution. And I say to you that that’s a 
problem. Because we have such a political government, so 
political that they want to go to Ottawa quietly, in the dark of 
night, and make a little agreement with Michael Wilson. But we 
won’t say anything until after the election. That’s the deal, and 
that the health care cuts that he has proposed are going to go 
ahead. 
 
That’s what you’re doing. That’s what Premier Devine did on 
the agricultural issue which affected health care, because 
farmers won’t have any money to pay taxes for health care. 
Eighty-one cents a bushel, Mr. Chairman, you know that. You 
heard it as well as I did. That what happened is that Premier 
Devine went to Ottawa, Mulroney was in Florida, the minister 
in charge of the wheat board was in Saskatoon, and who did he 
meet with? Well, he met with the big blue machine in Ontario 
because he had political problems; had political problems, got 
cold feet when it came time to call the election. Now what do I 
do, boys, to get out of that little dilemma? How do I get out of 
this dilemma I’ve created for myself? I was well down the road 
to calling an election, and then the health care issue blew up. 
Now how do I get out of it? That’s where he was. 
 
And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, that this 
government should be looking for support from the nurses and 
doctors and the opposition in going to Ottawa, unified to fight 
for Saskatchewan. Why won’t you do that? I say to you that we 
would support the Conservatives on this one. We would. If any 
member of the Conservative Party would get up and have the 
courage to say — and we would help them write the resolution 
— we’re going to fight Ottawa’s cuts to health, we would 
support you. I’ll give you that commitment that we would. And 
we may have to put it forward before the day is over if none of 
the members of the government have the courage to do it. But I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, you could have our support on that 
kind of a resolution, and I can’t for the life of me figure out why 
you won’t do that. 
 
And I guess my short question after those comments is: would 
you consider getting with us, moving a resolution to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . we would let you move it, and if you 
would want us to second it, we would, or you could get one of 
your members to second it . . . but to pass a resolution telling 
Ottawa, clearly, that you could take from this Assembly with 
you in your hip pocket saying, look, I have the support of every 
member — every member — that they will fight you if you go 
ahead with this heinous operation of cutting back health care. 
Will you move that kind of a motion or a resolution? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve explained at 
least 12 times what I plan to do when I go to Ottawa. I think it’s 
very well documented in Hansard. I think every member 
opposite has heard it time after time. I will go and meet with my 
federal counterpart to discuss health care initiatives in Canada; 
a number of things will be  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

826 
 

discussed. I will urge him to call a meeting of federal Finance 
ministers and Health ministers along with provincial Finance 
and Health ministers to discuss the whole topic of funding in 
health care. That’s the plan of action I’m going to take, and 
that’s what I’ll embark upon. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder why a non-partisan resolution 
of the committee, where members who are running in the next 
election from all political parties, members who are not 
running, but would be one of their last efforts to stand up for 
Saskatchewan — I’m sure the member from Rosthern would 
want to put his name on that kind of a resolution to fight for 
Saskatchewan because he’s been an honourable member in that 
way in fighting for his constituents. And I don’t for the life of 
me understand why you wouldn’t agree to that kind of a 
resolution because that kind of a resolution, I suppose . . . I 
would ask you: do you think that kind of a resolution would 
help you in your arguments in Ottawa to get the point across 
that those cut-backs shouldn’t take place? Do you think that 
resolution would help or hinder you in your debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think, and I could back 
over these again — the number of initiatives that we have been 
able to bring forward on the national scene led by 
Saskatchewan Health indicate that we are quite capable of 
articulating the Saskatchewan position and standing up for 
Saskatchewan. I intend to do that again. I think my colleagues 
have complete support in my capabilities of talking to Mr. Epp, 
Mr. Wilson, or who else may be down there. We’re going to try 
our best. That’s all that one can expect us to do. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to turn to a different subject now, 
and it deals with a group in Moose Jaw, formerly the mentally 
handicapped foundation, and I believe it has been funded in the 
past by your department. Can you give me the status on funding 
for that organization at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We haven’t funded the group in the past. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is saying that you haven’t 
given any money to that group in Moose Jaw in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate that we have not 
funded that group in the past. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Has the minister had requests from them 
for monetary assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, they have made requests to both the 
Department of Health and the Department of Social Services 
over the last few years. We prefer and are funding and working 
with the local chapters of the provincial mental health 
association. And I believe Social Services probably work with 
some of the handicapped, but you’d have to ask the Minister of 
Social Services on that. I couldn’t say where his moneys go. 
But we do, with the provincial chapter of the Saskatchewan 
mental health. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Is the minister considering . . . I  

missed whether you said whether you’re considering funding 
this group in the coming year. Is that included in this year’s 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. We have not considered funding 
them. We will continue funding the Moose Jaw chapter of 
Saskatchewan mental health. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, in Regina, have there been any 
cut-backs to any group that provides services to the mentally 
handicapped or to people who are . . . Mental health clinic 
operation — anything being cut back in that area? 
 
I believe I saw a news story today where one of the groups is 
being cut back. Can you bring us up to date on what group it is 
in Regina that you’re deciding to discontinue funding for, and 
the reason behind it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the group that you’re referring to 
are called the Agoraphobics Regina. We gave them a one-time 
fund in February of 1985, of $2,500. It was clearly understood 
at that time that it would be one-time funding, but following the 
issuing of the budget of this year, they came in for a request for 
funding. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The news article that I’m referred to is 
dated 23rd of April of ’86, “Self-help group loses grant.” And I 
just want to quote a couple of articles. 
 
The member from Rosthern is yelling, item 1 agreed. I’m not 
sure what he’s yelling about, but maybe he wants to get into the 
debate. 
 
But in the article it talks, and I will quote: 
 

Paul Grocott, executive director of the Mental Health 
Association of Saskatchewan, said the group had the full 
support of the association and it cannot financially support 
the self-help group because it already has a deficit budget, 
he said. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Self-help is a viable vehicle for people to get back on their 
feet. 

 
And the article concludes by saying: 
 

The Regina Mental Health Clinic cannot provide any 
non-financial help like free meeting places that the 
self-help group doesn’t already have, according to the 
executive director of the Regina mental health region. 

 
Can the minister explain why . . . Is it that the group isn’t doing 
a good job? Is that why the $2,500 is not being given to the 
group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the group when they first 
approached my department asked for a specific project, and that 
was to organize a library of resource material on agoraphobia 
and publish a news-letter. And it was made very, very clear that 
this was a one-time grant, and my department gave a grant of 
$2,500 to them. There was no request for any other funding 
until after the budget had  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

827 
 

been established and the budget had been announced; they came 
around now asking for another amount of funding. 
 
So let me be very clear. Their first request to establish a library 
and to publish a news-letter — we helped them with that. They 
were told it would be one-time funding; that’s what they got. 
There was no request for future funding into this year’s 
budgetary year until after the budget had come out; then they 
approached my department for further funding. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Is the minister saying that if the group 
were to come to him now and explain their situation, that there 
may be money for the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials are meeting with them to 
review their proposal. I’m not saying whether there’s money or 
not, but certainly we’re going to meet with them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, would you take the 
opportunity . . . if we were to try to arrange a meeting, could 
you see your way clear in your schedule to meet with them 
directly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The meeting has been set now with my 
officials. So certainly I have some very competent officials. 
They meet with a number of people throughout Saskatchewan. I 
get very, very good feedback on the meetings that my officials 
have with people. So we’ll go through that meeting. If the group 
are not satisfied with the meeting with my officials they have 
the right to contact me. But certainly, at this point in time when 
the meeting is set to go ahead in the very near future with my 
officials, we will follow up on that course. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I hate to say it- here we go again — 
but this is like the nurses and the doctors and the chiropractors, 
and now this group. The minister won’t meet with them. Swift 
Current — won’t meet with them. That’s what’s happening. 
And that’s why you’re so darned unpopular. You won’t meet 
with anyone. 
 
And obviously here is a little group, $2,500. You just told me 
you spent $37,000 on polling, political polling; 54,000 on 
speeches to send out to administrators who don’t want them. 
Here’s a self-help group that is explained by Paul Grocott, the 
executive director of the mental health association, as being a 
good group. It needs $2,500 and you won’t meet with them. 
 
Now are you getting the idea of why the nurses are mad at you 
and the doctors and the chiropractors and the groups around the 
province — why they’re angry? Do you understand why they’re 
getting angry? Because every time somebody wants to meet 
with you, you say no . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you 
just aid . . . Well, we’ll leave it at that. 
 
Here’s another group. We’ll just have to send this to them but 
don’t be surprised when this group is angry with you. You’ve 
become self-righteous about anybody who gets angry when you 
won’t meet with them. But obviously, if you’re Minister of 
Health, part of your job is to meet with these groups. 
 

And you don’t want to be in the Assembly. You’ve said you’d 
rather be out doing something else. You don’t want to meet 
with the doctors. You don’t want to meet with the nurses. You 
don’t want to meet with these groups. What do you want to do? 
Why do you want to be minister? 
 
Mr. Chairman at least has had the honourable thing and said, 
I’m not running again because I’m tired. That’s what he said: 
I’m tired; I’m not going to run again. That’s honourable. I agree 
with that. If you’re tired, don’t run. But don’t continue on 
saying to all these groups and the nurses and the doctors and the 
chiropractors, I’m not going to meet with you, but I’m still 
going to be minister. That doesn’t work because they obviously 
think that part of your job is to meet with them. 
 
And I would like to just end on this topic by letting the minister 
go on that one because he says he won’t meet with them, so 
we’ll just let them know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, first and foremost, the 
group never asked to meet with me. They’re meeting at 10:30 
tomorrow morning with my director of mental health services, 
Mr. Yarske. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh sure, sure. Yes, meet with somebody 
else. That’s all you can say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well if they don’t . . . If you want to 
make fun of meeting with the director of mental health services 
for the province of Saskatchewan, if that is sloughing someone 
off, I fail to realize that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it would be interesting . . . And I will 
provide the opposition opposite with the number of people I 
have met with over the past four years. I will tell you that I have 
met with more groups — more groups — than any Health 
minister that ever was in their government, over the last four 
years. I’ll let that record stand. 
 
And if he thinks that I’m tired of meeting with groups, or that I 
won’t run again, I’ll tell you and I’ll tell every member in this 
Assembly and I’ll tell everybody in this province: I will run 
again; my government will win again; because I’m committed 
to keeping the socialists over there and the Conservative 
government here. And you will see that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I will go to Shaunavon. And I will 
go to Shaunavon and I will campaign against that member. And 
I will be in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, as I have been. 
 
I tell you, I will travel this province for one purpose — to make 
sure that Saskatchewan has the opportunity in the years ahead 
to develop. And keep those birds and those clucking ducks over 
there, throwing their socks, clucking, shouting from their seats 
as they continue, because that’s exactly where they deserve to 
stand, to stay. 
 
And you have my commitment, my colleagues have my 
commitment, and the people of Saskatchewan have my  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

828 
 

commitment that in the . . . whenever that election is called, I 
will be doing everything I can to keep the socialists right where 
they belong — in an opposition in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I don’t know what the minister is 
ranting about. We get up and ask a question about a little group 
in Regina who has been cut back in their funding — $2,500. 
They’re a small group, I admit — deal with mental health in the 
city of Regina. We asked a few questions about it. The minister 
gets up and rants and raves. Well I’ve never seen the like of it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve never in my life seen a display like we have 
just seen. You ask a reasonable question of the minister, a 
minister who’s earning $100,000 a year, his salary and 
expenses, 100,000 a year — and anyone can look in Public 
Accounts and see approximately what he made is about 
100,000; has access to executive aircraft; all the perks of the 
office. We ask a simple question about funding for a small 
group dealing with mental health and he gets up and rants and 
raves — gets up and rants and raves about how he’s going to 
win the next election. Well I’ve never seen anything like it. 
 
That kind of a display of arrogance, a display of arrogance 
where a small little group is coming to the minister for $2,500 
. . . and he has just said he has spent $37,000 on polling. He just 
told that to the Assembly. But he rants and raves at a small 
group who are coming to ask for some money. And he gets 
mad. He says, I don’t have to meet with them; I’ve already met 
with lots of people. I don’t have to meet with them. And he 
says, we’re going to kick those socialists like Tommy Douglas 
and Woodrow Lloyd out. We don’t like them because they 
brought in medicare. That’s what he says. Did you hear what he 
said? 
 
(1645) 
 
Can anyone believe this man who would get up on a health care 
issue and take a run at Tommy Douglas? I say to you that that is 
a man that’s out of touch with reality and the history of the 
province. That’s what happened; that’s what happened. Here we 
get up and ask questions about a mental health issue where a 
group is being cut back — cut back by $2,500 and they don’t 
have any money to operate. And the mental health association 
in Regina says: look, it’s a good group, it should be funded. 
And the minister gets up and takes a run at them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He takes a run at the socialists. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And at the group. He says, I don’t have to 
meet with them. People in the department will meet with them; 
I don’t have to. I’ve already met with enough people. He said 
that to the nurses. I’m not going to Estevan and Weyburn to 
meet with them. I may go to Regina because I’m in Regina, but 
I’m sure not going to drive all the way out to Weyburn — that’s 
an hour by road, 20 minutes by plane. I don’t have to go out of 
my way to do that. 
 
And this little group, this small little group, Mr. Chairman,  

who have had $2,500 taken away from them, out of a billion 
dollar budget — 54,000 of which last year went to writing 
speeches that the minister sent out to administrators, $37,000 
that went to polling — he is going to take that $2,500 and I 
think put it into another area where politics is better. And he 
says, I don’t have to meet with them. Well I want to ask you, 
Mr. Minister: why don’t you want to meet with this group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, certainly you know we 
draw a long bow, but there’s a world of difference between 
Tommy Douglas and the member who stood up and talked 
today. A vast difference. 
 
But let me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, here goes the 
shouting again. Shouting from their seats. 
 
Let me indicate to you, Mr. Chairman, let me indicate to you 
that the group . . . He says a cut-back. There was no cut-back. 
The group came to see if they could get some money last year 
for a library and a news-letter. We gave them $2,500. They 
never asked for anything more. Now they come in, after the 
budget, asking for $36,000. 
 
I’ve asked my director of mental health services to meet with 
this group. They’ve never asked to meet with me. Certainly 
they can meet with him and I’m sure that he will have a 
satisfactory discussion with them. If not, they’re welcome to 
come and see me, as any other group is. But certainly, I think 
. . . And I have faith in my director of mental health services. I 
believe that he can work something out with this group. And 
certainly there is no attempt by anyone in this government to 
say to this group, be they 20, 50, or 100, that we will not take a 
look at their concerns. We certainly will. But I can’t give a 
commitment that we’re going to give them their funding. It 
would have been a lot easier had they asked prior to the budget 
being set. But to try and indicate that there’s a cut-back of 
$2,500 is simply not correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister keeps 
mentioning Tommy Douglas, and I want to just make it clear 
that Tommy Douglas spent his life fighting the likes of that 
minister who would see cut-backs in health. He spent his whole 
life fighting right-wingers. That’s what he did. And you just 
said that you were going to fight to keep social democrats out of 
the province. And right-wingers in 1962 who tried to keep 
medicare out had the same background as these people across 
the way. Everyone knows that. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the minister will know full well that Tommy 
Douglas spent his entire life fighting Tories and Liberals, spent 
his whole life doing that. That’s what he lived for, because right 
wing reactionaries had no place in his life. He didn’t like them. 
He told me that. He said he didn’t believe in their philosophy, 
and he spent his whole life fighting the philosophy of those 
members like the member from Regina Rosemont. Tommy 
Douglas didn’t dislike people, didn’t dislike any people. But I’ll 
tell you he despised the right-wingers who would take away 
from the poor and give it to the Peter Pocklingtons of the world. 
He hated that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 23, 1986 

829 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I’ll tell you, for the likes of this 
minister and the Premier of this province to go around and talk 
about how Tommy Douglas was his friend, in terms of 
philosophy, does an insult and a disservice to a former Premier 
and a great man. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I’ll tell you, you’re not going to get 
away with it. No you won’t, because I’ll tell you people are 
laughing at you. You know what they say when the Premier 
Devine says, I’m like Tommy Douglas? Do you know what 
they say, the people in Weyburn? They laugh at him. They 
laugh at him. They say, you’re like Tommy Douglas — tell me 
another story; tell me another story, Tommy Douglas fought to 
build the health care system that is now being ripped down by 
right-wingers in Ottawa and in the province, by ripping apart 
the fabric of the medicare system by removing $154 million 
from the provincial budget for health. 
 
Now I’ll tell you Tommy Douglas didn’t agree with that, nor 
would he. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that you have a great 
credibility gap when it comes to saying to this committee that 
Tommy Douglas would have agreed with what you’re doing 
here with this little group. I’ll tell you, you’re making a 
mockery of the history of this province. 
 
Tommy Douglas had no time for the likes of this group who 
would take a little group and say, when they come forward, that 
I don’t have time to meet with them, and I don’t have any 
money, and in the next breath say, I have 37,000 for polling as 
well as 54,000 for ending out my speeches. Tommy Douglas 
never would have done that, Mr. Chairman. He never would 
have done that. He would have driven in an old car out to Swift 
Current if there would have been three health care people, let 
alone 200. That’s what he would have done. 
 
And I’ll tell you that it’s an insult to the people of the province 
who built the health care program and voted over and over 
again for CCFers and New Democrats — and they have voted 
for them in great numbers, believe it or not, over the history of 
this province since 1944. And the irony is, here they’re saying 
they haven’t changed, on the one hand. We’re the same as we 
were when Tommy Douglas was around. We’re the same thing. 
Here today he stands up and says they’re not the same. 
 
Mr. Chairman, you must see the irony of a minister running ads 
in the newspaper saying we’re the same, and then getting up in 
the House and saying we’re different. Well if you think the 
people are confused with the lines that you people use, you’re 
right. They’re very confused. Is Tommy Douglas the same as 
we are now, or are we different? All these ads that we haven’t 
changed, many people take that as being positive. They say, 
thank God — thank God they haven’t changed their attitude of 
taking a little away from the rich and giving it to the poor. 
That’s what they’re saying out there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And to this little group who is coming 
forward for a bit of assistance, I’ll tell you, you’re proving the 
point that Tommy Douglas was right when  

you would take and spend that kind of money on your own 
polling and not give to this group in the area of mental health — 
in the area of mental health that should be a priority with this 
government. 
 
And so when it comes to election time, then the spots start to 
show. Then we find out what it’s really about. Political 
spending in the Department of Health takes priority over the 
needs of the people who are not able to defend themselves in 
the area of mental health. That’s what this says. And you may 
say that that is a small amount and it’s insignificant and these 
people don’t deserve it — this little self-help group. 
 
But why don’t you stand in your place today and say, look, the 
money is there. The money is there, and I’ll cut back on my 
political polling to pay for it. That’s what Tommy Douglas 
would have done. He wouldn’t have had the political polling 
because he would have done his polling by going to Swift 
Current a few weeks ago. He would have been out with the 
people, listening to them. He wouldn’t have had to do 
expensive polling. That’s right. That’s what he would have 
done. He would have never taken money out of the budget for 
mental health and used it for political polling or sending out 
speeches; wouldn’t have done it. It wasn’t how he was made. 
 
And I just want to tell you that referring and saying that Tommy 
Douglas would have agreed with what is happening here, where 
the federal government is ripping apart medicare, I’ll tell you, 
Tommy Douglas would have fought and stood up for 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you that strong tradition of standing 
up for Saskatchewan — Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and 
Allan Blakeney, the former premier — they would be fighting 
this cut-back, and also would be using the money they saved to 
fund these kinds of programs. Because I’ll tell you, if we lose 
that $154 million, can you imagine, Mr. Chairman, how many 
small groups will not be funded? 
 
Listen, we’re talking about 2,500. Can you imagine if we lost 
154 how many small groups around the province will not get 
any funding. There will be literally thousands of them, not only 
in health, but the Minister of Social Services, I know he’s 
worried about it. He’s worried about those cut-backs because it 
will impact on his budget as well, as it obviously will. It will 
impact on every department, because if you take 154 million 
out of health, it will impact on the overall budget. It will impact 
in every area. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that I find it unacceptable 
that you would stand in your place today and attack the history 
of this province and say that Tommy Douglas would accept 
what you are doing here today in not funding this group and yet 
giving massive amounts of money away to Ottawa. 
 
The minister will know that he has said that he would have 
officials meet with the group. I wonder if the meeting fails to 
get the money for the group, will you give a commitment here 
to the Assembly that you will then meet with them to further 
discuss the issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have the letter 
from the president of the group, to my executive director  
  



 
April 23, 1986 

830 
 

of the mental health services, dated April 21st. I believe April 
21st was yesterday, was it not? Two days ago, two days ago. 
 
The meeting is set up for tomorrow morning. I don’t know how 
much more prompt we can be. Certainly, as I’ve said time and 
time again, if they don’t have satisfaction at that meeting and 
feel that they want to meet with me, they can come and meet 
with me. The correspondence has been between the director of 
my branch and their chairman. That meeting’s set for tomorrow 
morning at 10:30. I think that’s prompt — prompt delivery. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue here is, and I’m not sure that 
the minister is accurate in saying that they haven’t asked for a 
meeting or not, but the question was: if they request a meeting, 
if the meeting to get money fails, like if the officials say there 
isn’t money available because it’s going to Peter Pocklington or 
to Pioneer Trust or wherever you’re sending all that money to 
— if that meeting breaks down, will you give a commitment 
that you will meet with them personally after that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well for the fourth time, I will meet with 
them if they’re not satisfied. I said I will meet with them and 
I’ll meet with many other groups. But certainly, I mean, to keep 
repeating, they wrote the letter on the 21st and the meeting’s set 
for 10:30 tomorrow morning. We’ll have to see what comes out 
of the meeting. Maybe there’s a track that will be satisfactory. I 
don’t know. They’ve never asked for a meeting with me. So 
we’ll have to see what comes out of tomorrow’s meeting. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have listened to this display, I think it is for the best 
part of three weeks. I have heard the minister comment about 
what a grand job he is doing in communicating. All I can say is 
if you’re spending any time at it, you’re spectacularly 
unsuccessful. It isn’t by chance, Mr. Minister, that these 
estimates have lasted almost three weeks. I would be very 
surprised if this were not a record, an all-time record. I would 
be very surprised to hear that. 
 
That isn’t by chance. We’re not doing it because for some 
reason or other we think this is a useful way to waste time. 
We’re doing it, Mr. Minister, because we reflect public opinion. 
I cannot remember a time . . . I was not here in the early ’60s 
when the government of Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd 
got themselves into difficulty in Health, got themselves into 
difficulty in the face of right wing forces within society, like 
members sitting opposite, the KOD (keep our doctors) 
committee got themselves into difficulty trying to improve 
health care. And now that that pioneering effort is successful, 
members opposite want to take credit for it. All I can say is I am 
not sure that anyone here is of an age where they might have 
been actively participating in those events. But if you had have 
been, you’d have been the same, you’d have been with the 
KOD, parading out in front, talking about state socialism. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have been here three weeks because the public 
are insisting upon some kind of answers, some action. The 
chairman . . . I’ll start and work my way  

through a short list of the people who have questions of your 
leadership. 
 
The chairman of the health research fund uses the annual report, 
which you tabled, to bring into question this government’s 
commitment to health research. That is something that this 
province once was very proud of. In the days of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s go, Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well we’ll get out in lots of time. The 
assistant chairman, the assistant assistant deputy house leader 
can wait for a moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the chairman of the health research fund chooses 
the annual report to say that he doesn’t think that this 
government is providing adequate leadership. He assumed — 
quite correctly, I think — that you don’t read anything you get, 
including the annual report; because I assume, had you read 
that, you would not have tabled it. 
 
The patients in the hospital, Mr. Minister, anyone who has been 
in a hospital, is concerned about the lack of staff. They say 
when you go there you’re on your own, Mr. Minister. 
 
The doctors are calling for your resignation. The nurses are 
demonstrating in front of the hospital. 
 
I cannot understand, Mr. Minister, who you think it is that 
you’re communicating so well with, Mr. Minister, and I don’t 
know where you’re . . . I cannot understand how you would pay 
anyone the large sums you do to communicate your policy 
when they’re doing such a poor job. Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The minister obviously needs a new 
speech-writer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can name any significant group 
who has publicly stated that this government is doing a good 
job on health care. I wonder if the minister can honestly name 
any significant group, apart from the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan — and I’m not sure what they’re saying about 
you to you in private — but I wonder if you can name a single 
significant group which has had anything good to say about this 
government’s handling of health care, because I can’t think of it 
offhand. 
 
The Health-Care Association has been largely silent because 
they don’t want to bite the hand that feeds them, although I’m 
sure they would dearly like to bite the hand that feeds them. 
They, after all, are on the receiving end of the inadequate 
funding in health care. Doctors, nurses, patients, your own 
employees . . . your own appointees to boards — everyone, Mr. 
Minister, is unhappy, alarmed, and fearful of your leadership in 
health care. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Chairman, can you name a single, significant 
group who have publicly said anything good about your 
leadership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly can; the 
populace of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 


