













































May 26, 1986 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 26, 1986 

  

 

 

1495 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a privilege today to 

introduce some 27 grade 4 students from Assiniboia to you, and 

their teacher, Mrs. Mona Karst. Mona has brought students in for 

many years already, as long as I've been an MLA, I think. It's great 

to have you back with your students. And I'm looking forward to 

meeting with you and the bus driver, Dale Adams. And I wish 

you, along with the rest of the members, would extend a warm 

welcome to these students. 

 

And while I'm on my feet I will also ask you to extend a warm 

welcome to a group of students from my colleague, Dwain 

Lingenfelter's riding. They're from Ferland, Saskatchewan. And 

their teacher is Dolores Brisebois, and their chaperon is Helen 

Massé. And I wish you would extend a warm welcome to these 

young people as well. And I'm looking forward to meeting with 

them on behalf of my colleague, Dwain Lingenfelter. So extend a 

warm welcome to both these groups, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Trade Negotiations 

 

Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier, and it deals with Saskatchewan's role in the free trade 

negotiations now under way between Canada and the United 

States. Last year the Prime Minister and the provinces agreed that 

there would be, in the words of the communiqué, "full 

participation, full provincial participation" in these negotiations. 

 

Since then, Ottawa and the provinces have seemingly been unable 

to agree on how to implement a full provincial participation. And 

now I understand that a first minister's meeting has been set for 

next week in Ottawa to attempt to iron out these differences. 

 

My question, sir, is this: how does your government define "full 

provincial participation" in these negotiations, and will it be your 

position that such participation should include a place at the 

bargaining table for Saskatchewan and other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will be meeting — 

that is the first ministers will be meeting next week to discuss 

exactly how we can put the package together. In Halifax we 

discussed the possibilities and came to an agreement, or a 

consensus, with the Prime Minister that the first ministers could 

act as a board of directors, if you will, in terms of the whole 

Canadian negotiating team, and that while you have one person 

sitting at the table as you do speaking for the Canadians — 

whether the provinces or the federal government — that the 

backdrop from which you make those negotiations and carry them 

on are taking place as a result of the board of directors meeting 

and saying this is the strategy we will  

use; this is what we're doing. And then he negotiates and he comes 

back, and you meet with the premiers, the Prime Minister from 

time to time. 

 

You certainly have your people like Art Wakabayashi intimately 

involved in all the detailed discussions and knowing exactly what 

is going on — can report to me on a ongoing basis. 

 

So what we're doing next week is to say how precisely that will 

work so that the first ministers can feel comfortable with the 

process, knowing that the federal government is going to be 

speaking to the federal government in the United States. you won't 

be negotiating with 52 states. They won't be negotiating with 

province by province, but you'll have negotiating teams on either 

side, and obviously you're going to have congress and the senate 

watching it very close. You're going to have the provincial 

legislatures watching it very close. 

 

So it's design a mechanism for these historic discussions which, 

obviously, as we've seen in the last few days, are going to be 

extremely important because it's imperative that we stop the 

United States in terms of the kinds of protectionist measures that 

they have in mind now, whether it's on hogs or whether it's on 

softwood lumber or shakes or shingles or whatever it is, if they 

carry this on . . . I mean, it's extremely dangerous for our potash 

industry and our beef industry and many other industries. So, 

design a mechanism, and we'll certainly be prepared to talk more 

about it when we meet with the Prime Minister. 

 

With respect to my own negotiations, I expect our people to be 

fully informed. The federal government last Friday laid out to me, 

as the Minister of Agriculture and as the Premier, and he laid out 

to other provinces a whole list of research material and the impact 

of the farm Bill on Canadian agriculture; the impact of various 

trade negotiations on sector by sector, region by region — the 

kinds of things that we could protect; the kinds of new markets 

and new jobs that we could look it. Certainly Art Wakabayashi has 

all that information, and my intergovernmental affairs has that 

information. We're going over it, making our own analysis and 

interpretation, so that when we go back in discussions that we will 

be as fully informed as possible. 

 

So it's to stay close, to communicate as much as possible, and to 

make sure that we, at least, at a minimum, prevent the United 

States from doing what it started to do now, and we said it that 

would do, three or four months ago — three or four years ago, as a 

matter of fact: protectionist pressures in the United States would 

start cutting off jobs in Canada. And that's what we're out to 

prevent; in fact, we want to create more. 

 

Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier, as you have 

said, these negotiations could have a very major impact on the 

future of Saskatchewan's economy and the security of jobs in 

Saskatchewan. And what Saskatchewan people want to know, Mr. 

Premier, is: who will be looking after Saskatchewan's interests at 

the bargaining table — not in consultation, but at the bargaining 

table? 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1496 

 

 

So I ask you again: is it the position of your government that 

Saskatchewan and other provinces should have a place at the 

bargaining table, or are you leaving the negotiations at the 

bargaining table in the hands of Simon Reisman, the retired 

federal public servant, and in the eyes of many, I think, the 

quintessential federal public servant who will speak with that 

voice? Are we going to have anybody at the bargaining table, or 

are we speaking through Reisman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say quite clearly 

that the representation at the bargaining table, and the 

representation for the province of Saskatchewan, will run through 

the Premier's office and right down through to the negotiator and 

others. So it will be a combination. 

 

If in fact that I can be there in terms of carving out the strategy 

with the Prime Minister and the fellow premiers, and at the same 

time that we can have people who are going to be involved in the 

intimate discussions that go on now between Mr. Reisman and Art 

Wakabayashi and others, then your representation at the 

bargaining table will be through the people that you have there, 

plus through the Premier's office, plus through a whole range of 

officials and bureaucrats and others who can keep you right up to 

speed with respect to the negotiations. 

 

Now the major point to remember is that as the negotiations are 

going on and they bring positions back, they'll say, all right, 

should this strategy continue, or should it vary, or should we go 

from A to B to C. And that's where you can have your board of 

directors involved on a regular basis providing that kind of 

guidance. 

 

Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If anything 

is clear, it is that the arrangements are far from precise. And I 

think it's clear, Mr. Premier, that it's important that we have some 

pretty clear guide-lines because the U.S. are playing for keeps in 

these negotiations. They already have a carefully planned strategy 

to put pressure on Canada by moving forward with a series of 

protectionist measures like the 35 per cent tariff on Canadian 

shakes and shingles, the filing of a petition calling for 27 per cent 

duty on Canadian softwood, and the passage in the House of 

Representatives of a Bill threatening a series of trade penalties 

against Canadian goods. 

 

The Americans, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, have a game plan, 

and they're obviously playing hard ball. We can't, apparently, even 

decide what our starting line-up is. And I ask you this, Mr. 

Premier: why are we, and particularly why are you, as the Premier 

of Saskatchewan, going into such crucial international 

negotiations without a clear plan and without any apparent 

strategy to counter the kind of pressure which the U.S. 

government is very obviously mounting upon Canada in these last 

several weeks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the major problem with 

respect to trade negotiations between Canada and the United 

States is not that Canadians are not well-informed, or Canadians 

don't have their homework done, or the research isn't there. We 

know the kinds of markets and the kinds of things that we want to 

get from America. The major problem is, is one of a political 

problem where you've got the opposition, or the NDP, or people 

like them, that say that they don't want to get into trade 

negotiations with the United States. That's the major problem. 

 

We have been saying for the last three western premiers' meetings, 

in western Canada, we have said we must negotiate with the 

United States and stop that protectionism, or they're going to start 

cutting off our hog exports, or our oil exports, or potash exports, or 

softwood lumber, or many other things. The NDP keep saying, no, 

we shouldn't be discussing it with the United States. 

 

What the Americans have done right now is just look across the 

border and just smile every time an NDP opens his mouth because 

they're saying, oh, my gosh, I've got them split now because the 

opposition and the NDP doesn't want to talk negotiations, so they 

hammer on another tariff; they put on some more protection; and 

there's no solidarity on this side of the border saying we are going 

to protect Canadian jobs and we're going to get more jobs. And 

you can stand there today, Mr. Speaker, like the Leader of the 

Opposition said, he is worried that softwood lumber might be 

protected. Well I've been saying that for three years, that if they 

cut off potash and cut off hogs, we have thousands of people that 

will be unemployed. If they stop bacon exports into the United 

States, 1,000 people at Intercontinental Packers could go right out 

of work. 

 

We have been trying for years and years to protect those jobs and 

create more. And the opposition is coming back saying, well I 

don't think we should have trade negotiations with United States. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll just say this: we are better prepared than the 

Americans. The Americans have one voice speaking down there, 

and, Mr. Speaker, what they are doing is just building on the 

opposition in Canada . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I'm going to ask the 

members on both sides of the House to have short questions and 

short answers. We're going exceeding long. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, are you aware that one of the serious threats 

facing Saskatchewan from the U.S. today is the attempt by the 

U.S. lumber industry to get a 27 per cent duty slapped on all 

Canadian softwood lumber imports? This move threatens about 

$16 million worth of Saskatchewan sales to the U.S. on an annual 

basis, and hundreds of Saskatchewan jobs. Can the Premier give 

the Saskatchewan taxpayers a status report in respect to where this 

case is at? And when the U.S. commerce department be holding 

public hearings, and will Saskatchewan be intervening at the 

hearings to protect Saskatchewan interests? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point very 

clear. For the last two or three years my office and my activities in 

this government has been in the United States, in Washington, in 

Nebraska, in California, across the United States trying to stop this 

protectionist measure that's there. Because if they do the same 

thing, if they do the same thing in the potash industry .  . Mr. 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1497 

 

 

Speaker, they don't want to hear this; here they go again. They 

can't stand the answers, so they're talking and hollering from . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes 

should know something about the potash industry. If the United 

States decides to put tariff walls and protectionist measures against 

the potash industry, thousands of families that are working in 

mines and working in potash industries across this province will 

go down. And do you know what the NDP does? The NDP says, 

well, we shouldn't discuss trade with the United States. And then 

when they put on a tariff that's going to stop softwood lumber, 

then they stand up and sound like, oh, well isn't this terrible. 

 

Well who do you think's being working for some time to protect 

those jobs and those families at Intercontinental Packers, and the 

potash industry, and the timber industry, and the beef industry, and 

in the pork industry? Well it wasn't the NDP. It was conservative 

people and Progressive Conservative governments in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta and British Columbia that are trying to 

do it. In fact, even your counterpart in Manitoba was down into 

South Dakota trying to get them to take the ban off hogs moving 

in there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is all the more reason we have to be in serious 

negotiations to protect these jobs, not just standing up on one hand 

saying, we can't have trade, and the other hand, what are you 

going to do about the fact that they have protectionism. They have 

protectionism because they don't appreciate the Canadians and the 

opportunities we have together. Mr. Speaker, it's time that we, on 

this side of the border, spoke with one voice and quit splitting it 

like the NDP is trying to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to ask the same question, 

because the Premier did not, indeed, address the question 

whatsoever. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: are you aware that one of the 

serious threats facing Saskatchewan from the U.S. today is the 

attempt by the U.S. lumber industry to get 27 per cent duty 

slapped onto the Canadian softwood lumber imports. I ask you — 

this is a serious threat to the people of Canada and Saskatchewan 

— and what I ask you, Mr. Premier: can the Premier give the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer a status report as to where it's at? And 

when will the U.S. department in fact be holding hearings, if 

indeed they are; and will you have representations to the 

committee in the United States as against imposing such action? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, of course I'm aware of it, and 

of course we have been lobbying, and we will have the 

representation there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am trying to find out is whether the member 

from Quill has some sort of perverse delight in seeing tariffs in the 

United States so he can talk about the lumber industry losing jobs. 

Or is he saying, Mr. Speaker 

 . . . are you for free trade with the United States now? Is that what 

you're saying, you want more trade? Have you made up your mind 

yet? Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you what — they haven't — they 

haven't made up their minds. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have been making 

significant representation on behalf of the paper industry, the 

potash industry, the uranium industry, Ipsco, Intercontinental 

Packers — everybody that works in an industry that exports into 

the United States — and we will continue to be there. 

 

The biggest thing that hurts Canadians today are people like you 

that stand up and say we shouldn't be trading with the United 

States; we shouldn't be negotiating. Well I'll tell you, if you keep it 

up, they will be slapping on more protection and more protection 

day after day after day, because they think they've got Canadians 

over a barrel. 

 

Well I'll tell you, I'm not going to give up on Canadians, and I'm 

not going to give up fighting for markets in the United States. And 

you can talk out of both sides of your mouth all you like; but I'll 

tell you one thing, people see through what you're doing. When 

we try to protect jobs about build more jobs, they appreciate it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Protectionism Regarding High Technology 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, as you may be aware, one of the controversial sections of 

a Bill just passed by the U.S. House of Representatives threatened 

straight penalties against Canada unless we open the Canadian 

market to U.S. telecommunication industry. Can the Premier tell 

us what specific products the Americans have in mind, and are 

they in fact threatening jobs in our high technology sector here in 

Saskatchewan? And if so, what has Saskatchewan done to lobby 

against this trade threat in Washington? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I'm sure the hon. member 

should know, that we market high-tech equipment all over the 

United States. And one of the biggest things, the biggest concerns 

we have is they would put up protectionist measures against 

satellite equipment, SED Systems, fibre optics, or many of the 

things that we export into the U.S. That is why we've been down 

there for three years trying to get them to reduce their tariffs and 

talk about more trade and more opportunities between the two of 

us, rather than them picking us off one at a time. Of course we're 

aware of those things. 

 

All of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has woke up and 

said, my gosh, they might cut off sales of potash or fibre optics or 

some other resource product like beef or hogs or timber or bacon 

into the United States. We've been saying that for three years. You 

were asleep at the switch six years ago; you were asleep in '82; 

and now you  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1498 

 

 

finally woke up and said, well my gosh, we trade with the United 

States. 

 

Most of our jobs in Canada, on the export market, are into the 

United States — $170 billion in trade. And you're telling me, on 

the one hand, we shouldn't be discussing it, and then when 

somebody does something, you wake up and say, well what are 

you going to do about it? Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be a last or a 

sorry day on Sunday when we'd turn this outfit over to that bunch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Unequal Trade Arrangements with Central Canada 

 

Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier also and dealing with trade, Mr. Premier. I believe that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan would be, and are just as 

interested to know, when we may expect honest, sincere 

negotiations with central Canada to get free trade with them; that 

we're not paying freight going both ways; and that we reduce our 

input costs in agriculture out here which deals with central 

Canada, not so much the United States. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I'm glad you raised that question. We 

have faced inequities in transportation with central Canada for 

decades. And part of the reason is that Ontario and Quebec have 

carved out really good trading relationships with the United States, 

and we were not involved. The good old NDPer, Bob White, who 

represents the auto makers' union in Ontario, has himself a free 

trade arrangement with Ontario and the United States for cars to 

go back and forth all the time, and Canadians in Ontario benefited, 

and the United States benefited. 

 

And then Bob White will come out here to western Canada and 

say that we shouldn't discuss trade with the United States. It's all 

right to prevent our lumber from going down there and our hogs 

from going down there; Intercontinental Packers can get hurt, 

potash and all the rest of it. And we've got to pay the freight both 

ways on his automobiles, or goods and services, and it's a typical 

NDP reaction. They're going to protect Ontario. 

 

We know who controls the NDP in this country, and the Ontario 

NDP control the whole nation. Well I'll tell you, they're not going 

to control Saskatchewan. We're going to get a better deal for 

freight rates, and we're going to get a better deal for western 

Canada because we're going to be at the bargaining table when it 

comes to the United States. We initiated this, and we have now got 

negotiations that are going to help Saskatchewan and not just 

Ontario. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Young Offenders' Centre in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the Minister of Social Services, 

and it deals with your department's attempt to sneak in a young 

offenders' centre in the middle of a Saskatoon residential 

neighbourhood without prior consultation with the local residents 

. . . And your  

colleagues seem to think it's a joke. 

 

But Wednesday evening in Saskatoon 100 people from the 

community there, from the Nutana constituency, didn't think it 

was a joke. They attended a public meeting and overwhelmingly 

voted against the idea of such a centre in their neighbourhood. 

They were also very critical of the fact that you attempted to hide 

this proposed development from them until after you had 

purchased property in their neighbourhood. 

 

Will the minister now admit that it was a serious mistake to try 

and proceed with the centre without having consulted with the 

local residents before he attempted to proceed. And in light of the 

views expressed by the neighbourhood at this public meeting, will 

you this time assure this Assembly that when you attempt to 

develop a centre like that that you will involve the local 

neighbourhood in your attempt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of exactly where the 

particular kinds of facilities for young people should be located in 

the province is, from any perspective, a sensitive issue and one 

that we should all be concerned about. Whether it's a group home 

for young offenders, or a group home for young people that are 

emotionally disturbed, it really doesn't make any difference. It's 

been my experience in the three years that I have been in this 

particular responsibility that regardless of what kind of group 

home for young people is going into what particular area, there is 

always going to be some degree of concern and dissatisfaction 

with regards to that particular facility. 

 

With regards to the young offenders' facility that the member has 

referred to, I would hasten to inform him that we are talking about 

young offenders here that the judge has determined would not be a 

threat to society. 

 

Nevertheless, in this particular instance, community members in 

that particular part of Saskatoon were concerned. The MLA from 

Saskatoon Nutana brought their concerns to my attention. 

Community meetings were held, I believe, on two occasions, and 

as a consequence of those particular meetings, because of the 

degree of concern that was expressed, I made the determination 

that we would not be proceeding with the facility at that particular 

site. 

 

It's important to state, Mr. Speaker, that we do need to find a 

facility in Saskatoon for the young offenders in that particular 

community. There are facilities in other urban areas of the 

province. I happen to have one right in my riding, and one 

adjoining my constituency as well. And it's important that the 

young people in Saskatoon be provided with the same services as 

others in other parts of the province. 

 

Nevertheless, we do respect the concerns of communities as they 

are brought to us, and I can give the member the assurance that we 

will be consulting with organizations and with groups in 

Saskatoon to find the most appropriate location. 

 

Mr. Engel: — You claim that your government is interested in 

consultation. Yet you attempted to hide the  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1499 

 

 

purchase of property in this residential neighbourhood from the 

local residents. Further, you refused to attend the public meetings, 

and not one — not one — of your 10 PC MLAs in Saskatoon 

attended the public meeting on Wednesday night, including the 

MLA for Saskatoon Nutana, where the centre was to be located. 

 

How do you describe that as willingness to consult, number one; 

and number two, can you give us a list, can you provide us with a 

list of how many more centres like this you intend to build, and 

what type of consultation you plan on having as to where these 

centres are going to go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I'm not sure I understand the member. Is 

he suggesting in his question that, in fact, facilities for young 

people who require to be housed in urban areas that somehow they 

should be discriminated against, and they should not be housed in 

urban areas; that they should not have access to their families; that 

they should not have access to their schools; that they should not 

have access to their local neighbourhoods and communities. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana, as I understand it, was intending to be at the meeting, but 

because of the severe windstorm was not able to be there. All 

right? 

 

The second point, Mr. Speaker, is that members from my 

department, in fact, were in consultation at that particular meeting 

and explaining the particular matters of that facility and the nature 

of the program involved. There were some people that were 

supportive; there were substantially larger numbers that were 

opposed. And because of that particular sensitivity expressed by 

the community, the decision was made to not proceed at that 

particular site. 

 

Mr. Engel: — No, to the questions that you asked me, Mr. 

Minister. And would you be so kind to answer the question that I 

asked you without giving us a long story about something else, 

and excuses for not attending a meeting. 

 

The question was simply put: how many of these centres do you 

intend to build, and will you have consultation with the people that 

you're building them at? And it's no question of where I intend to 

build them, because when we built them in the past, we had 

consultation, and we did talk with the people as to where they're 

going to go. And the only storm that was there, Mr. Minister, is 

the storm that the constituents turned up against you people 

because you don't consult. Now would you answer .  . I answer the 

questions carefully that are asked me, Mr. Speaker; will he answer 

the two questions I put to him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would just correct the member opposite 

since when they were in power the Young Offenders Act was in 

fact not in place. There never was a Young Offenders Act. It 

would have been pretty difficult for you to consult with anybody 

about the Young Offenders Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the Salvation Army here in 

Regina has been involved with the people that have had problems 

with the criminal system here, and they are going to be working 

with us to locate a particular facility here in the city of Regina. 

We're very encouraged that we have such a reputable organization 

that is working with this government to provide services for young 

offenders to ensure that those young people that we are all very 

much concerned about will be provided with appropriate housing 

and would be able to maintain contact with families and with 

schooling and so on. 

 

We have also been consulting with groups in the Prince Albert 

area for some time in an attempt to find a particular location there. 

And I have myself personally met with representatives from the 

Prince Albert area in an attempt to find the best possible location 

to provide the kinds of services — and I want to stress — the 

kinds of services that these young people very much need and 

deserve. And that's a very important point to make. And there are 

concerns on the part of communities, and rightly so. One would 

not depreciate those. 

 

On the same hand there are concerns that we must all have about 

the young people. And somehow we need to wed those two 

together to ensure that we are appropriately meeting the concerns 

of the community and at the same time meeting the concerns of 

the young people. And that is my objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

 Resignation of Member for Regina South 

 

Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day and with 

leave of the Assembly, I have an announcement that I would like 

to make, as well as a few remarks. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise in 

this legislature today for my final time to make a few remarks and 

perhaps share a few memories. At the end of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I will be announcing my resignation as the MLA for 

Regina South to assume new duties as the agent-general for 

Saskatchewan in London, England. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been eight years since I first entered this 

hallowed Chamber on my second attempt at seeking public office. 

During my business career I had achieved many successes. 

However, in 1975 I felt it was time to contribute some time and 

energy to the community and to the citizens of Saskatchewan who 

had made my life in the business world reasonably successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my friend, the member from Rosthern, has said 

previously in this legislature, it was indeed an awesome 

experience for a new member in his first appearance in the 

legislature. In 1978 it may not have been as awesome for us as it 

was for those first elected in 1975. And this, Mr. Speaker, can be 

directly attributed to the help and support that they provided to me 

when I arrived here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember the first few times I rose in question 

period to address a question to a cabinet minister. I remember well 

the lessons I learned: to know  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1500 

 

 

your facts; to know the kind of response you were likely to get 

from an experienced member; to know the answer before you 

asked a question; and to know how to react to them without 

putting your foot in your mouth. 

 

I know some hon. members will say that I did a good job of that 

on more than one occasion. And, Mr. Speaker, I did it with 

sincerity, with the interests of my constituents at heart, and with 

the best intentions of making our system of government work to 

benefit all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember well our being elected in 1982 with a 

massive mandate and formed the government. I remember with 

immense pride at being asked by the Premier to serve in cabinet. I 

remember the intense debates in the House during committee of 

the whole discussion of legislation, during committee of finance 

discussion of estimates, and during Crown Corporations 

Committee discussions, as the minister responsible for SGI, for 

Sedco, and for the Crown investments corporation. I remember, 

too, the parry and thrust of question period from my experiences 

on both sides of the House. 

 

But above all this, I remember the camaraderie of all members of 

the House, regardless of political philosophy, and a sincere desire 

of all members to work for the betterment of Saskatchewan. There 

have been many, many instances which I have witnessed in the 

House: the compassion that transcends party lines; the sincerity of 

members that lifts them above the traditional political philosophy; 

and the intense desire to serve all citizens of Saskatchewan, not 

just their own constituents. And on these occasions, Mr. Speaker, 

and on many others, I have indeed been proud to be referred to as 

a politician and a member of the legislature. Politics is an 

honourable profession, and one of which we can be proud. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there have been many more occasions 

when the decorum in the House has been less than good, when the 

orderly business of the House has been shunted aside because 

members have not acted in a courteous and respectful manner for 

the institution of government. It is at these times that I have been 

reluctant to respond to the electorate, to guests of the House, and 

particularly school children who do not have the opportunity to 

watch us day in and day out. 

 

I say this not to point fingers at members opposite, for I have been 

a member of the opposition, or at members on the government 

side who may have been less than candid in some of their answers. 

I say this because I have the utmost respect for our democratic 

form of government. There are many people in the world who 

have been willing to sacrifice their lives to defend or to attempt to 

gain our form of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should ever be mindful of the impressions we 

leave on the public who are oft-times sceptical of politicians and 

who see us as less than credible in our actions in the House. This 

does not help us attract good candidates to run for elected office or 

for encouraging the younger generation to seek a career in politics. 

Mr. Speaker, there are times for partisan politics, but there is 

always time for decorum. 

As I leave this Assembly to become our province's agent-general 

in London, I leave with mixed emotions. I look back on the good 

times and our successes. I look back on some aspects of this 

legislative process which could be improved, and we should 

always be looking for ways to improve the system. We cannot 

always rely on the traditional ways or on precedent. We should not 

use precedent as an excuse for not looking for a better way to 

conduct the business of the legislature. 

 

And as an example of this, I would refer you to the way the Crown 

Corporations Committee functions. The Crown corporation under 

review may have been audited by a private audit firm. It is then 

reviewed by the Provincial Auditor and subject to an intensive 

review by the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

In my tenure as a member of the opposition, or as a cabinet 

minister, I cannot recall anything of any serious consequence 

being discovered in the Crown Corporations Committee which 

had not been identified by the auditor. On the other hand, I cannot 

recall the Crown Corporations Committee ever taking a serious 

look at the coming year, a review of proposed rates, or the 

potential profits of that Crown. Rather than dwelling on history 

after at least one, and sometimes two, professional audits, we 

should be looking at ways to improve our review of the coming 

year for the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you. I want to thank all members and 

the staff of the Legislative Assembly for all your help in the past. 

It has been a most rewarding and enjoyable experience. And I 

would not like to leave here without saying a thank you to the 

media for their courtesies extended to me during the past eight 

years. 

 

All of us, I think, do not fully appreciate the contribution to good 

government which is made by civil servants, especially by the 

senior officials in the public service. These officials — and 

particularly those who have managed the departments, the 

agencies, and the Crown corporations for which I have been 

responsible — are dedicated, conscientious and hard-working. 

We, and the general public, too often criticize the bureaucracy 

without realizing their importance to good government. I was 

particularly fortunate in having officials in my department who are 

recognized throughout the public service as some of the best in 

government. 

 

I might add that had they chosen a career in business rather than in 

government, they would today probably be successful leaders in 

the business community. To them I say a sincere and heartfelt 

thank you for a job well done. 

 

In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make one more 

comment on the actions of some members who, in this legislature, 

attack private citizens and civil servants. These attacks are an 

abuse of the legislative immunity granted to members, because the 

individuals being attacked have no chance to defend themselves. 

They are an abuse of the immunity because the members do not 

have the integrity to make the same comments outside of the 

Chamber. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I conclude my remarks, I truly hope  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1501 

 

 

that I have made a contribution to good government, to my 

constituents, and to the citizens of Saskatchewan. I will be leaving 

the Assembly with a lot of fond memories and a good feeling that 

I know that I tried my best. 

 

I want to thank my constituents, the people of Regina South, for 

their support over the years. And I want to assure them, and my 

colleague and friend, new candidate for Regina South, the member 

for Regina North, who will be their new member after the next 

election, will represent them well. 

 

I look forward to continuing my service to the province in my new 

post in London. I hope that the next five years will be as fruitful 

and as rewarding as the last eight. Thank you for the opportunity 

to have been part of this truly fine process. Best wishes and good 

luck to you all, and God bless. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks 

I shall be moving second reading of Bill 45 — An Act to amend 

The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is designed to restore fairness and equity in 

the taxation of church properties. Mr. Speaker, for a long time 

religious organizations in this province have enjoyed municipal 

and school tax exemption on their places of worship and two acres 

of land used in connection with those places. This provision was 

considered adequate when this province was largely rural in 

nature, with small municipalities and equally smaller churches. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, many of those small churches have 

developed into very large churches, some of them with seating 

capacity for 2,000 people. Times indeed have changed. As a 

result, the current two-acre exemption for church land is no longer 

adequate to meet the needs of today's larger churches for space, 

especially space for adequate parking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present legislation has become unfair because it 

penalizes some churches for growing larger. As a result it imposes 

a disproportionate tax on large churches as compared to small 

churches. 

 

Last fall, Mr. Speaker, a number of the churches in the city of 

Saskatoon, affected by the current two-acre limitation requested 

that the province amend the urban Act to increase the amount of 

church land that could be exempted from municipal and school 

taxation. They also invited the city of Saskatoon to support their 

request. The churches and the city of Saskatoon reached a 

mutually  

agreed upon formula, and as a consequence we have the 

amendment that is before us today. 

 

And before proceeding further, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should 

simply read into the record the various church congregations that 

are affected by this particular amendment. In Prince Albert there is 

the Victory Baptist church; in Moose Jaw, there is the church of 

Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, and the Hillcrest Apostolic 

Church; in Regina, there is the 7th Avenue and Pasqua Street 

Church of Christ, and the Apostolic church of Pentecost of 

Canada. And then in Saskatoon, we have eight larger churches: the 

Apostolic Church of Pentecost of Canada, the Assembly Hall of 

Jehovah's Witness, the Westside Pentecostal Church, the Forest 

Grove Mennonite Community Church, the Episcopal Corporation 

of Saskatchewan — the Emmanuel Baptist Church, the Circle 

Drive Alliance Church, and the Elim Pentecostal Tabernacle 

Church. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the commitment of this government to local 

government reform and fairness in equity and taxation, we 

propose to act now to address this particular problem. This 

amendment will replace the current arbitrary two-acre limit on 

exempt church land with a formula that is tied to the occupied 

floor space of the place used for worship. This should allow 

churches to expand parking and other ground facilities to meet the 

needs of growing congregations. Church facilities not used for 

worship will not be considered in the calculation of the exempt 

land. Churches with places of worship too small to take advantage 

of the new formula will continue to enjoy the two-acre exemption 

on land used in connection with the place of worship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that this amendment will result 

in minimal reduction in revenues to municipalities and school 

boards. The greatest impact will be in Saskatoon, and even in that 

city only $25,000 per year is involved in this form of property tax 

exemption. However, as the city has, since 1975, abated taxes 

owed by the churches in respect of land in excess of two acres, in 

practice there will be no revenue loss in that city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, and I would urge 

all members to support this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you — the courtesy of the 

member from Regina North West who allowed me to speak. I will 

not adjourn it . . . North East, sorry. My comments, Mr. Speaker, 

are after working with the church groups and those involved in the 

Saskatoon area for the last year and a half on this piece of 

legislation, and the idea which they wished to have in some of the 

larger churches because of the amount of square footage in the 

church, and because of the laws re parking lots, have forced them 

into the situation that they have asked for this type of legislation. 

The only other way to do it, Mr. Speaker, would be to bring zero 

Bills in, or private member's Bills, for each of these churches, as 

has been the practice in some times in the past. I think this is a 

more efficient way, and the way that the people involved in the 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1502 

 

 

religious groups wish it to be done, and therefore I support it. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to first of 

all indicate that we are aware of the circumstances that have led to 

the introduction of this legislation. I do not have any initial 

concerns, as I see it, in the Bill. I would like therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, to consider the description and the outline which the 

minister has now provided to us, and then I will have something 

more to say. And for now I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of The Court of Appeal Act, 1986. The essence of the 

amendments contained in this Bill is to prevent the use of the court 

to unnecessarily delay proceedings. In many instances, Mr. 

Speaker, litigants will try to appeal to the Court of Appeal matters 

of a non-final nature simply to delay proceedings. To discharge 

this practice, the Court of Appeal has ruled in the past that 

permission of the court is required in advance before it will hear 

these matters. The amendment contained in section 4 of the Bill 

will clarify the authority for the existing practice in the court. 

 

Similarly, many litigants will appeal minor decisions of a Court of 

appeal judge on non-final interlocutory matters to the full court. 

To prevent abuse of this right of appeal, the amendment to section 

15 will permit rules of court to be made prescribing the 

circumstances in which these matters will be permitted to be 

appealed. To provide time for preparation of, and consideration of, 

the new rules of court, these amendments will come into force at a 

later date. 

 

All of the other amendments contained in this Bill relate to the 

new definition of the word "decision." Throughout the existing 

Act many different terms are used to describe the mattes that are 

being appealed to the Court of Appeal. A new definition of 

"decision," and amendments throughout the Act to utilize the new 

definition, will eliminate confusion. Mr. Speaker, these 

amendments have the support of the judges of the Court of 

Appeal. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Court of Appeal 

Act. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 

comments, and then I'll be asking to adjourn the matter for further 

consideration. 

 

The minister has detailed the purpose of the Act is to prevent 

appeals going to the Court of Appeal for the sole purpose of delay. 

I think to some extent that that makes some assumptions, as 

against the legal profession for instance, that they want to, and are 

instructing their clients, to take proceedings to the Court of appeal 

merely for the purpose of delay. And I wished the minister would 

at least have indicated whether he has conferred with the law 

society, whether it's a recommendation of the law society. At least, 

if he has done that, I think it's incumbent upon him to indicate to 

this Assembly what is the source of consultation that has taken 

place. 

Certainly one other method of controlling — as he indicated, it's 

an abuse of the process — is the awarding of costs in the 

discretion of the court. And if you bring a matter before the court 

and — unnecessarily or unfounded by the court — costs can of 

course be transmitted as against the party that brought it, in the 

opinion of the court, without justification. 

 

I want to take a look at it, and I want to talk to some of the people 

that are concerned. I certainly wish the minister would have had 

the courtesy of standing up here and indicate the extent of the 

consultation, because certainly he is in a position to be indicating 

to the House what consultation purposes have taken place — 

whether it has been with the law society; whether it has been with 

the law reform commission, if they took a look at it; whether it 

was in consultation with the justices, and certainly whether or not 

he looked at any other alternatives. Whether . . . you know, in 

putting forward this, whether he has looked at the number or the 

projected number of abuses as he is alleging requires the necessity 

of changing the Bill. 

 

These are some of the areas that I think that any informed Minister 

of Justice would have given the courtesy to the House, of 

addressing them. We can read the Bill and see what it says, that 

you have to have leave from the Court of Appeal. What we'd like 

to know is, in proposing the legislation, the process that has been 

followed. 

 

And accordingly what I'd ask, Mr. Speaker, at this time, is to 

adjourn debate in order to have further consideration of the matter. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 40 — An Act respecting the Establishment, 

Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my 

right is John Law, Deputy Minister; seated immediately behind 

Mr. Law is Judith Falle, solicitor from the Department of Justice; 

beside Ms. Falle is Doug Cressman, the assistant Deputy Minister; 

to my left is Alan Appleby, director of parks branch. There are two 

other officials at the back, Cal Kirby, manager of park planning 

and Barry Tether, director of southern field services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Koskie: — There are just a few specific areas that I want to 

touch on, Mr. Minister, in respect to the Bill. I take it the new 

legislation — and correct me if I interpret it wrong — but the 

existing Act, section 5, I am told, of the existing Act permits the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to add to a provincial park or 

protected area, the boundaries of which are established in 

schedules of the Act. Regulations made pursuant to this power 

have done more than add to, on occasion, and to that extent are 

invalid. As well, all such regulations made prior to February 26, 

'79 have been superseded by the revision and are, accordingly, 

from our review of it, also invalid. 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1503 

 

 

The specific question, Mr. Minister, that I'm asking is: is it correct 

that the new legislation re-describes the boundaries of all parks 

and protected areas and does not permit the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council to alter the boundaries set out in the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 

correct. Any changes would be done by amendment in the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Okay. And again my understanding is that the 

existing Act permits provincial parks to be classified by 

regulations. Is it correct that within the new Act it sets out the 

specific classifications and the specific parks within each 

classification. Is that the general detail that is provided within the 

purview of the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 

correct. The classification of park by type and designation is set 

out within the Act. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Further, the new Act, it seems to me, permits the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to create park land reserve, but 

only to maintain the status quo vis-a-vis the land while it is 

decided whether it should be established as a park or a protected 

area. 

 

I'm advised that an amendment to the Act would be needed to 

include land in, or designated as, a park or protected area. These 

regulations expire after five years but of course could be 

re-enacted. The point of designating land as a park land is to 

control its use and disposition, and I think that's set out in section 

14 of the Act. 

 

I think it's correct, is it not, that no person shall grant or transfer 

any park land. In other words, I take it that's the extent of section 

14, and that section 15 provides or permits the minister to make 

certain dispositions subject to the Act and regulations in that 

regard, and permits the minister to add his own terms and 

conditions. 

 

(1500) 

 

So is it correct then, generally, that there shall be no grant or 

transfer of any park land, subject only to section 15 which 

provides some exceptions there by the minister? Is that generally 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The hon. member touched on three 

different sections, Mr. Chairman. With your reference to section 5, 

you are correct in your assumption there about the park land 

reserve and having a five-year period of time for public input, 

research investigation, to see indeed if such land should be 

declared a park. 

 

Section 14: the intent is simply to say that park land cannot be 

sold. Section 15 deals with disposition of park land. It deals 

precisely with entering into agreements to lease park land or to 

grant easements and other such things on park lands. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well, come specifically to 15, I may have a few 

questions there, and maybe we can start that way. But I want just 

to get one other matter clear here, and that is in respect to a 

specific section again — if you don't mind,  

Mr. Minister, dealing with it this way — and that is section 22. 

What is the purpose of section 22? What is it purporting to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — This section is included to accommodate 

any dispositions that may have been made prior to the resources 

transfer Act of 1931 for lands which have now become park lands. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Can you tell me what that means in layman's 

language? Would you go through that again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It's merely repairing a provision that's 

already with The Provincial Lands Act, and we're aware of only a 

few dispositions that may have been done prior to 1931, at which 

time transfer of land was made from federal to provincial 

jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I don't know if that helps or not. I'll come back to 

it as we go through the sections. 

 

Also I want a general comment. Section 26 permits the minister to 

determine the boundaries of various zones within a park, and The 

Regulations Act is expressed not to apply to the order describing 

the boundaries. It is perhaps not necessary for such orders to be 

filed with the registrar of regulations, but the other result is that 

they will not have to be published anywhere, as 26 has so set forth. 

 

And I'm wondering whether it might not in fact be desirable to 

direct that it be published, say in part 1 of the Gazette, so that the 

public will have a knowledge of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that this is a 

management tool, park management tool, as opposed to a form of 

regulatory activity which, indeed, will be contained within park 

management strategies which, of course, are available and will be 

made available to the public. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Is it published anywhere? What I'm asking is 

whether or not it's going to be published in the Gazette. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There was no intent to publish it in the 

Gazette, but it would be made available to the public. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In what form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — In the form of park managing strategies 

which already exist and which we make available to the public 

interested in any particular park. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — What are the ways that you use at the present time 

in informing the public? You said you used the ordinary methods 

of informing them. What are those methods that the public will be 

so advised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, when any change has been 

made in zoning, there has been a press release accompanying it, 

explaining what the intent is, plus stating that copies of the 

departmental strategy are available to members and interested 

public. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1504 

 

 

Clause 27 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I believe there is an amendment to clause 27. 

Clause 27 is to read: 

 

Amend section 27 of the printed Bill by striking out "and" after 

clause (n). 

 

Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 28 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 32 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Clause 32, there's an amendment. Section 32 

of the printed Bill. 

 

Amend section 32(2) of the printed Bill by striking out "the" in 

the second last line and substituting "and". 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, just in respect to clause 32, I take it that it 

limits the power of arrest without warrant, only to a situation in 

which a person who is ordered out of the park refuses to go. How 

does that section compare with the existing section 24 of the 

existing Act? Is it narrowed down or is it broadened or is it the 

same? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I found a provision under the old Act for 

the hon. member. Under the previous Act, if someone were to be 

barred from the park or asked to leave the park and came back in 

within the 48-hour period, the enforcement officer would have no 

power of arrest. In this case this is the only instance where 

enforcement officers may arrest park users, and that substantially 

is a change from the old Act to this particular provision. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Okay, this is a departure from what was there 

before. What evidence have you to require that expansion of 

powers to the enforcement officer? Were you having a series of 

problems where people were being ordered out of the park and 

were refusing? What necessitated the sweeping powers handed 

over to the enforcing officer? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I found some 

information for the member. "Failure to comply with a directive of 

an officer" accounted for almost 13 per cent of the number of 

offences under The Parks Act; and "unlawfully failed to comply 

with an order of an officer to leave a park" accounted for about 

21.5 per cent. In those instances the RCMP were called to enforce 

those particular provisions. The RCMP were supportive of the 

change which is being proposed within this Bill to allow the 

enforcement officer power of arrest under that circumstance, but 

only under that circumstance whereby the offender has refused to 

leave the park, or indeed forces his or her way back into the park. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The enforcement officers — what type of training 

have they in order to transfer this power over to them? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the training of the officers 

is a two-year Renewable Resources course offered through the 

technical institutes. A part of the course does relate to enforcement 

which is taught in Regina at the RCMP barracks by their own 

instructors. 

 

I'd like to point out to the hon. member that this particular 

provision doesn't mean that we expect our officers to be somehow 

quasi-policemen. The intent is not to make them RCMP officers or 

police officers. It's to give them the authority, when rowdyism or 

some such instance breaks out in the park, to ban from the park for 

a period of 48 hours a particular offender. If the offender chooses 

not to leave, or comes back in within a 48-hour period, they have 

the authority to arrest. 

 

I hasten to point out that should the officers be placed at any 

physical risk whatsoever, or even the hint of physical risk, they are 

to call the RCMP. I don't expect officers to use force. 

 

Clause 32 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to section 34, I take it it allows the 

convicting judge to order restitution for damage to property and 

also to order a person to stay out of all or any parks for a specified 

period of a maximum duration of one year, if I'm correct in 

reading that. I guess the question is, is that what it purports to do? 

And secondly, is this a new provision, or was it a similar provision 

in the previous Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, the first part is correct. The hon. 

member is correct. Under the second part, previously restitution 

could only be ordered where a charge for wilful damage under the 

provisions of the Criminal Code had been laid by a police officer. 

Now, if wilful damage is proven in court and it came to court 

under the jurisdiction of one of our officers, restitution can be 

ordered by the magistrate. 

 

Clause 34 agreed to. 

 

Clause 35 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you. 

 

An Hon. Member: —- You need a light. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well you're not lit up, I'll tell you that. And I'm 

referring to the chirping of the member of Moosomin, the member 

that no longer is going to run. There may be reasons why he's not 

running. His contribution to this House is very limited. I wonder, 

Mr. Chairman, do I have the floor or does the member . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Can we please have some 

relative calm and quiet in the House so that the member from 

Quill Lakes can carry on with his question. 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1505 

 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We 

were going along very well until the rude interruptions of the 

member of Moosomin. 

 

And I want to ask, Mr. Minister, in respect to section 35 here. The 

section reads that: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations 

respecting any matter or thing necessary to carry out the 

provisions of this Act. 

 

Now that is about the broadest provision that I have ever seen in 

the history of any legislation in the 10 years that I've been in the 

legislature. And what I'm wondering . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And the Deputy Premier is chirping, too. So they're hurting 

very badly because the minister . . . I am pointing out some of the 

weaknesses of his legislation and the care that should be taken. 

 

But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, certainly I think that very, 

very broad provisions for providing the right to make regulations 

is certainly not welcomes in any form of legislation, and primarily 

because it can lead to abuses. And I'm not alleging that there 

would be abuses. But generally speaking, let's face it, when the 

power to make regulations, it's certainly not in a general provision 

similar to 35. 

 

You should have set down some of the areas in which . . . and 

normally that's all listed as to the areas that you can make 

regulations. I draw that to your attention, and I ask you for a 

justification for such a wild and woolly departure from the norm. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'm not sure it's a wild and woolly 

departure. I'm advised that this, in fact, is fairly general in drafting. 

I yield to the superior experience of the member for Quill Lakes. 

He has been around the Assembly a considerably longer period of 

time than I have, but I'd like to point out to him that this section is 

intended as a catch-all, only if something has been missed in the 

drafting. 

 

But — but I hasten to point out to the hon. member, if we cast 

back to section 27, that is a regulatory-making section of the Bill, 

and this particular section, 35, does not supersede section 27. So 

section 35 is meant to pick up something which may arise in the 

course of implementation during the coming years that we may 

have missed, so that we have the authority to address a problem 

that may not have been contemplated in the drafting. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I'm not going to debate it with the member, only 

to say that I happen to be the chairman of the regulations 

committee, and one of the areas that we're constantly looking at is 

whether or not there is specific powers for the particular 

regulations. 

 

And one of the things that has been brought to our attention in that 

committee is, in fact, that the general powers to make regulations 

should be spelled out, and this is very convenient if in case we 

miss something. Now isn't that nice for the public to know, that 

anything that you deem you want to make regulations towards, 

you have that power. 

Well I'll tell you that the public is not very, very happy with broad, 

sweeping powers just for the convenience of the minister. I would 

think that you should think of the convenience of the public and, 

therefore, spell out what areas that you have the power to make 

regulations, rather than this wide and broad sweeping powers for 

your convenience, just in case you have missed something. That's 

what you've said. You're not concerned with the public; you're 

concerned with your own convenience, and that's the concern that 

we have with it. 

 

And I'll tell you, in the regulations committee, the solicitor that we 

have for the regulations committee constantly is indicating that 

there should not be such a broad and sweeping provision. I want to 

draw that to your attention. And I would think that you should take 

that under advisement and to put in an amendment. In fact, you 

should repeal that whole section because it could lead to an abuse. 

I'm not alleging it would, but certainly the potential is there 

because it says that you can make regulations for . . . Well I'll read 

it so the public will be aware of the viciousness of the extent of the 

potential this here Act, section 35, and it reads: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations 

respecting any matter or thing necessary to carry out the 

provisions of this Act. 

 

So absolutely anything . . . And as you said, it's solely for the 

convenience of you, just in case you missed something. And I 

suppose, just in case you have missed something, I think that's 

what we should consider. Time should be spent on the legislation 

to make it as complete as possible, and then if you need some 

further powers, you bring it back as an amendment to add to those 

powers, but then there is some legislative control. But if you put in 

. . . You can make regulations to cover anything that you wish for 

the purpose of this Act, then that's a broad brush that you give 

yourself, and a very difficult, very poor type of legislation because 

it's not protective of the public as you would lead us to believe. 

 

So I raise that. I'd ask the minister to consider getting rid of this 

. . . repealing that vicious, wide-sweeping power of regulations 

that you have in this section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

respond to the hon. member's remarks. I can see where, taken in 

isolation, this clause may pose a problem, but the clause cannot be 

taken in isolation because it's tied in to the rest of the Bill. 

 

First of all, it is not there for my particular convenience; it is there 

for protection of the public. Because if we do miss something 

which arises later, we need a regulation to cover that particular 

happenstance. 

 

Secondly, this is common to many, many pieces of legislation 

whereby it's written in that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

may make regulations respecting any matter or thing necessary to 

carry out the provisions of the Act. And it is a necessary clause, 

and it's not there for any spurious or devious reasons, and I can 

give every assurance to the hon. member it would not have been 

included had it not been deemed necessary and, indeed,  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1506 

 

 

common practice in drafting legislation. 

 

Clause 35 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 36 to 38 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedule agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

(1530) 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Parks Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to this particular Bill, Bill 44, this is 

The Parks Consequential Amendment Act, and I take it each and 

every provision here is as a result of the previous Bill, and what 

are consequential of the previous Bill that we just dealt with. I just 

want to ask the minister, if that is indeed accurate, as that's my 

understanding of it, and is there any particular substantive change 

to any of the Acts in this here Bill, The Parks Consequential 

Amendment Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I am advised that there are no changes 

which were not consequential to the provisions of this Act and to 

the safe passage and administration of this piece of legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Koskie: — There is a chirper in the House. He's interfering 

with the proceedings — the member from Meadow Lake. I 

thought I had the chair, Mr. Chairman, or the floor rather. I would 

therefore ask you to keep a little order in the House, because that 

large, huge members of the government side tend to try to be 

obstructive. 

 

And I'd ask the member from Meadow Lake to enter the debate or 

else allow me to have the floor. Because his chirping goes on. And 

it's the same with the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake — is 

constantly chattering. He thinks it's very funny. 

 

In respect to the amendment to The Wildlife Act, looking at 

section 18 being amended, I take it, Mr. Minister, the present 

section 18 provides for a one-year disqualification period after 

conviction for any contravention of the Act or regulations — 

one-year disqualification, if you keep that in mind — for any 

conviction or contravention of the Act or regulations, except 

section 37, hunting with lights, in which case the disqualification 

period is three years. 

The situation re section 37 remains the same, I take it. But in 

addition, the disqualification period, after conviction for 

contravention of section 41, traffic in wildlife, is now five years; 

and for contravention of clause 28(1)(a), hunting in contravention 

of prescribed time, place, or manner; or section 31, possession of 

illegally taken wildlife, is one year or two years or three years, in 

the discretion of the convicting judge. 

 

It seems to me that it provides here that this discretion is also 

given to the convicting judge re the contravention of any 

provisions of the regulations that is prescribed in the regulations; 

and further, that a contravention of any other unspecified provision 

of the Act or regulation still results in a disqualification period of 

one year. 

 

That is the legal summary of the section 18. I just ask if that 

represents a fair and accurate representation of what is set out here 

in comparison to what we had before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is quite 

correct. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, in respect to the amendments to section 57, 

subsection (1.1) I take it is added here to . . . basically is it to single 

out contraventions of clause 28(1)(a), section 31, and those 

provisions of the regulations that are prescribed in the regulations 

to deal with them more harshly by providing for the imposition of 

a higher maximum fine? 

 

It seems to me it is still, by this provision, it is still up to the 

convicting judge to assess the amount of the fine, but he can, if he 

wishes now, impose a significantly greater fine — $5,000 rather 

than the $1,000. 

 

Again, is that reasonably accurate of what is being set out there in 

the section 57, clause (1.1)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That's correct, Mr. Chairman. The hon. 

member is right. We're giving more leeway and more 

discretionary power to the presiding judge. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to subsection (3) there, it says: 

 

Any person who violates section 41 is guilty of an offence and 

liable on summary conviction to a fine of not less than $1,000 

and not more than $25,000 or to imprisonment for a period of 

not more than two years less a day, or both. 

 

I take it that this is a new provision, and it's a very substantial one. 

I was wondering whether you have any precedents for such a wide 

range of fine . . . I'm not being critical of it being there; I'm just 

asking whether you have done any research into having such a 

wide range. It's a fine of not less than 1,000 and not more than 

25,000. Can you think of the circumstances of particular offence 

that leaves such a wide variation there of fine, from 1,000 all the 

way to 25,000? You may have a precedent from other  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1507 

 

 

legislation, or you may have a particular reason for it, but I'd like 

to hear it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there are reasons for 

it. By way of background, I'll point out that in Alberta — not yet 

proclaimed; a provincial election intervened — they're are moving 

to a maximum fine of $100,000 for this particular offence, which 

is trafficking in wildlife. 

 

Canada, under a new parks Act, also not yet proclaimed but which 

is in the works, they are moving to a maximum of $150,000 for 

the same offence, and also providing for a jail term. I have the 

penalties for various other provinces in Canada. They are all 

substantially higher than ours are at the present. Trafficking is the 

illegal sale of wildlife parts taken from Saskatchewan primarily to 

markets in the southern United States. 

 

The reason for such a high fine is to act as a deterrent. The 

previous fine of $1,000, Mr. Chairman, could be deemed as just a 

built-in operating business expense for certain trafficking rings. 

We have evidence, and we have cases currently before the courts, 

of individuals who have taken substantial amounts of 

Saskatchewan wildlife out of this province and made huge profits. 

 

We know of one particular individual who in a three-four-day 

span last year took approximately $60,000 worth of wildlife parts 

— black market $60,000 value — to the United States. He had 

been convicted of offences in the States and made enough money 

in Saskatchewan in a three-day period to go back and pay all his 

fines and buy his vehicles and guns back. 

 

So we have had a significant trafficking problem in the last few 

years, and we hope, by raising the fines and by giving the judge 

the discretion also to impose a jail sentence, that we will somehow 

manage to deter would-be traffickers from coming in and raping 

and pillaging the wildlife of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you for that particular information. What I 

was wondering . . . You say that other provinces and other 

jurisdictions have, in fact, or are addressing this; and indeed 

Alberta, but superseded by an election — an election by the way 

which I may say was very gratifying to us. 

 

I want to ask you whether there was any attempt made, at least 

with western Canada, to come to some uniformity in respect to the 

imposition of fines. It seems to me that where there's an 

opportunity, that one might in fact look at that. You have seen the 

variations as you have indicated. I was wondering whether there 

was any mechanism, or whether you pursued the possibility of 

getting some continuity of the legislation from province to 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That's a good suggestion the hon. member 

has made. In fact, ministers who have wildlife responsibilities in 

Canada have discussed this particular item. The one difficulty I 

point out to the hon. member is that we do have different species 

across western Canada. So bighorn sheep, for instance, in Alberta, 

which would be one of their serious problems, really isn't a 

problem for  

us. Ours is white-tail deer, and to a lesser extent now, bear. We've 

got a population of 40,000 bear in Saskatchewan, and certain 

people in the United States are just starting to discover that, and 

they're moving up here and illegally taking bear. 

 

So although the suggestion is a good one, it has been discussed. 

The crime has a different type of severity, depending on the 

species of wildlife indigenous to the different provinces. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, on clause 4, when you talk about 

wildlife parts, and I would imagine you're talking about horns, and 

some of that has been happening by going across the border — 

how are you going to make people aware that this is an offence? I 

know there are some that maybe have a licence to do a little bit of 

hunting and they maybe get an animal that has a fair rack on him. 

They may have use for it; they may not. How do you tell them that 

this is an offence? If they have those horns that they cannot 

dispose of them, what do they do with them? Could they sell them 

to someone? Do they have to apply for the permit? Is there a way 

that they can deal with those horns? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We will be advertising this in a game 

synopsis of which there will be some 200,000 copies available to 

the public. We also have certain provisions that are in the hunting 

guide that comes out every year. I'd like to point out to the hon. 

member, there is a legal mechanism by which a hunter who has 

legally taken a white-tail deer, a moose, whatever, can dispose of 

the horns, the antlers, the rack, by getting a permit, free of charge, 

from a conservation officer. We'd just like to know what the 

disposition is of the rack, and that way we can keep some kind of 

track. We know where it's going. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — You're saying that they could sell that rack, or 

just give it away — which? Could they do either? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, they can sell that track. It's their 

possession; they took it legally; it belongs to them; they can sell it 

legally. 

 

One point I should make for the hon. member. This legislation is 

by no means aimed at the honest sportsman or sportswoman out 

there in hunting season with a licence pursuing their hobby. By no 

means. This is there to protect both them and the future of wildlife, 

so that we will always have a abundant supply of game. Frankly, 

sir, this is aimed at crooks, and only crooks have something to 

fear. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the new section 58, I take it that the 

new provision is really the one permitting the judge to order that a 

vehicle used in connection with the commission of the offence 

against section 41 be forfeited to the Crown. I take it that's the 

essence of the new provision in that section 58. Is that correct? 

Was it in the previous section? Was there power permitting the 

judge to order that a vehicle used in connection with the 

commission of offence against section 44 be forfeited?  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1508 

 

 

Was that present previously? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — An offence for night hunting, at the 

judge's discretion, he could — she could — impound a vehicle for 

60 days. This particular clause would give a magistrate, the judge, 

discretion to impound a vehicle or to declare that the vehicle is 

forfeited. That did not exist before and, under that section, that is 

for trafficking. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I'm pleased to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. 

Rick Kilarsky, municipal finance branch of Urban Affairs. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

the amendment here is straightforward, so I don't think I have 

many questions on the nature of the amendment from the legal 

point of view. 

 

I do want to, once again, make the comment which I have made 

before. I simply want to state that the problem with this 

amendment is that it highlights a situation which I think 

municipalities are concerned about, rightfully so, and that is that 

they have no longer any way of knowing from year to year what 

kind of funding they're going to be able to expect from their 

provincial government. 

 

And if you are a minister, as you are, in charge of a department, 

and if you don't know what your budget or what your financing is 

going to be in order that you can look ahead, it would provide you 

with some difficulties. In the same way, and in fact in a greater 

way, municipalities, because your government has now adopted 

the tin-cup approach, and the municipalities have to come every 

year and say: here's what our problems are, how much are you 

going to give us; and then wait for a budget which then announces 

it, and then wait for the budget debate to be finished and whatever 

processes that come with that, to get their money. I think it makes 

their life a lot more difficult. so we object in principle to the fact 

that revenue sharing, as municipalities once knew it, no longer 

exists. 

 

We also are concerned about the nature of the increase that's 

provided in the budget and again in this amendment, which is 3 

per cent — 3 per cent, particularly in light of the fact that last year 

there was no increase at all, that the revenue sharing from 

municipalities was frozen. When you consider that inflation, if it 

was 4 per cent in 1984 and 4 per cent in 1985 . . . or let me move 

up a couple years — 4 per cent in  

1985 and 5 per cent in 1986, which I think is where it is heading, 

that's 9 per cent inflation over a two-year period, but the increase 

in revenue sharing is only 3 per cent. 

 

That's one of the reasons why taxes have been going up on 

property. I will want to talk to the Minister of Education, 

whenever we get into estimates, about what's happened to property 

taxes for education. And when you add all of those up, there has 

been a lot of money that's been taken out of property owners' 

pockets, families who are trying to raise children, which has gone 

to pay for municipal services and education services because the 

government's proportion has actually been decreasing. 

 

In light of this concern which I have outlined, Mr. Minister, I think 

it's important that municipalities get some idea about when they 

will have an escalator formula in revenue sharing, and then again a 

distribution formula, because this amendment refers to the fact in 

your explanatory notes that there is no escalator index because you 

claim it cannot be calculated. I have indicated before that I would 

argue with you on that, but the fact that there is no escalator 

creates a problem. 

 

And you indicated in your estimates, Mr. Minster, that you were 

consulting with Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

on providing an escalator formula. Are you in a position to 

indicate what progress has been made so that maybe hopefully in 

the next year, in the next budget, there can be a different 

amendment to this Act which would put more certainty in it? Has 

there been any progress in the negotiations for the escalator 

formula? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I can't give the member the 

specific detail. I can say that this very day I met with SUMA — 

and my officials were meeting — this morning. I believe they are 

meeting this afternoon, and they are in fact dealing with this 

particular issue of revenue sharing. For the future, things such as 

the escalator formula and distribution matters and so on, are 

presently being discussed. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am glad to hear that, and I hope that those 

negotiations go better than the one previous. Because I know that 

there were meetings prior to this budget and this Bill and this 

amendment, in which it was said, we're negotiating with SUMA 

and municipalities and we'll have a formula. But it hasn't 

happened. I can only hope that it will this time happen. 

 

Can you tell me this: do you have a mechanism, a consulting 

mechanism in place, where you know you're starting at point A? 

Like, you've had some meetings today and they're continuing 

today. Is there a mechanism in place where it will at a certain point 

in time result in a conclusion? Or are you just playing it in an ad 

hoc way with these negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we continue to meet with SUMA. 

These are not ad hoc negotiations. They are very important and 

serious and appropriate kinds of discussions and consultations. We 

naturally expect that this discussion process will ensue, at some 

point in time in the future, in some particular kind of a formula 

which  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1509 

 

 

will be satisfactory to everybody. Naturally one is not able at this 

point this afternoon to project a particular date at which time that 

particular formula would be made public. But naturally we expect 

that that will come in due course. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can accept that you can't say, we're having 

negotiations and it's going to conclude on July 31st of 1986. But I 

think the public and the municipalities and the opposition, even 

your members, have a right to know whether or not it is the 

intention of the government to have a formula in place prior to the 

next budget. That's really what I'm trying to get at, because I think 

that is important. 

 

Is that the intention of the government, to have both an escalator 

formula and a distribution formula in place prior to the next 

budget? And then we can debate whether it's an adequate formula 

or not. But at least people out there who are relying on some form 

of provincial funding would know what to expect. Can you give 

me that commitment on behalf of the government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That is my hope, that indeed that formula will 

be in place. Is that clear enough? I was responding to your 

question. It's my hope that that will be in place before the next 

budget cycle. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I suppose maybe the election might 

have something to do with that, but we don't want to get into a 

discussion on that one right now. 

 

A lot of hopes, Mr. Minister, a lot of hopes come crashing down. I 

know you say it's your personal hope. Is that the intention of the 

government — you, as a member of the cabinet — is that the 

intention of the government that it in fact be in place? If it is, and 

if you can tell me that, then I will be satisfied. 

 

I'm not happy with what's happened; I'm not happy with the 3 per 

cent; I'm not happy with the fact that it's being applied to 

everybody. Because there should have been, in my view, some 

provision in the escalator where it recognized particular 

difficulties that some municipalities face. You have chosen not to 

do that. I simply want to put on the record that in the view of the 

opposition, that's unacceptable. We could debate that, but we have 

had that debate. I really think it's unacceptable; I think it's unfair. 

There could have been a better method developed. 

 

But I simply ask again my question: is that the intention of your 

government, Mr. Minister, that there be a formula in place and that 

is the intention of your negotiations prior to the next budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, it is our intention to have that kind of a 

formula in place prior to the next budget. 

 

I'm not surprised, of course, to hear the opposition say that they 

are not pleased or not supportive. Rarely these days does one hear 

an opposition anywhere saying that they are supportive or 

encouraged or pleased with any particular initiative taken by any 

government. So that is not surprising in and of itself. 

But I would simply remind the members of the Assembly here this 

afternoon, and to the public, that over the last few years since this 

government has been in power that there were revenue-sharing 

increases in the order of 11.5 per cent and 7 per cent and 5 per cent 

and this year, 3 per cent — a significant sum in terms of increases 

in dollars for urban municipalities here in the province. 

 

I know that the members opposite would like to see more. I 

naturally would like to see more if that were possible. I'm sure 

everybody in the province would like to see more money being 

made available to them for various kinds of purposes, whether 

they be organizational purposes or personal purposes. 

 

Nevertheless, I think that we have been able to provide a 

reasonable and a fair amount of assistance to urban municipalities, 

and I'm pleased that we have the amendment to The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act today which does provide our urban 

municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan with the 3 per cent 

increase. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I acknowledged that there has been an 

11.5 per cent increase. I think that was provided in the last budget 

that the New Democratic party was the government in 1982, and I 

acknowledge that there was a 7 per cent increase and a 5 per cent, 

but you forgot to refer to the last year in which there was a zero 

per cent increase, Mr. Minister, and this year it's now at 3 per cent. 

 

And it's not a question of somebody would just want more. The 

fact is that people who are affected by the policy decisions of any 

government have an interest in those policy decisions, and your 

decisions in your financial management and in policy has caused 

property taxes to increase very significantly, not only on the mill 

rate which has got property taxes that people actually have to pay 

go up significantly, but also in the fact that you removed the 

property improvement grant which was a very substantial increase 

in the property tax. And every day I have people tell me, when I'm 

around my constituency, that with them that's one of the biggest 

issues that they face — the removal of property tax relief. 

 

Now the member from Weyburn laughs. Well maybe with his 

income as a veterinarian he probably was very successful, and his 

income as a cabinet minister, the property . . . Mr. Chairman, now 

that I have the attention of the House and the member from 

Weyburn is quiet again, I will continue. 

 

Now the member from Weyburn with his cabinet minister salary 

may not be concerned about a $230 property tax rebate, but I can 

tell you that the average home owner in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Chairman, found that to be a very significant relief in property 

taxes. And I agree with them, and so does the New Democratic 

Party and our caucus agree with them. That's why it is our 

commitment as a party, when there is an election, and if the people 

decided that there should be a New Democratic government, one 

of the things that they can be assured of is that they will have once 

again property tax relief, because it is our view that the burden of 

property taxes has got to be just too great. 

 

(1600) 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1510 

 

 

There is nothing completely fair about the idea of property taxes 

because, Mr. Chairman, if you owned a home, at your income as 

an MLA, and your neighbour who may also own a home, who 

may be earning $10,000 a year less, there is no provision in the 

property taxes that says you're going to have to pay more property 

taxes and that family will have to pay less. In some ways it is a 

regressive tax. It's necessary, it's true, because it's one source of 

revenues for municipalities and for school boards. But one of the 

things that also is necessary is having some relief to property 

owners. That's gone. 

 

And if the New Democratic Party forms a government it will be 

reinstituted, and even you, Mr. Chairman, will qualify. And so you 

should, because people should not be discriminated on the basis of 

who they are or whether they're wealthy or whether they're not 

wealthy. And that's the point I want to make. A 3 per cent increase 

in revenue sharing, when you consider the fact that it was zero per 

cent last year, is really an insignificant increase. It does not even 

meet the cost of inflation. 

 

That's all I have to say on that. I'm prepared to let the Bill go by. 

The minister has given me the one commitment which I really 

wanted to get today. And that is the commitment that this 

government, if by some chance it happens to be the government 

after the election .  . There are an awful lot of people who are 

doubting that these days, but if by chance that happens, that there 

will be before the next budget — I have a commitment from the 

minister on behalf of the government — both an escalator and a 

distribution formula. And I will be waiting for the day to see when 

it is announced. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — An Act respecting the Establishment, 

Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move first and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 41 — An Act 

respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax Credits be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In respect to Bill 41, I 

want to add a few comments in respect to it. Certainly it's a type of 

legislation, which the minister alluded to, of providing some tax 

exemptions where people invest in stocks on the stock exchange. 

And I think the question which we have to ask is: to what extent is 

this meaningful to the people of Saskatchewan? How many people 

in Saskatchewan are actively buying stocks on the stock 

exchange? And I think, if you look at it, you will find that it 

doesn't stretch across a very significant number of the population. 

 

So what we're saying here is that again what we have is not a very 

meaningful type of legislation in that it does not include or allow 

for the full participation of people in society. What this is directed 

to again is to those with money and those few that have some 

expertise to deal in the stock exchange. 

 

Certainly . . . The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake laughs. 

But we are concerned in that what you have done with respect to 

Saskoil, in the selling off of Saskoil and privatizing a portion of it, 

it again was restricted to those who have the money to lose, risk in 

the stock in a very risky business in the stock exchange, and it also 

is a relatively few people who will participate. And we would 

have thought that you have to start asking yourself: how is this 

party opposite running this province? 

 

We find here a total massive deficit of $2 billion. And at the same 

time what they're doing here is to offer further concessions of 

income to the treasury. And who are they offering the concessions 

to? It's to those who can afford to take a risk and lose money on 

the stock exchange. That's what they are encouraging here as an 

income tax benefit. 

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1511 

 

 

I want to say that certainly provisions which would be broader 

based, which would indeed give to those in lower income an 

opportunity too . . . There seems to be an assumption that only if 

you have a significant amount of money, a certain sophistication 

to deal with the stock exchange, do you get the benefit. 

 

I think that it's time that the government came to grips with the 

dilemma that they have created here in the province, and that is the 

magnitude of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well their basic 

economic policy has been floundering and flopping, and it has 

brought Saskatchewan into a position which few could believe 

would have happened four years ago. And they continue with 

these types of proposals, Mr. Speaker, of giving income tax 

concessions to a very few restricted numbers in society who are 

likely to participate in the investment in the stocks. 

 

What we are doing here is communicating with the business 

community. I know, in talking to many of the business community 

in my area, one of the things that they're saying is: let business 

proceed where it's economic to do it. When we start putting in 

government grants to various businesses, they're saying that it 

skews the operation. And in fact they would rather see if an 

enterprise is going to go — that you don't have to have built-in 

government incentives. That's what many of the small-business 

men are saying. We are analysing with the business community 

the impact of some of the measures of this government as to the 

basic effect and whether they indeed welcome it. 

 

The minister comes forward with a figure of, I believe, something 

like 75 to $100 million being generated through this method. Well 

certainly we do not criticize the minister for attempting to get 

some economic development going, because certainly 

Saskatchewan needs economic development. But all I can say is 

that they have floundered around. And by this time the people of 

Saskatchewan, after watching the dismal fiscal management and 

the economic development of this province, many people are not 

convinced that they know where they are going or that their 

particular methods of getting there are of advantage to the general 

economy. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, we want to communicate with the business 

community on this essential Bill. What I'm going to ask, in light of 

the fact that we are carrying this out — it's an important piece of 

legislation. And certainly if the business community feel that it's 

conducive to the further development of Saskatchewan, and will 

be of benefit to new companies being formulated, and a new 

source of revenue, then of course we would not be opposing that 

legislation. 

 

But we are in the process, as I say, of discussing this with the 

business community. And as . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: —- With Larry Brown. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The member from Duck Lake is throwing snide 

remarks again. When I say we're discussing with the business 

community, he snidely says, oh it's with Larry Brown. I don't 

know why the minister from Duck Lake can't sit and get into the 

debate rather than throwing  

snide remarks. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, we are, as a caucus, 

discussing this matter seriously with the business community, for 

the information of the minister of Duck Lake, P.A. - Duck Lake. 

 

Accordingly, we want further time to review this matter, to discuss 

it, and accordingly I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1615) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 28 — An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to be able to get into this debate on what I think is an 

important Bill with some rather important implications, as was 

indicated by the member from Elphinstone, not only from what is 

in it, but also from the point of view of what is not in it. 

 

The Bill that we have before us today amends the same Education 

and Health Tax Act, the legislation which has provisions in it to 

charge the sales tax for used cars — or used vehicles, not just cars, 

because the range is very broad — and I think that that is 

significant. And we're talking here about taxation, and no matter 

what form of taxation it is, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers have to pay. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government's tough tax on old cars, the 

resale of old cars, is what I think, in my view and in the view of a 

lot of people, a major betrayal of the Tories' promise to the people 

of Saskatchewan. This amendment that we see before us is an 

attempt — although it does provide some benefit, and I would not 

argue with that, and that's why I can agree with the amendment. 

 

But this amendment, Mr. Speaker, the objectionable thing about it 

is the motives of this government in bringing it in. And the history 

and the record of the actions of this government from the point of 

view of taxation only could lead to the conclusion in the minds of 

the general public that it cares very little about their interests when 

it comes to the amount of taxes that they have to pay and the kind 

of value they get for the dollar of the tax that they pay. And so the 

purpose of this amendment is simply to try to recoup some of the 

political loss that this government has suffered by the introduction 

of the sales tax on used cars. 

 

Now it's not unimportant, Mr. Speaker, it is not unimportant that 

this government, this Conservative government and every 

Conservative candidate campaigned in the last election on the 

promise of tax cuts. And specifically they promised — every 

single Tory candidate promised — that they would eliminate the 

provincial sales tax in their first term of office. 

 

Well now we see here a situation where this government is beyond 

their first term of office. They now find themselves in the fifth 

year of their government. They have expended and extended their 

mandate to govern,  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1512 

 

 

and yet they hang on in the hope that, by bringing certain little 

measures there, they can convince enough of the disillusioned 

electorate who have forsaken them to come back and re-elect them 

for one more term. 

 

Now the member from Lloydminster-Cut Knife the other day, Mr. 

Speaker — and I don't think you were in the Chair at that time — 

but he stood up in defence of this Bill and he made a long speech 

on a lot of subjects. And one of the things that the member from 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster tried to do was he tried to disassociate 

himself from the Conservative Party and its commitments. It was 

kind of humorous, and it could have been humorous and it could 

have been funny except for the fact that an awful lot of people 

have been hurt by the actions that we have seen happen in 

Saskatchewan for almost five years now. 

 

The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd stood in the House and he 

argued that he had absolutely nothing to do with the promise to 

eliminate the sales tax. Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that my 

colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, when he spoke, very 

eloquently and very clearly showed that indeed every candidate 

who ran for the Conservative Party did indeed make the promise 

to eliminate the sales tax. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you run as a Conservative, then you stand 

for the things that the Conservative Party stands for. If you run as 

a New Democrat, you stand for the things that the New 

Democratic Party stands for. 

 

Now the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

tried to dissociate himself from that promise. Well once, and I 

forget how it is, somebody made a comment that I remember 

hearing very clearly, and it sort of reminds me about it every once 

in a while when I hear members like that, who talk the way they 

do. And it was a comment went something like this: if you walk 

like a duck and you talk like a duck and you look like a duck, 

you're a duck. 

 

Well I simply say, Mr. Speaker, if you talk like a conservative and 

you run as a conservative candidate, you're a conservative. So for 

the member to dissociate himself now, when he knows that the 

electorate of Saskatchewan have decided that they can't trust these 

people any more for another term of government . . . They try to 

say, oh but we weren't part of that. 

 

Well I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, they were. Now many of them 

no doubt were sincere about it, because they were new and they 

did not know the process. And the members who were in the 

House for several years gave them information which they took at 

face value, which turned out to be inaccurate information. But that 

was the policy. 

 

And so I say to the House, Mr. Speaker, the facts cannot be 

denied. Conservatives promised to eliminate provincial sales tax in 

their first term of office. But have they reduced it? I say to you, no. 

Have they kept their promise? I say to you, no. 

 

There's a provision here to take away the sales tax on  

clothing, and that's good. But it doesn't come close to what the 

commitment was. They have not honoured their commitment to 

eliminate the sales tax at all. As a matter of fact, for a while they 

increased and extended that sales tax as it applied to used cars. 

 

Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, for the record, that in 1982 it was 

a New Democratic Party government — and these people have 

tried to take credit for — but it was a New Democratic Party 

government, prior to the election of 1982, which eliminated the 

sales tax on children's clothing. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that that 

action was taken. 

 

Now I have heard members opposite go around making arguments 

that the Conservative government eliminated the tax on children's 

clothing. Well I have here a copy of the budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker, March 18, 1982. My name happens to be on it, and let 

me read to you what that budget speech said, Mr. Speaker. It says 

on page 42 of that budget speech, as I announced earlier: 

 

We will provide assistance to families with small children by 

eliminating the education and health tax on children's clothing 

and footwear. The exemption will cover children aged 14 and 

under and will save Saskatchewan families over $3 million in 

1982. 

 

That referred to the sales tax which is part of this legislation which 

we are amending here today, Mr. Speaker — or we're talking 

about amending here today. And it is really not hard to understand 

why the general public is concerned about what this government 

says, because they know, too many times what they say is not the 

honest truth. This example of trying to take credit for the removal 

of the sales tax on children's clothing is a very good example. But 

that's four years ago, Mr. Speaker, and that's in the past. 

 

So while a New Democratic Party government was moving to 

eliminate the tax on children's clothing, what did this Conservative 

government do? This Conservative government in 1985 put a tax 

on used cars, which people had to pay. And so therefore this was 

an unfair increase in the sales tax. They preached tax reform, and I 

have read budget speeches since 1982 by the former minister of 

Finance who talks about tax reform, but then nothing is done after 

that. 

 

Who can be not in favour of tax reform? I think if you ask anyone 

except the extremely wealthy and those who are now taking 

advantage of the tax system, they will agree that tax reform is 

something that we all should be interested in. We all should be 

interested in a simpler tax system. We should all be interested in a 

more fair tax system. There's no denying that. 

 

But what this Conservative government has done when they talked 

about tax reform is that they simply have actually meant it to be a 

tax increase, and the one on used cars was, I think, a prime 

example. It did not make the tax any simpler. It did not make the 

tax system any simpler. It did not make the tax system any more 

fair. It was a betrayal of a promise made to the people of 

Saskatchewan, a betrayal of a commitment to cut taxes, and it 

demonstrates how hollow is their pious support for  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1513 

 

 

what they only give words to, and that is tax reform. When the 

Devine PC government says tax reform, as has been said by many 

before me, they really mean a tax increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know that after the by-election in November in Regina 

North East, and I remember it very well because I happened to 

have been involved in that, but after the by-election this 

government finally admitted that the sales tax on used cars was 

wrong, and I accepted that. Sometimes this kind of therapy makes 

people reconsider. It was cancelled in December, but it's not 

incorporated in this Bill. It was in place for a period of about six 

months, and 60,000 vehicles in Saskatchewan, used vehicles, were 

sold. The people who purchased those 60,000 vehicles paid that 

sales tax on used cars for that period of time. The government 

turned around and said, well the tax is wrong, we have learned a 

lesson, but they insist on punishing these people who paid that tax 

on this unfair tax, which the government opposite even has 

admitted is an unfair tax. Those people by this government are 

being punished because they got caught by the . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor or does the 

member from Saskatoon Centre, who's shouting from his seat, 

have the floor? And when I have the attention of the House, I will 

continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can't accept and neither can my colleagues accept 

the fact that people, who were caught in the political 

gamesmanship of this Conservative government and paid the sales 

tax on used cars, should be punished for this government's 

mistake. And that's why it is the position of the New Democratic 

Party and this caucus that people who paid that tax on used 

vehicles should have it reimbursed. And under this government, 

Mr. Speaker, under our government after the next election, they 

will have that sales tax reimbursed as they should. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —- Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And so the fact that there is no provision in 

this Bill, there is no provision in this Bill to eliminate legally the 

collection of the sales tax on used vehicles, I think should be of 

great concern to us all. Indeed it is to me and it is to my 

colleagues. And I know that it is of concern to a lot of the public, a 

vast majority of the public, because they're asking, why does the 

government not do away with the legal provision to collect the 

sales tax on used vehicles? 

 

Now here we have a piece of legislation, an amendment to The 

Education and Health Tax Act, in which it would have been quite 

simple and quite normal to incorporate an amendment which 

would take away that sales tax on used vehicles, but it's not here. 

One has to ask, who's playing the game and what kind of a game 

is being played? And people can then only reach one conclusion, 

and I think it's a fair conclusion: that if the opportunity politically 

presents itself, this Conservative government intends to 

reintroduce the sales tax on used cars. 

 

Having decided to do that, they will not have to introduce 

legislation and therefore have it open to debate, not only in this 

House but in the public. They will simply, because it is still in the 

law, be able to say around a cabinet table: we are now going to 

collect the sales tax on used cars and  

never have to put it up to public scrutiny. They will simply be able 

to say that, Mr. Speaker. they will set out whatever appropriate 

forms need to go out to the dealers who sell cars and simply say, 

you now have to collect it. 

 

And that's why a number of dealers, Mr. Speaker, have spoken to 

me and said, what is happening here; we don't know where we 

stand. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am saying to you that there should 

have been a provision here to eliminate the sales tax on used 

vehicles from this Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: —- Vote against it, are you? Vote against it. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now the member from Moosomin says, 

vote against the Bill. Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, if I or 

one of my colleagues when we get into committee, introduces an 

amendment to this Bill to do away with that sales tax on used cars, 

I will welcome and challenge the member from Moosomin and the 

member from Prince Albert-duck Lake to vote against that 

amendment. And we will certainly want to be able to ask them 

why it wasn't in this Bill in the first place, unless there is 

something that this government wants to hide, and that wouldn't 

be surprising because they have a reputation of hiding an awful lot 

of things from the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now as I said earlier, this amendment that's before us in Bill 28 is 

an amendment which we can support as it stands alone. Now, but 

just as New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, introduced an elimination of 

the sales tax for children's clothing in 1982, so we can also be in 

support of the removal of the tax on clothing other than luxury 

items. 

 

But the point that needs to be made — the point that needs to be 

made, Mr. Speaker, is this: that this Bill cannot be taken in 

isolation. No tax Bill can be taken in isolation because a tax is a 

tax, and it can be a sales tax, or it might be an income tax, or it 

might be some other form of tax, so this move in this amendment 

would be commendable if it was the only tax measure, but it is 

not. 

 

There are other tax measures — the used car sales tax; the flat tax, 

which was another one; the cancellation of the property 

improvement grant was another one because that was in essence a 

tax increase on property. And so all of that has had an impact on 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in total, Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have been forced to pay more and more taxes with each 

successive Tory budget, and this year is not an exception. And so 

while ordinary taxpayers pay more, the wealthiest in our society, 

outfits like oil corporations have paid less if you want to make a 

comparison between the payment of sales tax and the payment of 

taxes that others have to pay. In 1982, for example, oil revenues 

for the province of Saskatchewan were estimated at $796 million. 

In 1986-87 in this budget, which we are considering, oil revenues 

are estimated at $510 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We aren't at this time  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1514 

 

 

considering the budget, but rather we're considering one Bill that 

deals with one topic, and I would ask the member to come back to 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don't disagree 

with you. We're considering a Bill that deals with the sales tax. 

And what I'm doing here is making a comparison with what's 

happened to the sales tax and the impact that this amendment will 

have, as compared to what's happened in other forms of taxation. 

 

In 1986-87 oil revenues are estimated to be only . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I just asked the member to come 

back to the subject of the Bill, and he's going on a very 

wide-ranging discussion and it doesn't fit. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We're talking about the principle of the 

sales tax, and I accept your ruling, but simply that $510 million in 

oil revenues this year compared to over $700 million five years . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This is the third time that I'm 

correcting the member that he is off the Bill, and I'm going to ask 

you to stay to the Bill and not try and slip it in like you're doing. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'm coming to the Bill, because I think 

it's important for the comparison to be made, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

you had been in the Chair. I don't argue with your ruling . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. If the member has something to say on 

the Bill, I'll hear that, but otherwise I'll move on to the next 

speaker. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me compare the sales tax, 

which is what this Bill is about, to the comments I made on oil 

revenues. The sales tax that Saskatchewan people have to pay in 

1986 is $386 million — a very significant increase in the amount 

of sales tax that Saskatchewan citizens have to pay, even though 

that government and those ministers over there argue that sales 

taxes have decreased. 

 

The fact of the matter is that more money in sales taxes is coming 

out of Saskatchewan people's pockets today than it was five years 

ago. And that's simply due to the policies of the government 

opposite. 

 

The sales tax is only one form of taxes. And that's the point I was 

trying to make, Mr. Speaker, before you interrupted me and asked 

me to get in the topic as you understand it, and I'm prepared to do 

that. But the sales tax is only one form of taxes and charges that 

Saskatchewan people have to pay. It in itself has increased 

significantly, the amount that people have to pay. 

 

If you take into consideration the total amount of taxes, of which 

sales tax is apart, Mr. Speaker, clearly there has been a very major 

tax increase on Saskatchewan people. True, a reduction or doing 

away with the sales tax of clothing will help some people and 

some individuals; I accept that. But that alone cannot be taken in 

isolation, as I said in my earlier remarks. 

The fact of the matter is that people earning $20,000 a year with a 

family of four in 1986, including the sales tax, are going to pay 

over $760 more in taxes and charges than they did in 1982. If you 

take a family with an income of 30,000 people, the amount of 

taxes they will pay, including the sales tax which we are talking 

about here today, in 1986 it's going to be well over $766 each year 

more than they had to pay in 1982. 

 

So although this Bill is an attempt by the government to try to say 

to the Saskatchewan taxpayer that they have decreased taxation 

because they have eliminated a tax on clothing, the total tax bill 

for Saskatchewan people has increased and increased very 

significantly. And an increase of over $700 a year in taxation and 

charges on a family earning $20,000 a year is a big increase in 

taxes — a very big increase in taxes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what does this education tax, this sales tax, pay 

for? Well it pays for services that people in this province have 

long learned to enjoy and appreciate and expect to get, good 

quality services, whether it's education, or whether it's health, or 

whether it's other kinds of services. People are concerned that 

many of those services have deteriorated and they're not getting 

fair value for their tax dollar that they're spending on sales tax. 

 

An Hon. Member: —- That's not right. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, somebody opposite says, that's not 

right. Well that member obviously has not spent a lot of time in his 

constituency or he will know that most of his constituents don't 

agree with what he has to say. And they object to the fact that 

some of that sales tax that people are having to pay is going to pay 

for international trips by cabinet ministers — taxpayer-paid 

holidays. It's going to pay for that huge cabinet, which the Premier 

finally reduced to some degree in December, but all of those 

people who were employed and who were there are still on salary. 

People of Saskatchewan are saying that's not the way they want 

their tax dollar to be spent, and I agree with them. 

 

What else, Mr. Speaker, is this sales tax and other kind of taxes 

going to pay for? It goes to pay for $20 million of advertising that 

this government busy to pay off their chosen advertising firm. 

People of Saskatchewan are saying their sales tax dollar should 

not have to go to pay for that kind of political advertising. When 

some of the taxpayers of this province have been told, look, you 

cannot get a salary increase this year — teachers were among 

them, there were other kinds of workers, people on minimum 

wage . . . 1985, I'll correct that. In 1985 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There are times when we have a 

free and open, wide-ranging debate, but on second reading of Bills 

that is not the time. And I would ask the member to get back to the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Bill, Mr. Speaker, as you say, involves 

the doing away with the sales tax on clothing. I accept that, and 

I'm talking about the sales tax. I'm saying that people of this 

province who pay the sales tax should not have to pay through that 

sales tax for these kinds of  

  



 

May 26, 1986 

1515 

 

 

items, and they should not have to pay for high-paid political staff 

that ministers hire. That's not what they meant their sales tax to go 

for. They meant their sales tax to go for services such as 

education, such as health care programs, and other kinds of 

services. That has not been happening. That has not been 

happening. 

 

And all across the province, Saskatchewan people are saying 

they've had enough. And they're saying they can not be fooled by 

a simple amendment to The Education and Health Tax Act, which 

only meets a very small part of the promise made by this 

government opposite, and does away with the sales tax on 

clothing. They say they will not be fooled by that because they 

understand that taxation is far broader than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several members have spoken on this debate. And I 

don't think that it's significant that a number of members have 

spoken, either . . . both on the government side and on this side of 

the House. They have spoken on this debate, Mr. Speaker, because 

they have spoken to their constituents, and their constituents are 

telling them that this is an issue that is of central concern with 

them. And that is the question of fair taxation. And so that's why it 

has prompted, probably more on this Bill than any other Bill that 

we've considered in this House before, for more members to stand 

up and speak. Because when you put aside a lot of the things that 

happen inhere, I think in essence members who sit here and 

represent their constituents still come back and in many ways 

reflect what their constituents are telling them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, sales taxes, the total amount of 

sales taxes collected over the last four or five years have increased 

significantly. Even with this amendment, Saskatchewan people 

will pay far more in sales taxes than they did in 1982. And doing 

that, they wonder why, in spite of that, there's still a $2 billion 

deficit. 

 

You would think that this great increase in the amount of money 

they pay in sales tax in total would have caused there not to be 

such a deficit. And so they're asking what kind of mismanagement 

do we have in this government, or the $8.7 billion of debt — triple 

over 1982. All of this has happened. There will be a price to pay 

because all of that has to be repaid at some time in the future with 

generations to come. 

 

And now in the year of an election, this government decides to 

introduce the elimination of the sales tax on clothing in order that 

they may, in their view, recoup some politics. Well people will 

appreciate it; we will support that change and that reduction in the 

tax, but I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell the members 

opposite, that people will not be fooled by the kind of political 

gamesmanship that has brought this about. It could have been just 

as easy to include this amendment when the sales tax on children's 

clothing was brought in four years ago, but the government chose 

not to do that. 

 

It chose to practise a process of contradiction — say one thing and 

do something else. It chose to promise the elimination of the sales 

tax in total, but they have refused to do that and only will 

eliminate the tax on clothing. 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people who have yet 

something to say on this Bill. The public is saying a lot about it 

because they have been watching this debate and they have been 

listening to this debate, and I submit to you that there are more of 

the people in the public who yet want to phone us and phone 

members opposite, yet want to talk about the broken promises and 

how this does not meet the promise of the Conservative party 

opposite, and in light of that, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we 

will have a lot of questions when it comes to the committee and 

we will have amendments to make when it comes to the 

committee, and I hope that the members opposite will be prepared 

to support them. 

 

(1645) 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 

committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 

 ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 4:46 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 

the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Highways and 

Transportation Act 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit 

Act 

Bill No. 22— An Act to amend The Education Act 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of Education 

Act, 1983 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Application to Saskatchewan 

of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 

Abduction 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1983 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 

to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Act 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act 

Bill No. 40 — An Act respecting the Establishment, Maintenance 

and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 

to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Parks Act 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:40 p.m. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, it being near 5 o'clock, I 

suggest, now that we are in committee, that we recess until the 

regular hour of 7 and begin with the consideration of the 

Department of Co-ops. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


