


















































June 23, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 23, 1986 
 
 

2229 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Advanced Education and Manpower 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I had raised with you a problem that 
was down in Coteau Range Community College in respect to the 
course being put forward by Kelsey Institute, an extension course, 
and I indicated to you there were some 10 students taking the 
first-year portion of the course; and in fact they were told that 
there would be a two-year program in Moose Jaw through the 
extension course by the Kelsey Institute. 
 
I want to advise you that these students are unable to go to 
Saskatoon to complete their course and I’m also advised, as I 
indicated, there are only 20 spots in Saskatoon and there are 36 
applications. And you briefly addressed this and said that you 
were doing some monitoring. 
 
And I wonder whether or not you have taken the time to respond 
to the letter or copy of the letter that you received from these 
students, and whether you have advised the two members from 
Moose Jaw, who have not responded to the request of concern; 
whether they have been apprised of it and whether they have met 
with the people that are concerned. As I say, there are nine of the 
10 people just can’t go to Saskatoon. And they feel that they have 
been really cheated and betrayed because they were under the 
impression that the follow-up course, the second year course, 
would in fact be available to them — the supervisor’s course. 
 
So I’d like to, for the record, and in order that I might be able to 
advise them — since both you and the two members from Moose 
Jaw would not respond to them — I’d like to get it on the record 
then as to what steps you’re prepared to take to address their 
concerns, and I think legitimate concerns, of nine of the 10 
students down in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe I did respond to the letter that the 
member mentions. But I just would say to him, as I did before 
supper, the matter has been raised with me by several other 
members of the legislature — the member from Thunder Creek, 
two members from Moose Jaw. The member from Quill Lakes is 
right in saying that there is a level of consternation there, to say the 
least, and there is, and I know that. And I know that at the present 
time Kelsey Institute, where the course originates, is trying to 
re-direct some funding and so on, to see if there can’t be 
something done for the two years. 
 
We have not been able to find out how it became the 
understanding there, if in fact that was the case. And every 
indication is that there is that understanding there, that there was to 
be two years in Coteau Range. 
 
We haven’t been able to find out how that came about or how that 
understanding came about there, because as I  

said before supper, there are a number of courses that are in a 
similar circumstance, where one year of the course is offered off 
campus so to speak, away from the institute — that’s the 
originating institute. And then a certificate is given, sort of a 
preliminary certificate after one year, with which the student is 
able to go to work in their chosen field. And for further study 
normally they would go to the campus. 
 
Now I indicated that before, but having said all of that I will say to 
you that I know that at the present time Kelsey is searching out 
ways in which that might be changed. Because, I believe, as you 
do, that there is some level of misunderstanding as it relates to 
those students at Coteau Range. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I would ask the minister to make an effort 
to see that it can be resolved. 
 
I turn to another concern, and that’s the Cosmetologists 
Association of Saskatchewan. And this matter . . . I’m not sure 
whether it has been rectified or not, but there was a concern with 
the cosmetologists. They had written to the Premier, and they were 
concerned. They say that, “We have been given to understand that 
the apprenticeship and the trade certification branch has been 
moved from Advanced Education and Manpower to the 
Employment Development Agency.” And they say that this 
creates two umbrella situations in education and certification for 
the trades in the province. 
 
If I might just read the next paragraph: 
 

The Cosmetologists Association of Saskatchewan board of 
directors are sincerely concerned regarding pending 
legislation, change in the general trade regulation — some 33 
drafts have gone before the government — and 15 
recommendations which were approved by the then minister, 
Mr. Gordon Currie. 

 
So they are basically concerned, as I understand it. They indicate 
that, “We strongly urge that you reinstate the apprenticeship and 
trade certification under the Department of Advanced Education 
and Manpower and not into the other department.” I was 
wondering whether you have had a chance to take a look at the 
concerns of the Cosmetologists Association of Saskatchewan and 
whether you can reply. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think the information that you have goes 
back some time to when the Employment Development Agency 
was being set up, and so on. But the issue that was raised by that 
association was that there was a concern about the apprenticeship 
branch and so on going away from the manpower division of our 
department. That was not accepted by the cabinet, so it is not the 
case; and in fact their concerns were unfounded because as it 
turned out, they were not moved. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the new agricultural building at the 
campus in Saskatoon, in respect to the funding, I want to ask you 
there: what does the government expect the university to raise 
towards the funding? Is there any formal agreement set forward as 
to the exact amount? I  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2230 
 
 

know you have talked about getting some from the private source, 
and the university in fact raising some. The press release says, we 
will want the university to attempt . . . But there is no firm 
commitment that the university has to come up with any money. 
Two concerns that I have: one is basically, are you putting any 
pressure on the university to dispose of any assets in order to raise 
a portion of the cost of the agriculture building? Secondly, is there 
any actual amount that has to be raised from the private sector? 
I’ve read from 12 to 14 million, I believe. So I ask you: what basic 
commitment must the University of Saskatchewan meet in the 
funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The number that’s been mutually found 
acceptable between the two parties, between the government and 
the University of Saskatchewan, is $12 million. And that number, 
as far as I am given to understand, is quite acceptable to the 
administration at the university, and they feel that it’s quite 
attainable. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And when does the university have to come 
forward with this here $12 million? What period of time do they 
have in order to raise the $12 million out of the $78 million, that 
you indicated as the cost of the agriculture building? What is the 
time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — They’ve indicated that a three-year period 
of time would be reasonable, and we’ve agreed to that. And so 
that’s the goal — $12 million over a three-year period. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And if they’re unsuccessful in obtaining that goal, 
what is the commitment of the provincial government? Will they 
in fact proceed with it or is an absolute must? Or what happens . . . 
Do you give them a three-year period? Obviously it could be $4 
million a year that they . . . What schedule of raising this money 
do they have to have in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well like I say, it’s by a mutually agreed 
upon term, the three years that they’re doing this. And as far as 
your question goes: will the project proceed? Yes the project will 
proceed. We’re very confident, as is the university and the 
administration at the university, that this $12 million will be 
raised. They are some way along on that now; I don’t know the 
numbers of that. And I haven’t been talking to them about it, 
because it’s fairly recent. But we’re confident that they will raise it 
and certainly the project as announced will go ahead. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I mean, being confident and raising it . . . 
I’m not sure that there’s many precedents that we have in respect 
that the university being required to go onto a fund raising blitz in 
respect to the construction of capital projects on the campus. 
 
I don’t know what gives you such assurances. But I find it strange 
to say that regardless it will proceed. Are you saying that if in fact 
it cannot be raised that the government then will in fact pick it up 
and extend the period of time to the university? What is the basic 
arrangement? Is there any demand on them to have certain 
amounts of their funds in each year? In other words, I want to 
know the logistics of them having to raise the $12 million. You 
say it’s over three years. But is there a  

requirement of so much the first and so much the second up to $12 
million? It seems like an awfully loose arrangement, as far as I can 
see, and I’d like to know the details. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This is not something that was pulled out 
of anyone’s hat anywhere, for the member’s information, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The number, 12 million, is roughly equivalent to the equipment 
costs for the new building. And the precedents . . . You say there 
are no precedents, and I’d say, I’ll tell you that the geological 
sciences building, which is under construction now, and almost 
complete, and the Engineering Building, which was built a 
number of years ago, both of those had fund raising by the 
university for roughly equivalent to the equipment costs. And this 
is following that precedent so it’s not something that isn’t . . . 
 
But I do grant you, it’s a much bigger project and it’s . . . You 
know, it’s more money. But the university themselves have 
suggested that this is a reasonable amount that they believe are 
very confident they can raise, and I think they’re some way along 
in that. And we have no reason to believe, nor has the University 
of Saskatchewan given us any reason to believe, that they would 
not be able to meet this over a three-year period. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We hope that they are successful, but we also 
have heard that some pressure was at least being put forward to the 
extent of having to dispose of some assets, and the suggestion that 
was put forward to the university was the sale of some of the land 
that they had. 
 
And I hope that the minister or the government is not putting any 
pressure on the university to dispose of some of those assets. It is 
my understanding that the government in Alberta did the same in 
respect to the university of Edmonton, and certainly regret having 
done that because they have disposed of assets that they could well 
have used. 
 
I want to briefly turn to the issue of foreign students, and it’s an 
issue because of the differential fees imposed by the University of 
Regina. And I can only say to you . . . I’d like to ask the minister if 
he’s aware of how many foreign students, or visa students, there 
were on the campus in the University of Regina during the past 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe that number is approximately 
400, of whom about 80 per cent are from Hong Kong. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, that’s what I want, is a breakdown of the 
students that were attending, the visa students — the number from 
the United States; the number that are from third-world countries; 
the number that are from other jurisdictions, like you indicate, 
Hong Kong. Can you give us a breakdown? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure of the . . . I’ll attempt to do 
that but I just want to point out to you that the board of governors, 
in making their decision to ask for higher tuition fees for visa 
students, has also in conjunction with that — because as you will 
point out and I think others, rightly so, who are familiar with the 
university  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2231 
 
 

community will know there are some from some third-world 
countries who are here and who are needy cases — the board of 
governors has set up a bursary system for that purpose. But many 
of the Hong Kong students, and I think you will know, are rather 
wealthy. I don’t say all of them are, but my information is that a 
number of them are and that they didn’t react in any negative way 
at all to the change in policy of the board of governors. 
 
But that’s the information I have now and if there’s any further 
breakdown that you need, I can attempt to get it for you. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I’d like the breakdown a little further than 
that. I’d like to know how many from the United States and the 
third-world countries. 
 
I’m rather surprised by the attitude of the minister. It seems to me 
that it would be . . . There are certainly some advantages of having 
students from foreign countries come to our campuses. Certainly it 
brings another dimension to the education process, and certainly it 
also allows our country and our province to be familiarized with 
other parts of the world. 
 
I think it would be a disadvantage; it’s a disadvantage to cut back 
so drastically as what one has done here. I refer to what is reported 
in respect to the British government under Margaret Thatcher, 
wherein the British government in fact imposed restrictions on 
foreign students through a huge increase in the amount of tuition 
fees. 
 
And it’s reported that the British government has taken a look at it 
and re-evaluated it, and the British government then contributed an 
additional $150 million in scholarships for foreign students. First 
of all, they essentially closed off the admission of foreign students, 
and since then they have re-examined the situation and have 
allowed them to come in. 
 
There’s one other thing that is pointed out to me: that if you 
restrict foreign students from our campuses there is the counterpart 
that . . . And I’ve had the opportunity to meet with representatives 
of the university who are concerned over the decision of the board 
of governors on this matter. 
 
The problem that they put forward here in respect to it is that 
many of the communist countries are, in fact, offering 
scholarships, traffic, tuition-free admission to universities in many 
of the communist countries. And what I’m saying to you is that I 
thought we were living in a rather open society and I thought that 
we were expanding our horizons in respect to trade. I thought 
Canada and particularly Saskatchewan would want to make some 
contribution to the third-world countries, and because of the 
inadequacy of your funding what you have done is to force the 
board of governors into the restriction of foreign students. And it’s 
done under the guise that there is a deficit and that they have to 
raise some money, and the evidence is that what you do is simply 
to drive the students from the campus on to another campus where  

it’s more favourable. 
 
So there are certain disadvantages, Mr. Minister, in respect to it. I 
think you will acknowledge that. I notice that the senate of the 
University of Regina is in fact asking the board of governors to 
re-examine their decision to double the fees to foreign students 
this year and to double them again the following year. So I wonder 
if the minister can advise whether there has been any further 
update in the decision of the board. I read where the senate is 
approaching the board of governors asking them to reconsider. I 
wonder if the minister is in agreement. I wonder if the minister 
can, on behalf of his government, indicate whether he’s in 
agreement with the curtailment of foreign students from the 
campus by making it prohibitive from the standpoint of increasing 
the tuition fees. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all, when the member talks 
about curtailing the numbers of students, there’s no evidence that 
the increase in tuition fees for visa students will curtail the 
enrolment of visa students. What I have said to the member before 
is this: that the board of governors made the decision that they 
base it on. Another thing that they point out, and I think rightly so, 
is that even with a doubling as they’ve suggested for visa students, 
doubling of tuition fees, it takes those tuition fees to 30 per cent of 
the cost of the education, so that 70 per cent is still coming from 
the taxpayer of Saskatchewan, the public purse. And that, I don’t 
think, is an unreasonable ratio — 70 per cent to 30 per cent. 
 
As we pointed out, the tuition fees at large at the university are 
about 15 to 16 per cent. This is the University of Regina I’m 
talking about now — 15 to 16 per cent of the cost is in tuition fees, 
which I don’t think is an unreasonable amount either. But, Mr. 
Chairman, there is no evidence, and there’s no evidence, I believe 
that the member can point to, to say that there is a curtailing of the 
number of people from other lands who will come to our 
universities as a result of this action by the board of governors. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t know if you’ve done any studying or not, 
but here’s report in respect to what has happened in some of the 
other jurisdictions. It indicates, however, previous experience in 
Britain, Ontario, and Quebec has shown that with differential fees, 
the enrolment of foreign students will decline. In Britain the 
number declined by 50 per cent; in Ontario and Quebec by 20 and 
40 per cent, the highest decline being in graduate studies. So those 
are the particular studies that have been done and clearly indicated 
that what has happened is a decline in foreign students. But of 
course . . . 
 
I leave that particular matter, Mr. Minister, but simply to raise our 
concern that we may be doing ourselves a short-term benefit by 
. . . Obviously the position is to get more money at the Regina 
campus, because if there’s sufficient funding, then I’m not sure 
why they would be imposing increasing the fees. 
 
And I just think that we sell ourselves short if we start to exclude 
foreign students from our campus because I think they bring a 
certain advantage by bringing to the campus a quality of education 
and an excellence. Many of these  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2232 
 
 

students bring a very high degree of excellence. And I know there 
are a lot of Hong Kong students on the campus here, but I’ll tell 
you they bring a tremendous amount in the computer science 
particularly, and in the major sciences. 
 
This is a stimulus and it’s also a part of getting Saskatchewan 
known. But, you know, I suppose this government on one hand 
can say that, oh, Saskatchewan is the best kept secret, and then 
because of their own financial underfunding of a university, what 
has happened is that foreign students are essentially driven off our 
campus into other campuses that don’t charge the extra high fees. 
So I guess there’s a contradiction, but we’ll have to live with it. 
 
It’s difficult, of course, to change a policy, because he can stand 
up here and say, well we’re going to drive these foreigners off this 
campus and we’re going to allow more space for Saskatchewan 
people. It might be a vote-getting way. But it’s pretty 
narrow-minded thinking, I would say. I would think that we 
should allow foreign students on our campus to bring the contrast 
of educational excellence. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in respect to College Mathieu, I 
know that your predecessor has in fact been discussing a brief that 
they have submitted — the former minister — and I’m just 
wondering if you could tell us what your policies are in respect to 
the development of College Mathieu. And I guess first of all I ask 
you this question: what is your policy re the right of the French 
people of Saskatchewan to complete an independent education 
system — the Fransaskois, as they’re called. I wonder what your 
position is to their right to a complete and independent education 
system. I know they have had discussions with your government 
and I was wondering if you would be in a position to respond to 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve never been 
approached since I’ve been the minister in this department by 
anyone from College Mathieu, you know, regarding any of the 
points that you raise. So I’m not just sure what you’re getting at 
there. I’m not sure exactly sure what you’re getting at, and my 
officials around me here aren’t aware of anything to it. Although 
you did mention in your earlier remarks, and maybe I need a point 
of clarification here, you said that they raised something with the 
former minister who is now a Legislative Secretary in this 
department. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I don’t know what his position is now, but 
the Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, the board 
representatives of the College Mathieu have met with them. I 
know that some progress was made because I have a letter here 
from the Hon. Gordon Currie where he in fact indicates some 
commitment of a couple staff. And the whole discussion was in 
respect to the right of the French to complete an independent 
education system. 
 
And I guess what I’m asking you is: have you and your 
government a position? Do they in fact, as you view it, a right to 
complete an independent education system? So you can have a 
chance to talk with your former minister, and I’d like a reply 
because they requested that I contact  

you on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What the officials here are aware of is that 
the College Mathieu was given, I believe, two people to $75,000 
from the office of minority languages, federal government 
organization in Ottawa which was administered here in 
Saskatchewan through the Department of Education. So that’s 
why I may not have been in these discussions. My colleague, the 
Minister of Education, may know more about this than I do. I’m 
sure she does. And I know those estimates were up and I’m sure 
you would have asked those questions of her at that time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I know you are rather embarrassed to have these 
questions placed at you and you don’t want to answer them. But 
I’ll tell you, the Minister of Advanced Education was doing the 
dealing. So don’t start shoving it over to the Minister of Education. 
And I can read you the letter from the Minister of Advanced 
Education and Manpower. 
 
And there are certain other questions I want to know. Do you 
maintain as a position, as a minister, as a government, whether or 
not they have a particular right — that is the French community, 
the Fransaskois — to a complete and independent education 
system? What is your view on that? 
 
I don’t know how you can duck that question just by saying, I just 
got into the department, when we have had a brief submitted to the 
former minister and the former minister putting down a position. 
And what you’re trying to do is to duck; that’s what you’re trying 
to do. I ask you again: what is your position in respect to their 
right to have a complete and independent education system? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe what the request was at the time 
of . . . My colleague, the member from Wascana who was the 
minister at the time, informs me that they had come — just going 
by memory now on his part — that they had come and asked for a 
separate status community college as it relates to the Fransaskois 
of Saskatchewan. The response to that was that we would deal 
through the office of minority languages in the federal 
government. The federal government responded with the 75,000 
and the two people that I referred to, and that administration here 
in Saskatchewan is done through the Minister of Education. 
 
So I haven’t misled you in any way. I’ve just told you — and what 
they had asked for is a separate status community college, and we 
rejected that as not being a feasible thing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well they also asked for, in respect to adult 
education services, they asked for a French community college, 
that’s right. They asked for a resource centre. They asked for a 
bilingual secretarial program. They asked for a university 
program, B.A., B.Ed. 
 
So I want to ask you, what is your position? You’ve had an 
opportunity to review it, and I know the Minister was reviewing it. 
First of all, in respect to . . . you say the  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2233 
 
 

community college, you have rejected it. What about the resource 
centre that they were asking for, and the secretarial program, 
bilingual secretarial program, and the university program — a 
B.A., B.Ed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m informed that the two people 
that I mentioned in the 75,000 — the two people have been hired 
in February. They are working within the community college 
system now. They have a liaison person. One of those people goes 
to the other colleges and deals with the programs, with the French 
programs which they would like to see involved in the various 
community colleges around the province. And as you well know, 
the community colleges cover all the regions of the province and 
the French speaking communities, or the pockets of 
French-speaking people are in the various regions of the province 
as well. 
 
And one of the people besides this liaison person is one who’s 
working in program development to develop programs in the 
French language, which can be then put to use in whichever 
communities the population would warrant that type of program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — They’re asking particularly for an expansion of 
their facilities at College Mathieu and they’re wanting to, as I said, 
set up the bilingual secretarial program. Are you in agreement 
with them being able to establish that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The request that you have that you’re 
reading from, I believe is the one we referred to, where they had 
all of this . . . they had out there resource centres. And I forget 
what else you read out there now — the secretarial program and 
all the rest of it. But what I’m telling the member is that . . . 
Whether he wants to listen to the answer or not, Mr. chairman, I’m 
not sure. He asks the question and then he doesn’t appear to want 
to listen. 
 
But what I’m saying to him is that the normal process and grants 
that go to College Mathieu go to them for that. They have the 
people now through the office of minority languages. That one 
person is for program development. If they say that their program 
is . . . the most important one is a bilingual secretarial, well then 
I’m sure that person will be developing that program now for 
delivery at whatever college the French community or the French 
population will warrant — whatever community college in 
Saskatchewan region they might live in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I hope they are watching. Because I believe 
that you don’t even know the slightest idea of what you’re talking 
about. You haven’t got the slightest idea; you haven’t read their 
brief and you haven’t met with them. So you don’t know what 
you’re talking about; that’s the problem. And we might as well 
leave it, because you absolutely don’t know what you’re talking 
about, and it’s quite evident you don’t know what you’re talking 
about. 
 
We’ll leave this then and we’ll transfer those remarks, those 
brilliant remarks that you’d made in respect to it, out to them and 
see what they have to say. 
 
I want to turn to the annual report, 1984-85. But I’m not sure that 
this is still with your department. It was at one  

time — 1984. It may have been shifted out into another portfolio. 
 
But the Saskatchewan skills development program, is that still 
under your jurisdiction, or has it gone to Social Services or is it 
with the employment development agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, it’s under this jurisdiction. As I 
outlined just to your colleague, the member from Regina Centre, 
some information and statistics about it just prior to 5 o’clock, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m talking about the Saskatchewan skills 
development program, the 1984, the two-year program. There’s 
two different programs that you may or may not be aware of. 
There’s the Saskatchewan skills extension program — that’s the 
one that I asked you about and you gave me some information on 
it. 
 
The other program is the Saskatchewan skills development 
program — SSDP program. And this is the one that has a two-year 
academic and skill training opportunity for social assistance 
recipients. And I’m wondering whether that program is still under 
your jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes it is, and it’s an ongoing program, not 
limited to two years, Mr. Chairman. It may well have been begun 
as a two-year program, but it was so successful that it is ongoing. 
 
There’s more money in the budget, I’m informed by my 
colleague, the Minister of Social Services, this year than there was 
last or the year before. And I would just say, and as I did to the 
member from Regina Centre earlier this afternoon, that it’s a 
success story in terms of the disadvantaged people who are on 
welfare and who are looking to obtain skills so they can enter the 
work-force. And it is a success story and they have had some 
excellent . . . well they have some excellent programs and they 
have had some excellent success, as I’ve said. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you got the statistics in respect to the 
program for 1985-86? What I’m asking there is, does your ’84-85 
report indicate the number of students that were enrolled? The 
original estimates of ’84-85 were for so many students. I want to 
know how many enrolled, the number that participated in the 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The program is delivered through the 
various community colleges. Through that community college 
system, ’85—86, students enrolled — 3,036 students; and the 
number of programs, ’85-86 — 135 programs, benefiting 3,036 
students. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And all of these courses I take it, then, are give 
under the community college. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There’s the odd one that was under a 
private computer school or something like that — the odd one. But 
for the most part they are within the community college, in the 
community college system. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well it’s a good thing that you can brag of 
tremendous success, because certainly it’s not  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2234 
 
 

demonstrated in the statistics. When you look at the number of 
unemployed and the number of unemployed employables, you’ll 
find that there’s a tremendous increase in the number of 
unemployed employables during the time of your administration. 
 
I want to ask you in respect to the community colleges, the 
institutes, and universities, can you indicate to me what the 
estimate is for enrolment? Take the institutes first of all. Do you 
expect that there will be a continuing high enrolment, or an 
increase in enrolment? Certainly if you look at the statistics over 
the past few years, there were an increase in the number. 
 
What, if any, projection do you have for the current year? And I 
only have the statistics for the previous year, in respect to the 
community colleges. I wonder if you could — or the institutes 
rather — whether you could indicate whether there was an 
increase or decrease last year at the institutes and university, in 
enrolment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I indicated to your colleague from 
Regina Centre earlier, the expectation and the numbers which are 
provided by the universities indicate that there’s expected to be a 
flattening out and moving toward a decline at the university. 
Although I want to put this caveat on that in that those numbers 
cannot always be adhered to, because I think in the mid-70s there 
was a suggestion that that might happen, and in fact it did not. A 
50 per cent increase in institutes in the last four years. There’s 
been a 50 per cent increase in enrolment at our institutes in the last 
four years, and with the coming on stream of the Northern 
Institute of Technology in Prince Albert this fall, we expect that to 
level out somewhat. 
 
And there has, as well, been a major increase in community 
college enrolments, and some of that certainly has been as a result 
of the change in mandate of the community colleges where they’re 
more directed towards skill development and away from some of 
the hobbies and the crafts and some of the things which were the 
mandate of the community colleges for some years before. 
 
So there’s been a change in the mandate at the community 
colleges as well as some of the programs under our welfare reform 
program, the Saskatchewan skills development program being one 
of the, which takes people who are recipients under the welfare 
system and gives them the opportunity for some training and 
therefore move into the work-force. 
 
I just might add, as I said as well earlier to the member from 
Regina Centre, there is about a 75 per cent success rate within one 
month of graduation or completing a course in the Saskatchewan 
skills development program for these people who are less 
privileged. And it’s one of the things that points to the success of 
the program that within one month 75 per cent of them have 
employment. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Referring to the institutes, one needs only to look 
at the Estimates and find a very serious cut-back in the amount of 
funding. There is just absolutely no doubt that there is a large 
cut-back in the institutes across the province — the funding. 
 

There’s a cut in staff, a very major cut in the staff of the institutes. 
I can’t understand the reasoning behind you, because if we take a 
look at a few of the statistics, Wascana Institute, they’re losing — 
a cut-back in staff of 10.5. And if you look at the Kelsey Institute, 
there’s 20 people cut back. If you look at the Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute, there’s another 12.5 cut-back in staff. 
 
If you look at the funding alone, you find that there’s over 1.4 
million cut back in the amount of funding for the technical 
institutes. Now that is a very major cut-back in both staff and in 
funding. And I’m certainly rather surprised that the minister seems 
shocked at not knowing that he had a major cut-back in respect to 
the technical institutes. 
 
The total with the Wascana, the Kelsey and the Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute, I believe there’s 43 staff cuts in those three 
institutions alone — 43. The total amount of funding in respect to 
those three institutes is almost $1.5 million, and that’s comparing 
what was estimated for ’85-86 as compared to what is budgeted 
this year — so a very, very major cut-back of the amount of 
funding for the three major institutes. 
 
(1945) 
 
And if you look at the amount in the supplementary estimates 
under Advanced Education, and if you realize that in the 
Saskatchewan Technical Institute, Moose Jaw, 1.9 million was 
overextended last year, and Kelsey there was 105,000, so there’s 
almost $2 million overextended in the institutes last year, I can 
only say to you, Mr. Minister, that there is considerable concern in 
respect to the general funding of the institutes. The Kelsey 
Institute at Saskatoon, over 20 staff cut, and somewhere in the 
neighbourhood, over what was estimated last compared to this 
year, of $673,000 — which is a major cut. And so if you have 
such a commitment to education, I was wondering why there is a 
very significant cut-back in the amount that is being budgeted for 
the three technical institutes as mentioned. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the circumstance is 
as follows: the member says there has been cuts. What I will say 
to the member is that there are now four institutes. This fall, when 
the Northern Institute of Technology opens in Prince Albert, we 
will have four institutes. 
 
He says that there has been cut-backs. What I say to the member is 
that there has been a significant increase in staffing and in funding 
for institutes. And in funding, it’s 9 per cent funding overall 
increase. There’s no cut-back in staff resources. There’s been a 
significant increase, as I have said. In 1985-86, 1,048 positions 
were allocated to the institutes. In 1986-87, the figure is 1,109 — 
an increase of 61 staff or a 6 per cent increase. 
 
There has been a minor reallocation of resources to accommodate 
the entry of the new northern institute, as I’ve said. And some of 
the programs which up until now have been at Kelsey — the ones 
that come to mind are the forestry and resource management — 
some of those that up until now have been at Kelsey Institute will 
now be delivered from the Northern Institute of Technology,  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2235 
 
 

where they should be delivered, which makes eminent sense given 
the region that it comes from. And I’m surprised at the member 
not wanting to talk about the . . . I shouldn’t be surprised, I 
suppose, but I take note of the fact that the member from Quill 
Lakes does not want to talk about the Northern Institute of 
Technology, which is a very major installation in the city of Prince 
Albert and which will serve the whole northern portion of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts — 
there’s no doubt that there is 10.5 fewer people employed, on staff, 
and there’s no doubt that there’s $309,000 cut in the funding. So I 
would ask you: what adjustments have you made in respect to the 
Wascana Institute that they can operate with 10.5 fewer staff and a 
cut of $309,000 from what was estimated for last year? Would you 
outline how they are expected to operate, what portions have been 
removed from the Wascana, and what justification have you for 
the major cut-back in respect to the Wascana? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I made the point that the programs 
are across the four institutes. The four institutes will become a 
package in this province. You say that . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well I know you don’t. The member does not 
want to talk about the Northern Institute of Technology, but I’ll 
tell the member that the Northern Institute of Technology is one of 
four very important institutes in the province. All of the institutes 
are serving the needs in the various regions of the province. That 
institute which was not in existence under your government, it will 
now be operational this fall under this government. 
 
And I just say to the member, you can talk about cuts all you’d 
like to talk about cuts, but I’ll say to you that the numbers show 
that there are 61 more people working in the four institutes in 
Saskatchewan than there were in the last year’s budget, than there 
were provided for in the last budget when there were three 
institutes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I ask you: you’re cutting the projected cuts 
in the staff at the Wascana by 10.5 and over $300,000 cut in the 
amount of the budget. And I’d like to know the rationalization that 
you’re making. Are there less programs being offered, or expected 
to be? What is the rationale for being able to cut 10.5 staff and 
$300,000 from the budget of Wascana? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If the specific questions were about the 
Wascana Institute, there are two additional programs at Wascana 
that were not there last year. I’m not sure of the numbers and 
where those are allocated in terms of the numbers of instructors in 
the various programs, but much of that will depend upon the 
number of students that chose which programs But there will be 
two programs there which were not provided before, one being 
photographic technician, the other being building system 
technician. There are no programs which are now at Wascana 
Institute which will be deleted, I’m told. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. At the Wascana Institute then, you have 
fewer staff, more programs, and more programs, fewer staff, and 
less money. 
 

And okay, the Kelsey Institute — we’ve had correspondence in 
respect and great concern here because there is close to a million 
dollars being cut. And of course if you were to spend equivalent to 
what was spent last year, you’ll find that there was ad additional 
$105,000 spent, and in Moose Jaw there was 1.9 million. But in 
any event, what was estimated last year, and what is estimated for 
1986-87, there’s over $673,000 less budgeted for Kelsey Institute 
this year than what was estimated last year, and there are a total of 
20 staff being deleted. I’d like to know the rationale for this 
because I can tell you there is a lot of concern in Saskatoon with 
the nature of the magnitude of the cuts at that institute. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well at Kelsey Institute the majority of the 
changes that have taken place are related to the renewable resource 
technology program which has been transferred to Prince Albert, 
and I submit to you that it’s in the proper location now, by being 
delivered from Prince Albert. So that program goes there and a 
good number or a major extent of the amount that you’re been 
quoting from is because of that transfer. Because a good portion of 
the dollars that you refer to are staff dollars, and the staff from that 
program will be operating out of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to that change of course offering, what 
complement of staff have you deducted from the institute at 
Kelsey, and what amount of money as a result of the transfer or 
the coverage of it over in the Northern Institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe the blue book shows 20 people in 
terms of staffing deleted at Kelsey. What’s happened at Kelsey is 
that the . . . And there are some programs that are still ongoing, 
that students probably will have decided that they’re not the 
programs for on into the future — whatever — but there will be 
less of them. 
 
I believe there are five teaching positions, plus some other 
positions — but five actual instructor positions which are going to 
Prince Albert from Kelsey which are directly related to the 
resource technology program. The majority of the dollars . . . And 
once again, are staff dollars rather than any other, but they become 
staff salary dollars, in other words. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And would you give the rationale for a major cut 
in the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw? There’s 
12.5 people staff cut and $425,000 — in excess of that. What’s the 
rationale there? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There were two programs transferred from 
STI in Moose Jaw to the Northern Institute at Prince Albert: one 
being the penitentiary worker program which was delivered 
through STI before, which is now more legitimately delivered at 
Prince Albert in proximity to the penitentiaries that are in Prince 
Albert; and the truck driver and heavy equipment operator 
program, which has been up till now delivered at the STI in 
Moose Jaw, will be delivered through the new competency based 
learning modules at Prince Albert, at the Northern Institute of 
Technology. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the Northern Institute of Technology, 
can you indicate what was the total cost of construction there? Our 
understanding is that there was a  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2236 
 
 

sizeable overrun on the constructions costs. It was initially to be 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $30 million, and certainly it 
came out to apparently more than that. I’d ask you: what was the 
original estimate and what was the final figure on the cost of the 
construction of the northern technical institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, final cost of the facility, 
furniture, and equipment will be $35 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What was the original construction cost estimated 
at? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The original estimates was $31 million, all 
things together, and there was an addition made to bring it up to 
the 35 million level as a result of some redesigned programs, one 
of them being the decision to move correctional officer training. A 
day-care facility was added to go in conjunction with an early 
childhood training program which would be done on the site at the 
institute. 
 
Other program additions included roofer training, drug and alcohol 
counselling. And to accommodate the above program changes, the 
building underwent considerable redesign at a cost of about the $4 
million. I got this information that I received from the Department 
of Supply and Services. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I suppose any time that you have a major overrun, 
the best way to in fact get up and justify it is to say that you had 
redesigning, and then justify it. Because obviously you have 
indicated that it was completed at 31, and what happened is that 
there was an overrun of 4 or $5 million, and now you’re justifying 
it by indicating that there was redesigned. But that’s exactly what 
basically has happened here, is that there was a major overrun at 
the institute. 
 
I want in conclusion to say, Mr. Minister, that the major technical 
institutes — the Wascana, the Kelsey, and the STI at Moose Jaw 
— there’s a great deal of concern over the level of funding and the 
amount of cuts in staff. And I don’t know whether you have heard 
directly from them or not or have had any discussions. I suspect 
you have had. But certainly there is a major concern in respect to 
the amount of cutting. 
 
The other concern, as we proceed with this and wrap it up, is the 
lack of concern by your government, as we have indicated this 
afternoon, towards the federal government’s massive cuts in their 
commitment to secondary education and to health. 
 
And I draw only to your attention further concerns that we have 
because the federal government have put forth a study team report 
to a task force on program review. This is the famous Erik Nielsen 
task force. And in respect to funding they are looking at three 
basic options in respect to the EPF (established program of 
financing). One is to maintain the present EPF arrangement — and 
we know that they have changed that already. 
 
Number two was to leave the health transfer as it is as  

much as possible, through changing the fiscal arrangements Act’s 
provisions for post-secondary education, or removing them from 
another Act and attaching the conditions to the transfer. 
 
The third recommendation that this Nielsen task force put forward 
was to terminate the transfer for post-secondary education 
altogether. 
 
So the direction and the recommendations, be it all that it is not in 
fact . . . This is the recommendations of the task force; it’s not 
policy. But, in fact, these are the directions that the federal 
government will be looking at. And all I can say is that there is a 
major concern over this budget because of the massive cut-back to 
technical school funding. Because there has been a massive 
cut-back in funding in the three established institutes; no doubt 
about it. There’s over 1.4 million cut-back in funding in the three 
established institutes; there have been over 43 staff cut-backs in 
the three major institutes. And you can say all you want about the 
transfer of some courses. It does not, in fact, account for the 
massiveness of the cut. 
 
I can only say that the universities are concerned. They’re 
concerned with a 3.2 per cent increase in operating grants. And 
there is no doubt about it that they are concerned, and they’ll have 
massive problems attempting to live within that framework of 
operating grants. You know it and the universities know it. 
Because they cannot, in fact, operate within it because many of the 
expenditures that they have will be much higher than that. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, that your commitment here has 
not been as significant as the education community would have 
wanted nor, in fact, absolutely require. So I leave that statement. I 
could go into much more detail into the shortcomings of your 
budget but I think that those are the general areas. 
 
We find a development fund, $125 million, and the surprising 
thing that I think that we see is that major repairs to universities — 
at the University of Regina — have not even been effected and 
should have been, as has been requested by the students. 
 
So I think with that, Mr. Minister, I can conclude by saying that 
we’re a little disappointed in your performance — disappointed in 
that you will not, in fact, stand up to the federal government and 
you’re allowing them to set the course. And in the end 
Saskatchewan education is going to suffer if the federal 
government in fact backs out. So I’d urge you to take the fight to 
the federal government and to see whether or not you cannot in 
fact get larger amount of funding on behalf of education. So we 
can proceed then. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You have an increase from six to 17.5 in number 
4, human resources. Why the increase in the number of persons 
from six to 17.5 and the sizeable increase in the budget? Has there 
been a transfer from  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2237 
 
 

another department? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. That’s as a result of this being one of 
the departments in that centralization thing that was going on with 
the Public Service Commission. This was one of the departments 
which held the personnel shop. I believe as a result of the union or 
of the agreement that was done last year, that will be going back to 
public service. I’m not sure of the status of that, but that is the 
explanation for being in this department. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Advanced Education and Manpower 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

University Renewal and Development Fund — Nil Vote 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Advanced Education and Manpower 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There’s a payment there — extra amount spent 
was $1.9 million at Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose 
Jaw. I was wondering why such a major overexpenditure as 
compared to what was budgeted? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The 1.3 million is a 65- and 76-week 
course purchased by the federal government, which is refundable 
money; 163,8000 is the training for industry program, and I think 
that’s what you were asking about, but it’s refundable. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Advanced Education and Manpower 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Nil Vote 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That apparently then concludes the estimates 
for Advanced Education and Manpower. I will now ask the 
minister, if he so wishes, to make some concluding remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, very shortly, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to say a word of thank you to the officials in the department, 
those who attended here with me this afternoon and tonight, as 
well as those in the department who worked throughout the year. 
And the department, as I say, it’s a good-news department, doing 
some good things fro the young people of Saskatchewan, and 
we’ll continue to do that in the coming year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I join with the minister to thank the  

officials for providing the information. I don’t share his optimism 
with the direction of the department and the direction of his 
government in meeting the demands of young people. I’m 
disappointed in the overall structure of the funding of the 
department, but I nevertheless thank the officials for providing the 
information. 
 
(2015) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Revenue and Financial Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want 
to ask you a few quick questions with respect to Revenue and 
Financial Services. Would you indicate why the staff for the 
comptrollers’ office has been so substantially reduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That’s as the 
result of a new computer system that we’ve initiated in that 
department. As a result of the new system, we did not need as 
many staff people, and those people have been moved to other 
duties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I note that with 
respect to Wascana Centre Authority, there has been no increase at 
all in the provision for grounds maintenance. Since costs will 
certainly increase, to what extent do you think the maintenance of 
these Legislative Building grounds and other government grounds 
within the Wascana Centre will deteriorate? Undoubtedly they 
will deteriorate, but how serious do you think this will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That decision 
was taken in budget review, and since that time we have had 
representations to increase that budget, and it’s under review I’d 
say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that 
there is a lot of support for maintaining the Legislative Building 
grounds, I don’t necessarily say in top shape, but in a thoroughly 
adequate shape since it is the park which is most visited by more 
people in Saskatchewan than any other park — regional, 
provincial, or national — and is therefore under very, very heavy 
pressure of very, very many visitors come here, and I’m glad that 
you are proposing to reconsider that point. 
 
I ask you now with respect to the purchase of Sask Power savings 
bonds. You sent a letter to all full-time employees dated June 6th 
indicating that a loan could be arranged to purchase Sask Power 
savings bonds, and that the loan could be arranged through the 
Royal Bank. I take it from your letter that it could be arranged 
only through the Royal Bank. Do you have any arrangements 
whereby similar loans could be arranged through a credit union or 
any other chartered bank, and if not, why is the Royal Bank the 
only one with whom as employee can borrow if he wishes to 
purchase Saskatchewan Power savings bonds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — We chose the Royal Bank . . . to answer 
your questions in order, I believe. The Royal Bank 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2238 
 
 

 is the only bank that we’re using. It was a matter of administrative 
convenience, really. The Royal Bank had done the Saskatchewan 
Oil and Gas issue, and they were sort of set up for it and could 
handle it, and that was the reason that we chose to go with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, did you 
make any approach to Credit Union Central or the credit union 
movement that would have permitted employees to borrow from 
the credit unions in order to purchase Sask Power savings bonds, 
or did you for reasons of convenience restrict yourself only to the 
Royal Bank? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well we did look at the others in the former 
Saskoil issue, and we found the Royal Bank to be the most 
competitive. For reasons of convenience, we went with the Royal 
Bank this time; however, we’d be willing to look at extending it 
across to anyone else on a similar arrangement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, you have already sent out 
your letter and the issue will by and large be through within a day 
or two or three. There’s not much point in looking at it now; you 
have made your choice. You’ve selected the Royal Bank. You’ve 
excluded the credit unions and you’ve excluded the other 
chartered banks . . .(inaudible interjection). . . And as one member 
opposite has suggested, I’m catching on, and I am. It’s the Royal 
Bank that is the individual and sole choice of the government 
opposite in this regard, and I’ve caught on. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the provision for teachers’ pensions is down 
markedly from $54 million to $42 million. the provision for 
pensions for public servants is up from 37 million to 45 million. 
I’m talking in each case . . . I’m talking in the one case with 
respect to public servants, of what I might call the defined benefit 
plan or the old plan; and in the other case, I’m talking about 
teachers’ pensions and cost-of-living bonuses. 
 
Since the same trends which will cause an increase in the need for 
funds for public service superannuates would be operative for 
teacher superannuates, how do you explain the fact that the money 
you’re setting aside for teachers’ pensions is down by more than 
$10 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well to answer your question, the Education 
critic and the Minister of Education went over the teachers’ plan in 
some depth during their estimates, and I think things came out in 
there. The large jump in the public service pensions is because . . . 
Essentially what we’ve done is brought forward a bunch of the 
pension expenses through the early retirement program. So we’re 
at a stage now where we are where we would have expected to be 
in about 1990 or 1991 because of that many more people retiring 
and being on pension in that respect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
doubt very much whether that is the full explanation with respect 
to the teachers one. I’ll pass that by for a minute and come back to 
it, and ask you whether or not you have managed to get the record 
keeping of the Department of Revenue and Financial Services into 
some reasonable state so that the auditor doesn’t say that  

everything you’re doing is wrong. I don’t say wrong in the sense 
of conceptually wrong, I’m saying incorrect in the sense that your 
numbers don’t add up. And for a department — Revenue and 
Financial Services — for the numbers not to add up is a 
reasonably cogent criticism. 
 
The auditor is saying that you’ve overstated the liabilities under 
the investment division by $25.9 million; you’ve understated the 
liability under the dental plan by $44,000; you’ve understated the 
group life liability by $210,000; that the year before you made 
overpayments of the group life by 29,000 and 12,000; and the 
auditor keeps pointing these out. Everybody knows that an 
organization is going to have one glitch now and then, but 4 or 5 
or 6 or 7 glitches filling up pages in the auditor’s report is hardly 
something of which the department can take much pride. And I 
would ask the minister whether or not he has managed to get some 
sort of a handle on these many comments made by the auditor’s 
report, all of which start out by saying that in effect the books do 
not give him any reasonable assurance that the accounts of the 
fund were properly kept so as to permit the preparation of accurate 
financial statement — I’m talking here about the dental fund. I 
could read other descriptions in about the same language; the 
auditor has a certain sameness of language in his report. 
 
I would ask you: what progress has been made in getting a handle 
on the many problems the auditor points out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The issues 
that the member raises are all issues that come out of the auditor’s 
report and are dealt with of course in public accounts. To just 
shortly . . . and I might add that apparently they’ve reviewed these 
matters and are satisfied with them. The one thing I would maybe 
mention to you, I’d like to read just a sentence out of a letter to the 
former minister, to Mr. Rousseau, from the Provincial Auditor. It’s 
dated November of ’85, and the sentence I’d read is: 
 

I am gratified to note that a number of concerns in my 
memorandum respecting the year ended December 31, 1983 
have been addressed by the Agency and improvements have 
either been made or are in the process of being made. 

 
So the auditor indicates that he’s more or less satisfied. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m a 
little less than impressed with that. This was in 1985 and he said, 
you have made some improvements on the mess I found n ’83, but 
not in ’84. He might well have said in ’85 because at that time two 
full years had passed. Since March of ’83 to December of ’85, 
when you say he wrote to you, two full years had passed, and he 
compliments you on getting on top of things he pointed out with 
respect to the fiscal year two years ago — indeed three years ago 
— but two full years had passed. 
 
Do you feel that . . . Do you have a similar letter saying that he 
was happy with the things you had done with respect to the audit 
report for the year ended March 31, 1984? 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2239 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe I should read 
the whole letter, I suppose. Just to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Well, it’s a short letter, so it’s all relevant. 
 
Just for clarification, the year . . . He does mention 1983 here. The 
most recently audited year would be 1984. So what we’re really 
talking about is the same thing. And if I could, I’ll just read the 
first paragraph here. I’ve read the rest. 
 

An examination of the accounting records and related 
internal control of the Public Employees Disability Income 
Fund, administered by the Public Employees Benefits 
Agency, has been conducted under my direction for the year 
ended December 31, 1984. As a result of the examination, an 
observation concerning the internal control has been brought 
to my attention. Attached is a memorandum on this matter 
which has been discussed with Ms. C. Laing, Manager of 
Financial Services, Public Employees Benefits Agency. I 
would appreciate the written comments of responsible 
Agency officials on the contents of this memorandum. 

 
And then he goes on to the paragraph that I read previously that 
says, he’s very gratified that we’ve taken his recommendations 
and done something with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
For the year ended 1983, and not 1984. We are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, indeed. It’s quite a good deal of progress to 
get this government up to 1983 in the management of its books, 
and you haven’t managed it everywhere. 
 
Mr. Minister, to come back to . . . The member for Weyburn must 
have been a very, very quiet boy in his boyhood. That is a bit of a 
digression, Mr. Chairman. 
 
With respect to teachers’ pensions and the cost of living bonus, 
can you tell us what interest was accrued in the teachers’ pension 
fund, which was taken out of the teachers’ pension fund on the 
grounds that it was not required by statute to be left there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the exact 
number on the rate. And the reason why not is that it’s more 
appropriately addressed to the Minister of Education, as the critic 
from Education would know, and he went through this at some 
length with us. 
 
What I can tell you though, is that for this year — and I can run 
through the last couple of years — that we’ve contributed over and 
above the required contribution. For example, in ’83-84 we 
contributed $16.9 million over and above the required 
contribution; in ’84-85 we contributed $16.7 million over and 
above the required contribution; and for ’85-86 we contributed 
$81.4 million over and above the required contribution. 
 
If you want a rate, I’d undertake to get that for you. I’m just afraid 
we don’t have it here tonight. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
all I know is that the vote is here and it is a vote; it’s not statutory. 
It’s for $42 million and it seems not inappropriate to ask a 
question or two about $42 million. I know members opposite, 
some of them, regard that as a trifling sum, particularly if it’s 
being . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I will take up your offer to send me over the 
information on what money was removed from the fund, which 
the investments in the fund earned over and above the statutory 
amount required, and which were subsequently removed. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, there is a large figure here for the payments 
under the public service superannuation plan for $45 million; and 
another $10 million for the employees’ matching contribution plan 
or the public employees government contributory superannuation 
plan, to give it its official name. Mr. Minister, there are clearly 
large sums of money in this pension plan and some other pension 
plans, and the manner in which these sums are invested is 
absolutely key to the people who have pensions in those plans. 
This is particularly true of the government contributory plan. If 
you invest money in the old plan, then if the investments go bad 
they are presumably at the risk of the taxpayer. If however, you 
invest money in the new plan and it goes bad, you’re taking 
money from the superannuates. 
 
I am interested in knowing whether or not you are investing any of 
these sums in securities issued by something called SaskPen 
Properties Ltd. Do I understand the auditor’s report to say that you 
are investing substantial sums in SaskPen Properties Ltd.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do have investments 
in that fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you 
have 3 per cent bonds that you have purchased, of SaskPen, as 
securities with pensioners’ money, or with employees’ money, 
who will be pensioners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. The minister is about to 
make a statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a fairly auspicious 
introduction. I’d just like to say that we administer a fund of about 
$250 million, and of that fund roughly 1 million is in SaskPen 
securities. Now we’re trying to dig here through the information. 
We can’t find anything that says it’s at 3 per cent. Mind you, we 
don’t have the whole listing of all of the investments with us. It 
may be that there are some bonds with a 3 per cent interest rate. 
As the member would well know, often when you buy a bond it 
will have a quoted interest rate but you buy it at a discount or a 
premium which gives you a different effective yield. This could be 
the case, if you know of one that’s got a quoted rate of 3 per cent. 
But if you can provide us more information we’ll certainly find 
out exactly what the particulars are for you. 
 
We of course expect a rate of much better than 3 per cent,  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2240 
 
 

so if we in fact in that part of that portfolio hold something that’s 
got an interest rate of 3 per cent, then I would suggest that we 
bought it at a considerable discount to bring it up to market rate. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
reading from the auditor’s report for the year ended March 31, 
1985, the last auditor’s report, at page 27. I cannot say, because 
the auditor doesn’t say for certain, which pension fund bought the 
bonds. But I refer you to page 27 and the second full paragraph 
down, and he says: 
 

The Crown agency is called SaskPen Properties Ltd. 
(SaskPen), and is beneficially owned by the pension funds. 

 
I know that one of those funds . . . He tells me a little later that one 
of those funds . . . On page 31 he tells me it’s the public 
employees government contributory superannuation plan — 
sounds like what we’re talking about — and it’s beneficially 
owned by the pension funds. 
 

In return for the monies advanced to SaskPen, the Pension 
Funds were to receive as consideration for their investment, 
common shares and fully participating 3 per cent bonds, 
issued by SaskPen. 

 
Now I was asking you whether you had any of these fully 
participating 3 per cent bonds as referred to by the auditor on page 
27 of the auditor’s report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I have that page in the 
auditor’s report, and I think that the one area the member is 
concentrating on is the bond, and it’s a participating bond. And of 
course a participating bond has more than the interest rate quoted 
on it; there’s a participation factor. So that certainly tends to 
sweeten the return above the quoted rate. Plus, as they indicate, 
they are also common shares. It’s a package, and the package rate 
we would expect to come in around the 10 to 12 per cent range. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure you would 
expect that, Mr. Minister, but you have no assurance of that. Is it 
not true, Mr. Minister, that you’re in the real estate business and 
that you’re investing in properties which are vacant lots and 
development properties? You may make money on them; you may 
lose money . . .(inaudible interjection). . . That’s right. 
 
You may ask Pioneer Trust how easy it is to make money on real 
estate, but you don’t always make money on real estate. I am 
asking you, Mr. Minister, do you believe that the investments 
you’re making . . .(inaudible interjection). . . You’re going to have 
to shout a little louder . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I think we’re going to have some order here. 
The level of noise is going up and the Leader of the Opposition 
cannot make himself heard. Let’s bring order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Okay. Are you familiar, Mr.  

Minister, with the comments of the auditor with respect to 
SaskPen and with respect to the investments by the pension funds 
in SaskPen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well the answer to your question is yes, we 
have a very small amount of our pension portfolio in this 
particular security. Your comments, I guess, about you can or you 
may or may not make a profit or gain on the investments in the 
pension fund — I know that you’re well aware of the pension fund 
regulations and that they’re fairly stringent and that they have to 
be rather, if you’ll pardon the comment, a “conservative” 
investment, and that they’re carefully administered. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee have discussed this matter back 
and forth. They’ve had both sides of the issue in. The auditor’s 
argument, as I understand it, is not so much about the quality of 
the investment, as you seem to be indicating, but whether or not 
they’re an eligible investment. And we have legal opinions from 
the Department of Finance and from our own people that they are 
in fact an eligible investment. I guess part of the matter is a matter 
of principle as to whether or not we’ll invest Saskatchewan 
pension funds in Saskatchewan projects, which is what 
Saskatchewan Pen does. 
 
You’re well aware, I know, that primarily what happens, even to 
pension plans of Saskatchewan people, is that they’re primarily 
administered by companies generally in eastern Canada. So, for 
example, the teachers in Saskatchewan or the public employees or 
perhaps for that matter, ourselves as members of the Legislative 
Assembly, put money in pension funds which are then 
administered by a pension administrator, for example, in Toronto, 
and may well go into building something like the Eaton Centre in 
Toronto. 
 
SaskPen provides the vehicle that allows for an investment in 
Saskatchewan or Saskatchewan pension dollars to build our own 
economy and better our own province, and I believe that the real 
issue raised by the auditor is whether or not we should be 
investing in Saskatchewan Pen properties and Saskatchewan 
properties and that’s . . . I believe we ought to. I believe we ought 
to be using that pension money in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am 
not raising the same point as the auditor. The auditor is not 
supposed to ask whether the investments are wise. He is to ask 
whether they’re legal. He reaches the conclusion that they’re not 
legal. You say they are. 
 
I am turning to the question of whether they’re wise. You’re 
telling me that the SaskPen . . . Or do you agree, Mr. Minister, that 
SaskPen has a 20 per cent interest in the Bank of Montreal 
Building, the Victoria West building — that’s now called the 
Mercantile Bank Building — and a parking facility, and a couple 
of vacant lots? And you tell me they’ve got that all for $1 million? 
 
Are you telling . . . I want to ask you whether SaskPen has 
invested in that package of real estate in down-town Regina, the 
chief asset of which is a brand-new building which may or may 
not be a successful venture. I suspect it will be, but I don’t know 
that. And I’m asking you whether  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2241 
 
 

or not SaskPen has a 20 per cent interest in that. And I’m asking 
you again whether you’re telling me that SaskPen . . . those 
pension funds only have $1 million in SaskPen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re only one of a 
number of pension plans that have bought into SaskPen. So what 
their total holdings may be, you may very well be right in that. 
And I’m sure you are. 
 
In terms of whether or not it’s . . . You prefaced your remarks 
earlier by whether or not it was a good investment, and you were 
concerned about that, and you were concerned that the employees, 
because of the money purchase element of the plan, might end up 
being short-shifted on the thing. And that’s certainly a very valid 
concern. I appreciate your raising it. 
 
The thing, I think, that has to be borne in mind is that any 
investments made by us are run past the board of the public 
employees’ superannuation plan, and that board is made up of 
three employer representatives and three representatives of the 
union. So they would have to approve the investment. So 
obviously the employees themselves, or the employees’ 
representatives, have approved the investment. 
 
I think that’s item 1 in terms of security. They must have felt that 
it was a fairly good or a reasonable investment and would give 
them back a reasonable rate of return, because really they’re 
looking after their own pensions. Consequently I would think they 
would look at it with a very careful eye and wouldn’t be too loose 
with their own money. 
 
The other point that I would simply leave you with is that we’re 
only one of many of the pension plans that have gone into 
formulas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Obviously I do 
not have information which will tell me which pension plan put 
money in where, save only that we know that the pension money 
is used as a pool so it’s very difficult to know who is speaking for 
whom. But is it any of the pension plans for which you have 
responsibility that have a substantial investment in the Harwood 
Hotel in Moose Jaw? Are you in that or is it power or is it 
telephones or is it some other pension plan? I take it you will 
concede that one of the government pension plans has a significant 
investment in the Harwood. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — It’s not us. My colleague from Lashburn 
says if we want to make an investment in his hotel, he’d be very 
interested. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I have no doubt. And this 
is exactly the problem. That’s the problem. I think that quite a few 
people have been interested and quite a few people have been 
accommodated. This is the point. I am casting aspersions on the 
wisdom of investing in speculative real estate. I question whether 
or not your pension plan or any of the existing pension plans or 
any of the plans you propose to create should be investing in 
highly speculative real estate. There is no question that with 
respect to a down-town project like the Mercantile Bank building, 
it will be very heavily leveraged — I take it 

 no one doubts that — and that what you’re buying is the 
speculative margin, and that that can appreciate or depreciate in 
value very rapidly. 
 
Now members opposite seem obsessed with the idea of discussing 
other issues and I can understand why they wouldn’t want to 
discuss this one. But I think that pensioners are interested. 
Members opposite may not think that pensioners are interested in 
where their money is going, but I think they are. I think the 
minister should explain just how it is that this substantial change in 
policy is made. Now, Mr. Minister, I think a case could, under 
certain circumstances, be made for some investment, but if you 
want to do that you should do it by legislation as the auditor 
suggests — and that you haven’t done. And you should do some 
accounting; you should tell people where they stand — and that 
you haven’t done. 
 
You have taken this money; you have invested it without a 
statutory base, at least according to the auditor, and you have 
refused to account for it. And can you wonder why people who 
have pensions question whether or not that is an appropriate use of 
their money? Can you wonder about that? 
 
(2100) 
 
I want to repeat one section of this report. This is date . . . This is 
the auditor’s report and he’s got a covering letter dated January 31, 
1986. He says: 
 

At the date of this report, I have not completed my 
examination of the annual financial statements of SaskPen 
Properties Ltd. for the year ended December 31, 1983 and 
(December 31) 1984 due to delays in receiving the financial 
statements. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you possibly justify putting pension 
money into a company, into the bonds of a company and into the 
shares of a company which well over two years after the event 
have not presented financial statements for audit? Can you justify 
that? Is not that a cavalier use of the funds which are in pension 
funds? Can you justify this company not even presenting its 
statements for audit by the Provincial Auditor appointed by this 
legislature? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member from Regina North would like to 
introduce some guests. Is leave granted? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you very much. In the gallery tonight we 
have a group from Oregon. They’re actually a Jaycee organization 
from Oregon, and since 1952 they’ve been transporting a log on a 
transport truck to the national convention in the U.S. from Oregon, 
advertising tourism and their lumber industry. 
 
Heading up the group is David Rodriguez, who is in the gallery 
tonight. He’s their chairman. I’ll ask you all to stand, and we 
certainly welcome you to Saskatchewan. We hope you have a 
good stay in Regina, and as you travel through the province, I’m 
sure that you’ll certainly raise some interest in tourism in Oregon. 
You’re definitely welcome here. I’ll also suggest to the members 
that they  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2242 
 
 

are selling pins and with the pins they’re raising some funding that 
will help pay for their project. It’s a very ambitious project. The 
Jaycees in Oregon have done it every year since 1952, and I’ll ask 
the Assembly to welcome them to Saskatchewan with a good 
round of applause. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Revenue and Financial Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to . . . I want to reinforce the fact that roughly less than one-half of 
1 per cent of our total fund is invested in SaskPen — that’s one 
point. 
 
Secondly, any investments made are approved, if you would, by a 
board which is 50 per cent made up by the employees or 
representatives of the employees of the fund. So to begin with, 
there’s a very, very small percentage invested in the fund, in 
SaskPen. What investments there are, are approved by the future 
pension holders, if you would. So they have their own vested 
interests to look after. They’re not going to be, as I said earlier, 
spendthrift or profligate with their own money. So that’s two 
points that I believe I should make. 
 
Third point is that I think we have to really . . . The issue here is 
really: are we going to use money derived from Pension plans in 
Saskatchewan to build Saskatchewan? Or are we going to take 
these moneys as we’ve done all too often in the province of 
Saskatchewan, whether it’s pension moneys or anything else, and 
ship it out to benefit somebody else’s economy? And in the 
pension area, for years and years — and the member knows this 
certainly very, very well — we have shipped our money to 
Toronto investment brokers who have invested that money in 
either eastern Canada or in other areas. And they have tended to 
take the view, not that Saskatchewan was maybe a good risk or a 
bad risk, but that it wasn’t big enough to be worth playing with. So 
they go where they can make big deals, and take our money and 
put it into, as I quoted earlier, possible the Eaton Centre. And I 
picked that off the top of my head — any large investment that 
they feel that they could do in some centre where it’s convenient 
for them. 
 
So if we’re shipping our money down, for example, to Toronto, to 
be looked after by some guy in Toronto, he’s much more likely to 
make an investment in Toronto, he’s much more likely to make an 
investment in Toronto than he is to go around and look for the 
possibility of making an investment that will help Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe it’s fair and reasonable to take those moneys that are 
going to be paying pensions to people in Saskatchewan, that are 
derived in Saskatchewan, that in many, many cases are matching 
contributions that come from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and 
to put them into building Saskatchewan. I believe that 
fundamentally. 
 

And I think that there are adequate and ample safeguards built in, 
if for no other reason that the employees themselves have to 
approve the investment. Having said that, I think that deals with 
the general question. 
 
To deal with a specific question, the auditor raising the fact that he 
didn’t have an opportunity to audit the statement of this company, 
there are a couple of things there. Firstly, the auditor . . . Having 
been on Public Accounts — and anyone here who has knows that 
the auditor tends to make the argument that he should get to audit 
a lot of things that he doesn’t get to audit . . . So, for example, 
there are branches of government, or Crown corporations, or 
whatever, that are audited by private sector auditors. So it’s not 
that they go unaudited; it’s just that the Provincial Auditor doesn’t 
audit them. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan pension program has been audited by . . . 
was initially audited by Peat, Marwick. There was a change, I 
understand. A member of the firm, Peat, Marwick, came over into 
government, so that audit was relinquished by their firm. There 
was, consequently, some delay and that audit this very minute is 
with the auditor, the Provincial Auditor, for audit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I still do not know what has 
kept SaskPen from having a statement which could be looked at 
by the Provincial Auditor for the year ended 1983, and you sure 
haven’t told me. If Peat, Marwick weren’t able to get a statement 
out for 1983 prior to January 31, 1986, then neither Peat, Marwick 
nor any of their employees should be associated with the 
government. They obviously are. I don’t think it’s Peat, 
Marwick’s fault. I think SaskPen hasn’t been keeping financial 
statements which are available for audit. And if you’re saying that 
they have, but that the Provincial Auditor hasn’t done his job, or 
that Peat, Marwick hasn’t done their job, tell me. Tell me. Give 
me an explanation. Give me an explanation. 
 
Members opposite ask why we’re so suspicious. We’re so 
suspicious because the Provincial Auditor has reported on this 
improper performance year after year after year. You people are 
not concerned with the fact that the Provincial Auditor is saying 
that these pension funds are mishandled. I am saying, we are 
concerned. And whether members opposite are concerned, they 
can have their own level of . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please! Let’s have some 
quiet, please. Please let the opposition member ask his questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to see if you 
can get a couple of those people to restrain themselves because 
there’s no point in our shouting here when all we’re doing is trying 
to direct some questions to the minister, and he’s trying o answer. 
I’m not having any difficulty with the minister; it is just some of 
these people who wish they were ministers. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you give us an explanation as to why the 
auditor has not audited the statements for SaskPen in which you 
have a substantial investment for  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2243 
 
 

the year ended 1983? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can. To begin with, the 
auditor . . . As I mentioned, this matter has been discussed back 
and forth at public accounts, and the auditor has admitted that he 
has the statements with him now, has had them for some time and 
I understand is quoted as saying in public accounts that the ball is 
in his court. 
 
Finance have indicated that the minute they get 1983 statements 
back from the auditor, they’re prepared to give him the 1984 
statements for audit. So there, I gather, there has been some delay. 
The preparation of the statement does not fall within the authority 
of our department; it’s within the Department of Finance, I 
believe, and I can’t answer for what the delay may have been on 
their part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not asking you to 
account in detail for whether or not these statements are 
forthcoming. I’m asking you why you’re investing your money n a 
company that doesn’t produce audited statements. Certainly if it 
were a commercial company and you were buying its shares and 
bonds and they hadn’t produced an audited statement satisfactory 
to the final supervising auditor — and that’s the position of the 
Provincial Auditor — you wouldn’t touch their shares, and you 
wouldn’t touch their bonds. And of course you wouldn’t. If it were 
Bell Telephone and they hadn’t produced an audited statement 
satisfactory to the final auditor, which the Province Auditor is, you 
wouldn’t touch their shares, you wouldn’t touch their bonds, and 
you’d be right not to do so. What I’m asking is: what is so special 
about SaskPen that says that they don’t have to keep books, and 
you’re still investing in their securities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the 1983 
statements are the first year of statements for SaskPen. The auditor 
has them now. He has more or less admitted that by saying the ball 
is in his court; he’s had them for some time, and beyond that I 
can’t speak for the auditor. 
 
The issue that he’s raised, when he’s raised it, is in his view we 
don’t have statutory authority to make the investment. Now in our 
view, in our legal opinion, and Finance’s legal opinion, we do 
have that statutory authority. So what we have is not an unusual 
situation. We have legal opinions in conflict. And we feel that it’s 
reasonable. And I remind the Chair and the Assembly we’re 
talking about less than one-half of 1 per cent of the fund, of the 
pension fund — less that 0.5 per cent. 
 
So it’s not a huge amount. Any investment has to be approved by 
a board, half of the members of which are beneficiaries of the 
fund. So I think that looks after the security of the investment 
argument. They have approved the investments, that it’s a 
reasonable investment in their view. And it’s their money. That 
takes care of the security end. 
 
We have differing legal opinions. We have made the decision in 
principle that we want to invest Saskatchewan pension funds in 
Saskatchewan, and we’re prepared to do that. The member has 
indicated, when he talked about a hotel in Moose Jaw, that he 
didn’t think that was possibly  

an appropriate investment. That’s not within this fund. I would not 
comment whether or not that would be an appropriate investment 
or not. 
 
But I would like to say this: there are many, many communities in 
Saskatchewan that are smaller in size. I represent one. Certainly 
there are others that feel that simply because they don’t have 100 
or 200,000 people in them doesn’t make them a poor risk. 
 
And yet very, very often investment bankers and head offices of 
banks, when they’re called upon to look at investments in smaller 
communities, whether it’s, let’s say, an office building in a 
community of 15,000 people, they very often say the market isn’t 
big enough. Well people in Saskatchewan, because of our large 
geography and our relatively low population, have a lot of those 
types of communities. We believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
have demonstrated through good times and bad that they pay their 
bills, and therefore that they ought to be good candidates for 
investment, particularly of Saskatchewan pension funds, and 
particularly, as I said earlier, when in many cases half of the total 
fund invested comes from the taxpayer by way of matching 
contribution. 
 
So I guess really all I can say is, we have a legal disagreement 
with the auditor. In principle we believe it’s a right thing to do to 
invest money in Saskatchewan and help it build and grow, and I 
guess really that’s where we saw off on this thing. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please! I must ask for order. 
There is no point in having the member of the opposition hollering 
in order to ask us questions. Let’s have some quiet in here and get 
these estimates over with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, the minister suggests that 
there’s a small amount now invested in these types of investments. 
He does not give us any indication of whether or not it will turn 
out to be 5, 10, or 15, or 20 times that amount in the years to 
come. 
 
The issue is not right now, whether it is a small amount or a large 
amount, but whether or not the pension funds have adopted a 
policy of investing in speculative real estate. We’re not now 
talking about mortgages; we are talking about speculative real 
estate. The member opposite suggests MURBs. I don’t know what 
relevance that has to the discussion, but doubtless he will enlighten 
us. 
 
I am asking you whether it is the policy of the pension funds 
which are covered by your department to invest in what is 
essentially speculative real estate. When I say invest, I mean not 
take a mortgage of one-half the value, but take the equity end of it. 
Not the mortgage end of it, but the equity end of it, which you did 
with respect to that package of properties that I alluded to in 
down-town Regina, and which I suspect you’re going to do again, 
and it’s the extent to which you’re going to do that that I’m asking. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2244 
 
 

We all have fresh in our mind the record of Pioneer Trust, who 
invested in just these sorts of investments and lost a very large 
sum of money. We all have fresh in our mind the fact that other 
financial institutions, and I can give you a long list, but Northland 
Bank, Canadian Commercial Bank, Fidelity Trust, North West 
Trust, etc., have lost large sums of money investing in the equity 
end of real estate. They lost a great deal less money investing in 
mortgages, and obviously there is no perfectly safe investment. 
And I’m not suggesting that mortgages are necessarily bad — I 
certainly don’t think that — but this is not mortgage investment. 
This is the equity end. Someone else has put up the mortgage 
money. You are going to make or lose a lot money when you 
invest in the equity end of a speculative real estate deal, and that’s 
the issue. 
 
To what extent are you going to undertake that type of 
investment? And to what extent do you think your portfolio is 
going to be tied up in that type of investment? Because I think you 
owe that . . . you owe it to the pensioners and future pensioners to 
tell us what your investment policy is . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . It’s very difficult, Mr. Chairman, when members 
opposite are asking fatuous questions, but I’ll answer one or two 
of them. 
 
What about industrial parks? So far as I’m aware, not 10 cents of 
pension money was invested in industrial parks. So that, I hope, 
disposes of that interjection. 
 
With respect to all of the other what abouts that I’ve heard, if 
anyone can indicate that pension funds were invested in them, I’d 
be delighted to hear it, but I haven’t heard an intelligent comment 
from the members opposite who are sitting in their seats. 
 
The minister is making some intelligent comments, and I’m 
inviting him to make another intelligent comment and tell me, 
what is your investment policy with respect to investing in 
speculative real estate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Member, I’ll try 
not to disappoint you. I guess to go through it again, any 
investments made by pension funds are governed quite strictly, 
and in our division, for example, the investment and financial 
services division of Finance make their investments in accordance 
with Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act in Canada 
and The Department of Finance Act in Saskatchewan. So to begin 
with, they have to comply with those Acts, number one. 
 
They have to be recommended by the investment board of the 
Department of Finance. They have to clear the — what’s the name 
of it here — the board of the public employees’ superannuation 
plan which is 50 per cent made up of people who will receive the 
benefit of the pensions before they can make the investment. So 
there’s a great deal of scrutiny that takes place before an 
investment is made. That’s the point I’d like to make. 
 
The other point is that . . . You talk about equity investments. 
Large projects are very, very often done by equity investment, and 
the reason that they’re often done by equity investment . . . and 
you sort of squint, but I mean, you know that’s the case. Life 
insurance  

companies, people like that often take an equity position in a 
project because it helps to improve the cash flow of the project, 
and they’re in the business of making a profit for their 
shareholders and their policy holders and whatever. So why 
wouldn’t they take a piece of an investment in terms of equity that 
will grow and accumulate and acquire capital gain to sort of 
sweeten the return to their investors? Now essentially what 
Saskatchewan Pen does is that very same thing. 
 
You’ve asked what is our position with regard to speculative 
investment. I’d say we don’t make speculative investments. And I 
couch that in these terms. I don’t believe that an investment that 
could clear all the hurdles which I’ve outlined — the two Acts of 
the legislature that it has to comply with, the board in the 
Department of Finance, the public employees’ superannuation 
plan — I don’t believe in investments that could clear all of those 
boards and all of those hoops and be scrutinized that closely could 
really qualify as a speculative investment. I think by the time you 
got through that much scrutiny and review, that any investment 
that would get through that would be a reasonably safe and secure 
investment. And certainly the employees who are on the board 
seem to feel that having invested their money in SaskPen, that 
they must feel it’s a fairly safe investment. I’m sure they wouldn’t 
just throw it away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was an 
illuminating comment. You just say that regardless of the nature of 
the investment — it could be in Saskatchewan moose pasture or 
Saskatchewan dry holes — so long as it’s looked at by all of those 
particular bodies, it is not a speculative investment, and that is an 
interesting characterization of what is a speculative investment and 
what isn’t. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you have confirmed the fact that 
you do not have a strict set of rules with respect to investing the 
pension funds, and that will confirm what I think are the 
suspicions of a good number of pensioners and the suspicions of 
other people who may be tempted to join any pension fund which 
you may set up. 
 
You have, Mr. Minister . . . I don’t think anyone can deny, 
SaskPen may be a good business judgement or a bad business 
judgement. I express no view on that. And I certainly agree with 
the idea of using pension funds for promoting local development. 
No one is quarrelling with that, but surely, Mr. Minister, you agree 
that SaskPen is a piece of financial flim-flam . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Now just a moment. To the extent that anyone 
says that those are bonds as the word is ordinarily understood . . . 
to sell bonds in a company that is then going ahead and buying the 
equity end of a real estate venture is to use the word “bonds” in a 
way which no one would ordinarily use it. And I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, this is a way in which you have decided to invest a 
portion of the pension money in the equity portion of a real estate 
venture, which is financed substantially by loans provided by 
other people on the security of mortgages, and where the equity 
end of it is owned by SaskPen, along with others, and SaskPen is 
giving you a portion of that equity and calling the security which 
they give you, a bond. That is a reasonably unusual designation for 
that type of a security,  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2245 
 
 

and it is for that purpose. It’s a flim-flam. If you hadn’t called it a 
bond, you couldn’t have invested in it. If you had attempted to 
share in the equity end of that building without setting up SaskPen, 
you would not have been able to do it. You would not legally have 
been able to do it. 
 
You set up this dummy company; you had them buy the equity 
end; they issued to you their share of the equity end; they called it 
bonds; and you said you could invest in bonds. Now that’s what’s 
happened. And I hope no one denies it, and it’s a bit of flim-flam. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, I don’t want to quarrel excessively 
with you except to ask you to state what your policy is with 
respect to using pension funds to invest in speculative investments. 
And you’ve told me they can’t be speculative investments because 
they’ve been looked at by committee A, B, C, and D. And I find 
that an absolutely remarkable judgement. And I say that people, 
who are depending on these pension plans, will find it an equally 
remarkable judgement. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Minister, that they wouldn’t object to some 
speculative investments, investment in speculative real estate, 
because it has the qualities that you say. It has growth potential, 
and that may be a good thing in small quantities in a pension fund, 
but I think they want the minister to come clean. I think they want 
it done pursuant to rules laid out that people know about, and the 
minister has very, very clearly refused to give us the rules tonight. 
 
The auditor says it should be set out in legislation. The minister is 
unwilling to tell us what the rules are. And without in any way 
suggesting that such investments should never be made, I do 
suggest that they should be made pursuant to well understood 
rules which are understood by the people who are putting their 
money in a pension fund, as well as by the inner group in the 
Department of Finance who are making these decisions. 
 
I say that the rules should be set out in the legislation. The other 
rules to which the minister referred are set out in the legislation, 
and I say that just so should you set out the rules under which you 
propose to invest pension money in speculative investments 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . I’ll just take a breather for a moment 
until members opposite relieve themselves of their frustrations. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: if you say that these types of 
investments are good investments, and I’m not now quarrelling 
with that, and if you say that they are approved by the this small 
group that you speak of, why are you not willing to set out the 
rules under which they are approved so that all the people whose 
money it is know what the rules are? 
 
And may I say in passing, I wonder whether or not it is entirely 
fair to say that the employee representatives of the pension plan 
can express an absolute veto when they are being met with all of 
the plethora of financial data which the government people have 
when they’re recommending these investments. 
 
You’re not suggesting that you supply the employee 
representatives with a similar research staff so that they  

can assess the investments. I’m sure you’re not. I think that it is an 
unequal contest, because it is government people with great 
back-up and research, and employee representatives with none. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, I guess the only comments 
that I’d like to make — I don’t want to bore you with this little 
story — but, I remember being a young kid, and my dad was 
setting up a credit union with a group of our neighbours. And he 
came home from a meeting setting up the credit union one night 
raving about a guy by the name of Wes Robbins, and how this guy 
understood money and how bright this guy was. And to this day 
my father speaks about what an intelligent man Wes Robbins was 
when it came to money, how he understood it. And I would think 
Mr. Robbins, having been a member of the MDP and CCF, and a 
member of the group over there in government — when they were 
in government — would be fairly well regarded by them. He’s in 
fact the gentleman who set up the rules on this. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the rules that we deal by and that we operate 
by are the very same rules that were in place and have been in 
place for a long, long time. The member talks about what are the 
exact details. The details are contained in the regulations for the 
two Acts that I’ve been talking about all night, which guarantee 
that pension fund investments . . . In fact one of the criticisms and 
one of the arguments about pension fund investments are that 
they’re only allowed to be made in properties or in areas that are 
too conservative — they’re too safe — to take away that are of 
risk. 
 
And that’s one of the criticisms that you hear people make of them 
— that they’re too cautious; they’re too much the sure thing. And 
consequently — and I think we all know in here that the more 
risky the investment, the higher the return one would expect; or 
the more risky the investment, the higher the interest rate. 
 
Now in fairly secure investments the interest rate tends to be 
lower, and that’s why you get the argument from people that their 
pension funds don’t generate as high a rate of return as they might 
like, because they’re invested in things that are too safe, you 
know. 
 
Now I won’t make that argument because I think you only have 
one opportunity in life to build a pension plan. If you start to build 
your pension plan when you’re 64, it’s a little too late. 
 
So better off that you take a little less than you might otherwise 
have got, but that you have that security. And that’s what these 
Acts, and the board in the Department of Finance, and the board of 
the public employees superannuation plan, I believe, ensure that. 
 
We’ve had a good discussion tonight, and I hoped not to have to 
get into this, but the member has said that . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . I’ll ask the same courtesy of your members as you 
asked of mine, Mr. Member. 
 
We’ve had the member stand up and say, I agree with investing 
pension funds in Saskatchewan. I don’t really  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2246 
 
 

disagree with doing a lot of this, but I disagree with the vehicle. 
And we hear that in here over and over again, and it seems to me 
that that’s a bit of a catch-22 argument. I mean, it’s all well and 
good to say, I agree with this in principle, but you’re using the 
wrong vehicle. 
 
I won’t go into the number of things that we’ve heard it on, but 
certainly we kick one around in question period regularly. I mean, 
if you believe in the principle and you believe, for example, in this 
— investing Saskatchewan pension money in Saskatchewan — 
you have to have a vehicle. 
 
Now I wouldn’t . . . I mean, maybe there’s a better vehicle than 
SaskPen, but right now it’s sort of the only vehicle around. And a 
number of different pension plans, all of which are fairly 
conservatively managed, have gotten together and agreed that this 
will be a good and reasonable vehicle. 
 
So I mean, if you have a suggestion for a better vehicle, I’d be 
happy to entertain; I’d be happy to talk to you about it. I mean, I 
wish we had 20, or 30, or 40 SaskPens running around, taking the 
money that’s generated in Saskatchewan, helping to develop 
Saskatchewan, but I’m one who, being the fourth generation of a 
family who lives here, gets a little tired that we get milked like a 
fresh cow by other areas of the country time and time and time 
again, and this is one opportunity where we can at least take our 
own money and build our own province, and I support that 
fundamentally. And if Saskatchewan Pen is the vehicle, then I 
support that vehicle. 
 
You asked about the rules. I’d like to say one of the rules is that an 
equity has to have three years’ worth of dividend history before 
it’s an eligible investment. And the other rules are laid out in the 
regulations to the two Acts; I’m sure that you have access to it. I 
know you have access to it. In fact, I’ll go a step further; I’m sure 
you’re familiar with it because I know that the pension issue is an 
issue that you have an interest in, and you do study and you do 
follow, and you’re very very well versed in it, as well versed as 
anyone else. And so certainly, you know the rules. 
 
I believe that this is a good and reasonable and safe investment for 
people in Saskatchewan, and I could only hope that in years to 
come we’ll see more and more of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t 
intend to thrust the straw any more. It’s clear that . . . You know, 
you just heard the minister say that in order to invest in an equity, 
it has to have a three-year track record. I hope he doesn’t deny that 
SaskPen was incorporated in June of 1983, and I hope he doesn’t 
deny that the shares of SaskPen were bought almost immediately, 
not three years later, in fact that they were bought almost 
immediately, and there was no suggestion that there was three 
years’ wait. Those are the facts. And whether or not he says that 
you got to wait three years to buy shares, he didn’t do it. And I’m 
not quarrelling with members opposite about this, I’m just saying 
that I believe that there ought to be a statutory vehicle. I believe 
it’s inappropriate to set up a company under The Companies Act, 
or The Business Corporations Act to act in this way. I think we 
should have a statutory vehicle, and I think that statutory vehicle 
would tell the potential pensioners what the rules were and give 
them a level of assurance of both the operation of that company, 
which they cannot possibly have when it’s a company 
incorporated under The Business Corporations Act. I have made 

that point. The minister, I take it, doesn’t deny that he didn’t wit 
three years to buy these shares — I know that — and those are the 
facts. 
 
Now he believes that it’s entirely appropriate to have this type of a 
vehicle incorporated under The Business Corporations Act and 
acting in the way it has. I believe that the auditor makes some very 
good points which have not been answered. I don’t propose to say 
any more about it, and I will . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Thank 
you for that helpful interjection. 
 
But members opposite don’t feel this is a serious matter. I feel it is. 
I feel it’s a serious matter — how we’re managing $250 million 
worth of pension money — what the rules are. And I asked you, 
Mr. Minister, whether you have a general policy on how much of 
your money would go into things like investments in SaskPen. I 
haven’t heard the answer. I’ll get it on another occasion, because it 
looks like we’re not going to get very many of those tonight. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 — Statutory. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 11 inclusive — Statutory. 
 
Items 12 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 15 to 17 inclusive — Statutory. 
 
Items 18 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
(2145) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Revenue and Financial Services 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 

 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The minister would like to make his closing 
remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would. I’d like  
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2247 
 
 

to thank him very much. We’ve had my officials here for some 
time, and I appreciate their help. And I’d also like to thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for his questions. I enjoyed the back and 
forth and the discussion. It was very good tonight. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I will add my thanks to 
the staff and to the Minister. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have with me Keith 
Laxdal, the deputy minister, and director of revenue policy, Len 
Rog. 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax 

Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act (No. 2) 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 57 — An Act respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in 

Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have on my 
left the deputy minister, Mr. Kesslar; on my right the 
superintendent of insurance, Mr. McGillivray; and behind me, the 
director of policy and planning, Mr. Zukowsky. He’s just joined 
our department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —Mr. Chairman, one question. Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I note that there is some $2.5 
million that’s been set aside in trust funds for prepaid funerals. 
Will this Bill be retroactive and encompass that as well, or is this 
only for future transactions? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — It will just cover prepaid funerals sold 
after Royal Assent, once it comes into law. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —Why is that? I have some concern  

about the 2.5 million which are there now. Is it because it’s legally 
not possible, or you choose not to do it? I notice that in Ontario 
there have been cases where these funds have been 
misappropriated — those are your own words — and I know that 
to be the case. Is it because it’s legally not possible, or what seems 
to be the difficulty here? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That sum that you’re talking about, the 
$2-million-odd is presently covered under The Cemeteries Act, 
which also has a section that deals with prepaid funerals, and that 
money in Saskatchewan is held on deposit in trust. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —Okay. I think I understand that. The council 
is going to pass by-laws — that’s quite normal. It will also set 
aside or develop an insurance fund to pay out any claims. Maybe I 
missed something in the Bill, but what is going to regulate this 
insurance fund? Is there some other aspect to this that’s not here, 
or some other piece of legislation, or what will regulate those 
insurance funds? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The assurance fund will work similar to 
the real estate assurance fund that has been in effect for quite a 
number of years. It will be regulated by approved regulations, 
subject to the approval of the superintendent of insurance, and 
ultimately the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have further 
questions. Basically, in principle, this Bill, we’re satisfied with the 
intent of it. We will obviously — and I’m sure the department 
officials will obviously have to monitor its effectiveness over time 
— but we can proceed to do clause by clause. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —One question, Mr. Chairman. There is a 
provision here where the buyer of a contract can have funds 
returned because of a cancellation. Will that include interest on the 
funds, or just the initial amount of money that was put in? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — It will include interest as well. And there 
was a reason for putting that provision in. We have found in other 
parts of Canada people that have bought a prepaid funeral, perhaps 
10 years ago and maybe have paid $2,000, if they cancel today 
they simply get their $2,000. So that was requested by the 
association to make sure that this particular section was in the Bill. 
 
Clause 15 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 16 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
  



 
June 23, 1986 

 

2248 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I move that Bill 25 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital  

Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I move that Bill No. 26 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Education and  
Health Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Education and  
Health Tax Act (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I move that Bill No. 50 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act respecting Prepaid Funeral  
Services in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I move that the said Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 
 


