


















































December 23, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 
December 23, 1986 

 

479 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Government of Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 

 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s a few other 
questions that follow from the questions that I was asking. I’d 
like to ask the Deputy Premier whether he agrees with me that 
Bill 5 goes beyond the similar provisions in the federal 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I guess I’m a little fuzzy on the 
question. In what respect does this go beyond? I mean, can you 
clarify the question? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Okay. I’m suggesting that the federal 
legislation requires reorganization, which I understand takes 
place by proclamation, to come back to the House, to be 
debated by the House and passed by the House, or approved. 
And I’m asking the Deputy Premier whether in fact that’s 
correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My understanding of the federal 
legislation — or the federal provisions, if it is in fact legislation; 
I don’t know — is that there is no debate on establishment or 
revision of powers, but I think that the same is true here. If you 
keep in mind that, as we talked earlier today, in every instance 
there will be a requirement for the clean-up consequential 
amendments, if you like, that will provide for that opportunity. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I would like to also ask the Deputy Premier 
whether the present Bill 5 goes beyond what is allowed in the 
British House of Parliament. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sorry? 
 
Ms. Simard: — I would also like to ask the question whether or 
not he is of the opinion that Bill 5 goes beyond what is allowed 
in British legislation with respect to similar Acts in the British 
parliament. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Short answer: precisely, I don’t know. 
And the long answer is, I guess suffice to say, they are similar 
in nature and you can read them as well as I can, I am sure, or 
better. I will allow you to do that. I don’t know how I could 
stop you if you wanted to. But the short answer is, I don’t 
know; they are similar in nature. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well I’m suggesting, Mr. Chairman, that Bill 5 
does go beyond the provisions of the British legislation which 
require a resolution of parliament in order to do the sorts of 
things that are being allowed in this particular piece of 
legislation. In other words, it’s got to come back to parliament 
in order to be finally determined. 
 
I would also like to ask the Deputy Premier whether he agrees 
with me that by explicitly making The Regulations Act 
applicable in Bill 5, that the gazetting, in other words 

the giving of notice of the regulation, can be dispensed with by 
invoking provisions of The Regulations Act. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We have identified that problem and 
we are prepared to move on the House amendment as we go 
through clause by clause. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Has the Deputy Premier also identified the 
problem that by making The Regulations Act applicable they 
can in effect exempt The Regulations Act — in other words any 
of the notification, any of the tabling, and resorting to the 
Regulations Committee — by invoking a provision in The 
Regulations Act that says, you can pass a regulation exempting 
The Regulations Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, that’s essentially the problem 
we’ve identified. And I’ll send a copy of the proposed House 
amendment over to you. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Further question, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
wondering why the government has seen fit in Bill 5 to put in a 
provision that allows them to exempt a certain department from 
the tabling of documents provision, and what they envision that 
would . . . what cases they think that would be used in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that this is to cover off several 
things; like you might not want a department to have certain 
granting powers. You might not . . . For instance the Provincial 
Secretary, I think, hasn’t filed an annual report in 34 or 36 
years; and you know, you might not want the Provincial 
Secretary to file one next year in the event of reorganization. 
And you may not want a certain department to continue to have, 
if you like, the power to have consultants or whatever. But 
those are the kinds of things that that is intended to deal with. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I’m not sure I understand that reply, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m talking about the annual report, section 21. And 
I take it . . . It’s being suggested to me that in certain situations 
you wouldn’t want an annual report being tabled because it’s 
not done. I’m unclear as to what the answer . . . whether the 
Deputy Premier was addressing my question correctly; whether 
he understood what my question was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The example that I used of the 
Provincial Secretary: the Provincial Secretary hasn’t been 
required to file an annual report, and hasn’t filed one for over 
30 years. And so you wouldn’t expect, as a result of this, the 
Provincial Secretary to start filing an annual report. 
 
Ms. Simard: — In most cases however I believe departments 
are required to table annual reports. So we have a situation here, 
Mr. Chairman, that would allow the government to step in and 
say that annual reports do not have to be tabled by departments 
that are created by them with new objects and purposes that 
may not coincide at all with the old objects and purposes in 
departments. They don’t have to table the annual report. There’s 
a section in there that says that they can dispense with notice of 
this particular regulation. There’s a section in The Regulations 
Act that says this, and this amendment, 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

480 
 
 

by the way, doesn’t address that. It doesn’t address that 
particular issue. I just bring that to your attention if you’re 
intending to propose that amendment. 
 
The other thing that causes me some concern with this 
legislation is that on second reading debate there was a 
suggestion that it didn’t grant any further spending powers to 
government. However, I note that the Bill says that, number 
one, you can create a new department with new objects and new 
purposes; potentially new powers, because when you create 
objects and purposes, powers will flow from the objects. So in 
effect you’re creating new powers. But putting that aside, 
you’re creating a new department with new objects. 
 
And then it goes on to say that the government can spend 
money up to a maximum of 10,000. Perhaps they would have to 
go for special warrant but still there could be, effectively, 
100,000 applications for $9,000 each. And it’s being suggested 
that this is now empowering the government to spend any more 
money. Of course, I take exception to that because I think it 
goes much further than that. I would like to hear what the 
Deputy Premier has to say on that particular point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, there’s nothing particularly new. 
In many, many Acts in existence today that granting power is 
there now, so nothing changes. Appropriations are necessary. 
You can’t spend money that you don’t have. And you rightly 
said that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You rightly pointed out 
that you can do special warrants and that’s true. But having said 
that, they have to be supported here in supplementary estimates 
when estimates are dealt with in the House. But there are many, 
many piece of legislation that exist now that provide for that 
$10,000 granting provision. 
 
Ms. Simard: — But that’s legislation, Mr. Chairman, not 
something that’s done behind closed doors by cabinet. Not a 
new department created outside the Legislative Assembly. 
That’s pursuant to legislation that’s already been authorized and 
debated in this House, not pursuant to legislation which didn’t 
come before the House but was done by cabinet. So there’s a 
very distinct difference there. And would not the Deputy 
Premier agree with me that this is a substantial difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We don’t agree because we’re here 
now and we’re debating this, and it’s before the legislature. And 
you create a department, and it does have the power to make 
grants up to $10,000. Anything over $10,000 has to go to 
cabinet. All appropriations of government have to be approved 
here — this is how the place works — and so there’s nothing 
particularly new about this. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Just to follow through on that point. We may 
be debating at this point whether or not you should be allowing 
that power but we’re debating it with respect to something 
which we don’t know exists yet, something where the objects 
have not been yet defined. In the legislation you’re referring to, 
the objects have been defined. It’s much more specific. And 
would you not agree that that’s a substantial difference? 
 
(1915) 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The long and the short of it, Mr. 
Chairman, is that every cent that is spent by a department, 
whether that department now exists, or whether it’s a new 
department, it has to be approved by this legislature. It comes in 
here in estimates. 
 
Take, for example, the proposed department of human 
resources. It will come to this House line by line in the blue 
book and, you know, you will question us and we will debate it 
back and forth, but ultimately every nickel has to be approved 
by this legislature. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is that done after the money is spent or before? 
Or is there any case where it can be done before? Or rather after 
— pardon me. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I just want, in closing, to reiterate that point. In 
other words, you come to the legislature, when we’re talking 
about special warrant, after the money is spent. You do have the 
power in other departments now, but those departments are 
defined. Their objects are defined, their purposes are defined; 
we know what we’re talking about in terms of objectives. 
 
We don’t know what we’re talking about here. It could be a 
department to do who knows what, because you can create new 
objects. And you’re expecting us to allow you to spend money 
before it’s dealt with by the Legislative Assembly, not even 
knowing what the objects or purposes for this money are. And I 
think that’s asking this Legislative Assembly to go too far. I 
think you’re asking too much of this opposition. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ve listened, Mr. Minister, with growing 
impatience this evening. I’m not sure whether you’re 
obfuscating or whether you’re being obtuse. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would try and answer concisely 
what has been asked you by the member from Riversdale and 
the member from Lakeview. Why can you not bring the 
legislation back for the legislature to approve in specie? If you 
want to create the department of human resources, bring the 
legislation here for us to approve. Why do you insist on 
approving it en masse so that we must give blanket approval to 
an endless number of changes, some of which we might 
approve of but some of which we might disapprove of? Why 
don’t you bring it back to us in specie the way it has always 
been done in this Assembly before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The question has been answered 
several times, Mr. Chairman, and all I can say at this point is 
I’m still having difficulty in understanding why members 
opposite are resisting these efforts to bring efficiency to 
government. And we are . . . As I explained earlier today, we 
have a proposed department of human resources. We have that 
department now: several — four, 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

481 
 
 

five, six, I don’t know how many — separate entities 
responsible to one minister. What we’re trying to do with this 
legislation is bring together the administrative framework of 
those entities that are going to be this new department of human 
resources, and the efficiencies that flow from that. And the 
tax-paying public is asking us for those kinds of efficiencies 
and that’s what we propose to do through this legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what you seek to do is avoid 
legislative scrutiny. What you seek to do is avoid the hard 
questions, the specific questions about what you’re doing. 
 
What is going to happen to employees who are transferred to a 
Crown corporation? What’s going to happen to a number of 
different departmental functions and responsibilities? Mr. 
Minister, you’re not seeking to make government more 
efficient. You’re seeking to make it less responsible to the 
public. Hereafter when you create a Crown corporation to 
handle Supply and Services responsibilities, the only means 
we’re going to have to question it is going to be a press release, 
unless someone thinks that the Crown Corporation Committee 
has worked because I don’t think it has. It is a couple of years 
behind in its work, Mr. Minister, and it is just simply not an 
effective vehicle. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you wanted to make government more 
responsible, you’d be prepared to come here and justify that. 
But you’re not. You’re giving us these asinine answers, such as 
there will be consequential Bills which will come before the 
legislature and that’ll give you an opportunity to ask the 
questions. I wonder, Mr. Minister: do you actually believe that? 
First of all, do you believe that consequential amendments are 
inevitable? I don’t think your legislative draftsmen are that 
sloppy that they always make mistakes. Sometimes they get it 
right the first time, Mr. Minister. Sometimes there isn’t any 
consequential amendments. Even if there are, Mr. Minister, 
they might well be on a narrow point which wouldn’t give us 
the opportunity to raise the breadth of questions which arise 
when functions are transferred from one department to another, 
Mr. Minister, surely you don’t believe that consequential 
amendments are a substitute for having brought the Bill creating 
the department or abolishing the department here in the first 
place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, mistakes or sloppy 
drafting has nothing to do with it at all. It naturally follows that 
when you do a reorganization under this new legislation, if you 
are establishing or disestablishing and departments are moving 
or disappearing or springing up new, that there will be 
legislative changes required in existing legislation. So 
consequential to those changes that are made it will be 
necessary to, if you like, clean up the legislation that’s been in 
place before. And that will provide the opportunity to debate 
fully, I would expect, all of the changes that are proposed. 
 
I’d just point out as an aside — and I talked about this this 
afternoon as well — that in 1945 and again in 1978 the 
government of that day brought in some legislation dealing with 
Crown corporations. An Act respecting the Creation of 
Corporations for Certain Purposes, and the 

powers that exist in that Act, Mr. Chairman, are far broader 
than anything we are talking about here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is it the minister’s position that a 
consequential amendment gives us the right to raise any 
question that may arise with respect to the varying, changing, or 
disestablishment of a department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My guess is that that would be the 
case. I don’t know what form those consequential amendments 
would take, but my guess is, I mean . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask the member to make his 
comments from his feet, because they won’t be on the record 
when you make them from your seat. Would you wait for the 
minister to answer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I was just trying to assist the minister with 
his answer. Mr. Minister, without knowing what the 
consequential amendments are, how can you possibly know 
what the breadth of a discussion will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, Mr. Chairman, without 
knowing the extent of a reorganization — and government 
being the dynamic thing that it is, and a country being a 
dynamic thing that it is — from here on in, you know . . . 
Heaven forbid if you folks ever get back to this side. I would 
fully expect that you would want to adjust and have the 
flexibility to make some executive, administrative 
reorganization. And I would fully expect that as government, 
and we as a province, dynamically move on that that will 
become more frequent, to make those kinds of adjustments. 
 
And so without knowing what we’re looking at five, 10, 20 
years down the road, I don’t know what kinds of reorganization 
will be demanded of us at that time. And because I don’t know 
that, I don’t know how I could possibly know what the 
consequential amendments that would flow from that would be. 
And I can say that I can’t possibly imagine any reorganization 
under this legislation that wouldn’t have a requirement for some 
consequential clean-up of existing legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me just try an example on you. You 
have stated that you are going to create a Crown corporation 
which will take over some of the functions of Supply and 
Services. It’s anything but clear from those press releases what 
responsibilities are going to be taken over. 
 
Early in her brilliant legislative career, the member from Maple 
Creek got herself in difficulty with The Purchasing Act. It’s my 
reading of that legislation that The Purchasing Act could be 
transferred to the Crown corporation without any legislation, 
and our only recourse would be to issue a press release saying 
we think that’s not a good idea. A press release is no substitute 
for debate in this Assembly. That is the kind of thing which 
might occur and then the only recourse for discussing that 
thereafter is Crown corporations, which under you people has 
scarcely functioned. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, using that as an example, why don’t 
you think it out in advance, decide what you’re going to do, 
come here and justify it. Why do you insist on 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

482 
 
 

being given a carte blanche to make whatever mistakes that 
may occur to you and ask us to try and deal with the problem 
afterwards. Why don’t you think it out ahead of time, give us 
the opportunity to debate it before the mistakes are made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The property management corporation 
has nothing to do with this Act at all. In fact the legislation that 
allows us to set up the property management corporation was 
passed, I think, in 1945, by the CCF government, and 
re-enacted in 1978. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well then, why don’t you bring the 
legislation here now? Why ask us to take your word for it? 
Frankly, Mr. Minister, having spent four and a half years on this 
side of the Assembly, being told one thing in estimates and 
finding out something very different in July and August . . . 
 
If you are going to abolish part of the functions of the 
Department of Supply and Services, why don’t you bring that 
legislation here and now, so we know what you’re doing? You 
say, I’m not going to move the purchasing agency to the Crown 
corporations. You ask me to accept that on faith, and that’s 
what I’m doing, because it’s quite possible. I say, Mr. Minister, 
that’s not good enough. Having watched the member from 
Maple Creek flub a $2,000 purchase of a few water purifiers 
from a former candidate who ran in Regina Elphinstone, instead 
of going through the purchasing agency, I say, Mr. Minister, to 
take an example, that’s an agency which . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Madam Minister, you were less than 
proud of the way you handled it a little later on when we 
discussed it in estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re not going to transfer the purchasing 
agency . . . And if you did, it would create patronage in 
hundreds of millions of dollars. I ask you. This is the 
government which won’t accept competitive tenders, which 
asks for proposals so that no one can judge whether or not the 
lowest bidder actually got it. This is the government which 
won’t accept competitive tenders for anything. Even building 
contracts now, you ask for proposals. This legislation gives you 
the right to transfer the purchasing agency to the Crown 
corporation without any of the protections of that Act. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars will go through there if this 
were to happen without any protection, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1930) 
 
What would happen to the public treasury if instead of having 
to accept the lowest bid on $200,.000 worth of Caterpillars, you 
could take whichever bid you wanted? I say it opens a vast new 
realm of patronage which I hope you haven’t thought of. 
 
Mr. Minister, why not put it in the legislation of a department? 
Why not bring in a departmental Bill instead of asking us to 
accept on faith that this government has no interest in 
patronage? Because from what we have seen over the last four 
and one-half years, nobody would believe you, much less the 
people who have sat here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill before us right 
now gives us no power to transfer anything to a 

Crown corporation. We can transfer between departments; we 
can transfer, you know, from one minister to another. But as I 
understand it, this Bill gives us no power to transfer to a Crown 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is simply not accurate. That Bill gives 
you the power to transfer functions formerly handled by 
departments to Crown corporations and indeed you’ve 
announced you’re going to do it. You’ve announced that you 
are going to transfer part of the functions now carried out by 
Supply and Services to the Crown corporations. This Bill 
authorizes that. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you’d better read the 
legislation before you try and bring it through the legislature, 
because it does authorize that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No it doesn’t. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes it does. 
 
Mr. Minister, then let me ask you a specific question then about 
what we’re being asked to authorize. We’re being asked to 
authorize any number of different things, but one of them 
clearly is the disestablishment of the Department of Supply and 
Services. Employees have been told in the department that 
they’re moving February 1st; that rights as to seniority, pension 
benefits, and fringe benefits will not necessarily be carried into 
the Crown corporation. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: what’s the situation of those 
employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I didn’t get the question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Employees . . . Your government has 
announced that you are transferring some of the functions of the 
Department of Supply and Services to a Crown corporation . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, whatever you call it. 
 
Mr. Minister, employees tell me that they’ve been told that 
they’re moving February 1st; that seniority, pension benefits, 
fringe benefits, will not necessarily be respected nor will all of 
them necessarily be moved. Mr. Minister, what are the rights of 
those employees who will be transferred pursuant to the 
authority given in this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what the member 
is talking about has absolutely nothing to do with this 
legislation at all, this proposed legislation. It simply doesn’t. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is not the disestablishment of any 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Even if the department is 
disestablished, those powers have to be assigned to another 
minister because that legislation continues to exist until it’s 
otherwise changed by amendment, or repealing, or whatever. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I disagree with that. I 
want to go on to, I think, what members of this Assembly find 
the most distasteful, and that is the lumping of social services, 
labour, equality of women, and 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

483 
 
 

equality of natives all within one department. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would have thought that after the election, after 
having got trounced in urban areas, this government would have 
given some thought as to why that occurred. There were a 
number of reasons, but one of the reasons was a coalescing of a 
number of groups who felt they hadn’t been fairly treated. 
Among those groups were those on social assistance, those who 
call themselves working people — a far larger percentage of 
women than men — and a lot of native people in the urban 
areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would you transfer all of those problems, 
which are not just severe problems for society but political 
problems for you, why would you transfer them to a single 
minister who, I may say with every respect, hasn’t proved 
himself particularly competent in disentangling the problem in a 
smaller Department of Labour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, just so there’s no 
misunderstanding. While we haven’t disestablished or 
established anything yet, because this legislation has not passed 
yet, our intention is to have some separate entities brought 
under a common administrative framework called the 
department of human resources. And that includes the Seniors’ 
Bureau, the Women’s Secretariat, the Native Secretariat. The 
Department of Social Services, however, is not part of that. The 
Department of Social Services will continue to be the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well then would you . . . so the member 
from Melville is not the most powerful minister in government 
after all as he has self-described. Would the minister of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I see he’s only fourth most powerful. Would the minister then 
tell me what is to be under the department of human resources? 
I understood that some of the functions of the Department of 
Social Services were in that department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The only thing that came from the 
Department of Social Services into the new department of 
human resources, labour, and employment is the Seniors’ 
Bureau. So you have Labour, Seniors’ Bureau, Employment 
Development Agency, Women’s Secretariat, Native Secretariat. 
That’s it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What other departments do you have 
immediate plans to vary, disestablish, or change the name of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — One that I talked about earlier today is 
the Department of Environment and added to the Department of 
Environment as it exists today is public safety. And where did 
that come from? That came from . . . (inaudible) . . . and safety 
services, so that’s another of the areas that we plan to move on 
fairly quickly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is that a comprehensive list of what you 
now have in mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What we have in mind is to do an 
analysis, over time, of all of those areas, all of those 
possibilities or opportunities to gain efficiencies in the 

administration of government, Mr. Chairman. And so this thing 
may evolve over time. And as it does, you know, we will bring 
those things forward. Right now we have the department of 
human resources that we want to deal with and the department 
of environment and safety. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And those two areas are all you presently 
have in mind? Do I understand that . . . Mr. Minister, if you’re 
asking for a carte blanche, which you are, at least you can give 
us a definitive list of what you presently intend to change and 
what you presently intend to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, it’s 
kind of an evolutionary thing and as we examine it — and I’d 
be more than pleased to share it with the member — but the one 
that we’ve already talked about, as the member knows, is the 
department of human resources, labour and employment and 
one that I’ve alluded to recently, earlier today, is the department 
of environment and public safety. And as we conclude that 
there are other opportunities for administrative efficiencies we 
will bring those forward, but those are the two we have on our 
plate at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And those are the only two which you now 
intend to create, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As I say, those are the only two that we 
have on our plate at this particular time but we intend to 
continue looking for administrative efficiencies to be brought to 
government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do we have your undertaking that those 
will be the only changes during this current session which I 
expect will prorogue some time in late 1987? Are you able to 
give us that undertaking, that’s all you intend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know if I can give you that 
assurance or not at this time. I quite frankly don’t know how far 
advanced we are in the analysis of looking for those efficiencies 
that everyone so desires, so I don’t know that I can give you 
that assurance at this particular point. I can tell you that right 
now we have on our plate human resources, labour, and 
employment and environment and public safety. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to departments 
which are disestablished, will there be employees who will also 
be disestablished? Are you able to give this Assembly your 
assurance that you won’t sue the realignment of departments as 
an excuse to fire career public servants and hire political hacks 
in their place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, this legislation has 
nothing to do with . . . The public service, Mr. Chairman, is still 
governed and will continue to be governed by The Public 
Service Act and by the collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the Public Service Act has 
given less and less protection as you people have been in office 
longer and have learned means of evading it, and that is the 
honest truth. The Public Service Act now provides very little 
protection to public servants. They know it, and so does a 
former member, a Mr. Embury, who ran in Lakeview know it, 
and so do other candidates 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

484 
 
 

from Regina know it because it was a real issue in the last 
election. 
 
Mr. Minister, there will be every opportunity for you to abolish 
the post of the director of The Labour Standards Act and 
re-create a new post of a director of working peoples or 
whatever you want to call it. Do we have your undertaking that 
you will not be abolishing positions and creating new ones so 
that you can get rid of people who aren’t prepared to buy a 
Conservative Party membership? Will you give us that 
assurance that you’re not going to use this to lay off a number 
of career public servants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. 
Chairman, absolutely ridiculous, because I don’t think that 
there’s any provision any place in any government where you 
are compelled to have a membership to any political 
organization. It’s just ridiculous to suggest otherwise, and the 
member knows that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’re evading the question, 
as you have all during the afternoon and evening. It’s 
noteworthy that you had to ask your official whether or not you 
had to have a membership to work for the party. 
 
(1945) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does he have one? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would be fascinated in knowing what his 
answer to that question was, but that’s not for public 
consumption. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question is not whether or not by law you 
have to have a membership to work for this government; the 
answer is no. Whether or not, practically, you have to have a 
membership to get a senior position into this government, I’ll 
tell you the answer is yes. And you know it and I know it, and 
so does everybody in this city know it, and that’s why you got 
shellacked, and that’s one of the reasons you got shellacked in 
this city during the last election. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question is not whether or not you have to 
have a membership to work for the government. The question 
is: will you give us your solemn assurance that this 
reorganization will not be used as a pretext for abolishing 
positions and thus laying off large numbers of career public 
servants who’ve had the courage and the integrity to say not 
some of your baser requests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the reason that this 
legislation is before us is to bring efficiencies to government 
and the administration of government and that’s quite simply it. 
There is no dark or sinister motive and to suggest otherwise 
simply isn’t the case. This legislation, or legislation similar to it, 
has been in existence in Manitoba under four administrations, 
Mr. Chairman, and to suggest that there’s anything dark or 
sinister about this simply isn’t in any way in touch with the 
reality of the situation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that 

patronage is not a very efficient way to run a government. Over 
the last four and one-half years we saw expenditures in this 
government increase by 42 per cent at a time when inflation 
increased by 30 per cent and public services are collapsing. The 
reason why you’re spending more and doing less is because this 
government is ridden with patronage. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s nothing very responsible or efficient about 
patronage. It’s a very expensive way to run a government, an 
expensive way to run public services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take your refusal to answer the question, albeit 
being asked in a pointed fashion three times over, to be in the 
affirmative. That is what’s going to happen. You are going to 
abolish the position of career public servants and they will be 
laid off, and you will hire, Mr. Minister, a number of hacks who 
won’t know where the washroom is when they walk in the front 
door. That’s what’s going to happen, and the government and 
the public services in this province will decline further than 
they are, and the cost will go up and we will see a continuation 
of what has happened over the last four years. Mr. Minister, I 
take your refusal to answer the question over the last 
10- minutes to be an affirmative. And I’ll tell you it’s bad news 
for the Government of Saskatchewan, and it’s bad news for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
One of the very common labour relations issues in 
Saskatchewan during the past few years has been the issue of 
contracting out. And I think you know when I use that term it 
means a situation where an employer stops doing something 
which he formerly did and hires some outside person or 
company to do that thing. And this has been resisted by trade 
unions at the collective bargaining table because it costs their 
members jobs. People who were formerly employed by that 
employer are laid off and the work is done by some other 
people who are employed by the contractor. 
 
Now when I look at this Bill, Mr. Minister, I note the provisions 
of clause 17, and particularly 17(1)(b), and the question that I 
want to ask you is whether it is the intention of the government 
to use that provision in order to contract out work now being 
done by the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Chairman, I’m told that that’s 
a standard provision in a great number of pieces of legislation, 
including the old Act that this came from. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I haven’t 
looked at all of the Acts that set up all the departments, but I did 
look at a number of Acts setting up departments, and frankly I 
wasn’t able to find such a provision. I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
could you give me some examples of Acts where that particular 
power exists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — To name a few, Mr. Chairman — 
Advanced Education and Manpower, Education, Justice, Parks 
and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could be quite 
clear about the way in which that right or that power will 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

485 
 
 

be used in this piece of legislation, having regard to the fact that 
it wasn’t in the departmental Acts of a large number of 
departments. 
 
You’ve named some where apparently that right or that power 
did exist. But having it exist in Acts like The Department of 
Justice Act and Advanced Education is one thing; having it 
exist in the central piece of legislation that will apply 
presumably to all departments is quite another. 
 
So I wonder if I could get your assurance that the government 
doesn’t intend to use that power in order to introduce the 
subject of contracting out on any kind of a significant scale in 
the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told, Mr. Speaker, that as 
departmental Acts came forward that this was a standard sort of 
a clause. In the new legislation a lot of the Acts that you’re 
referring to haven’t been brought forward or dealt with for 
many, many years. But those in recent history — and I don’t 
know what year that those would have started, but I would 
guess the last 10 or 15 years — that that is a standard provision 
in those pieces of legislation. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, are you aware that the issue of 
contracting out is an issue now between the government and the 
SGEU in an application before the Labour Relations Board, and 
are you aware that the matter of contraction out is an issue that 
has been tabled in the current round of negotiations with 
SGEU? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I guess I’m not 
aware in any detail as to what has been tabled and what hasn’t, 
but my sense of it is is that’s exactly where it should be, at the 
collective bargaining table. And I think the member agrees with 
that. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes, I do agree 
with you, and I want to come again to the question I put to you 
and try and be quite plain about this. Is it the government’s 
intention, if this Act is passed, Mr. Minister, is it the 
government’s intention to use the power contained in section 
17(1)(b) in order to contract out services that hitherto have been 
performed by the Government of Saskatchewan itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose the concern 
raised by the member is possible, but clearly that’s not what this 
is here for. What this is here for is to provide the vehicle for the 
department — a department — to enter into agreements. For 
example, rather then providing an outright grant to . . . In the 
department of native affairs or in the Department of Economic 
Development or whatever, you might want to enter into an 
agreement where certain terms and conditions have to be met in 
order for this money to flow. And that, as I understand it, is the 
purpose of this particular part of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a few 
brief questions. It’s obvious by this point in time that the 
minister doesn’t wish changes in departments coming back 
before the legislature for any scrutiny. And I know I’d much 
rather be at home playing with my children at Christmas time 
than playing with you. No disrespect at all, Mr. Minister. 
 

In this Bill, I’m wondering if we can come to any point of some 
scrutiny in terms of what you do in the Executive Council. If 
you are, as it says in the Bill, to: 
 

. . . establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine the objects and purposes of the department; (or 
to) disestablish any department; (or to) determine or 
change the name of any department. 

 
In fact, Mr. Minister, before any of those changes come into 
effect, do they actually come before the Regulations Committee 
of this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are a couple of points, Mr. 
Chairman. First, I would much rather you were at home with 
your children too. The answer to your question — before any of 
these changes take effect, do they come before the Regulations 
Committee? — the answer to that as well, Mr. Speaker, is no. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, then — Mr. Chairman, 
sorry. Through you to the minister, The Regulations Act applies 
to every order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council made 
under what they refer to as subsection(1) in this paper. And 
those items in subsection (1) refer to the establishment, to: 
 

. . . establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine the objects and purposes of the department; (or) 
disestablish any department; (or) determine or change the 
name of any department. 

 
Now what does the Bill mean, generally? I can’t understand 
why this doesn’t come before the Regulations Committee, 
because the changes that you propose under this legislation in 
fact are done in the Executive Council or by the executive of 
government. Why do they not come before the Regulations 
Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The procedure has been, and is now, 
that regulations are passed, obviously, by Executive Council. 
From there they’re filed with the Clerk. The Clerk files them 
with the registrar of regulations. From there they go to the 
Regulations Committee, the Committee of the Assembly, and 
that committee then reports on those regulations to the 
Legislative Assembly. And that’s the way it is. 
 
Now if the committee on regulations recommends to this 
legislature that a particular regulation should be brought 
forward and debated here, that’s what happens. If the committee 
recommends that the regulations are adopted, they’re adopted. 
That’s the process. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the regulations then — 
what you’re telling me is that the regulations, or the changes 
that would be made in Executive Council, come before the 
Regulations Committee after, in fact, they’re enacted by the 
Executive Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s true, Mr. Chairman. The 
changes that would come from this legislation by regulation 
then go ultimately to the Regulations Committee and then 
finally reported to this House. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

486 
 
 

(2000) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what if the Regulations 
Committee — I assume it’s within the powers of the 
Regulations Committee . . . I don’t wish to continue while 
you’re being briefed; I’d like you to listen to one conversation 
at a time. If something that’s done under the authority of this 
Bill is done by the Executive Council and the Act comes before 
the Regulations committee and the Regulations Committee 
finds whatever it is that’s being done by the Executive Council 
to be ultra vires or beyond the powers, what is the process, 
then, Mr. Chairman, to the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things. 
Every jurisdiction in Canada where the Executive Council 
passes regulations or has the power to do that, they refer them 
to a regulations body. And in the event, in the event as you have 
suggested, in the event that there was something wrong, 
whether it was beyond the jurisdiction or whatever, and that 
was discovered at the regulation review stage, then that 
committee obviously would have an obligation to refer it to this 
House to be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is that then, Mr. Minister, the only condition 
under which the Regulations Committee could refer something 
that’s done in Executive Council — under the authority of this 
legislation — back before the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t quite know where the member 
is going. But . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, let me 
describe the committee for the member for Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, allow the minister to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Section 17 of The Regulations Act 
states as follows: 
 

Where, under the Standing Orders of the Legislative 
Assembly or in accordance with the procedure otherwise 
prescribed by the Legislative Assembly, a member of the 
Executive Council or other authority making a regulation, 
or, in the case of a regulation made by order in council, the 
member of the Executive Council recommending it, 
receives from the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly a 
copy of a resolution of the Assembly showing that the 
Assembly disapproves the regulation or any part thereof, 
or requires it to be amended, the member of Executive 
Council or other authority or the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, as the case may require, shall revoke the 
regulation in whole or in part or amend it as required by 
the resolution. 

 
And it seems to me that that’s just what we’ve been saying for a 
few minutes now. 
 
To answer your last question: is that the only vehicle or the only 
reason that the committee could refer the regulation to the 
Chamber, to the legislature? My guess is, as a committee of this 
legislature, if that committee 

decides for any reason to bring the regulation to this Chamber, 
it can do so. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I don’t believe that that’s correct, Mr. 
Chairman. I believe that the only things that the Regulations 
Committee can bring back before this Assembly — and I’m 
taking the advice of some of my colleagues who’ve been here 
longer than I have — is it a case that the Executive Council 
exceed their authority under any particular piece of legislation 
or statute that they happen to be dealing with. And it bothers me 
somewhat in that there isn’t even the scrutiny of a committee 
over what the Executive Council is allowed to do under this 
Bill, or this proposed legislation, let alone for the Assembly to 
have any scrutiny; none of the committees have any scrutiny 
either. And I suppose, Mr. Minister, that after conferring with 
your authorities there, whether or not you would correct what 
you have just told me as to whether or not there are actually 
other instances where the Regulations Committee could bring 
back an order in council, say, before this Assembly for their 
scrutiny. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, what I will do is I will 
try and find the standing orders for the Regulations Committee 
and provide the member with that answer if he wants to go on 
to something else. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I wish my colleague, the member 
from Quill Lakes, were here. He was chairman of that 
committee for the last four years. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit the function of that committee 
which hires a lawyer to assist them and do most of their work, 
has as its sole responsibility the determination of whether or not 
regulations are intra vires or ultra vires, and has not authority 
under the motion of this Assembly which set it up to pass on the 
merits of the regulations? 
 
And will the minister admit that that’s patently impossible to 
do, given the fact that it meets a couple of times a year and most 
of its work is done by a member of the legal profession? Will 
the minister admit that the committee can’t do that as it is now 
structured, and has no authority to do anything but pass on 
whether or not those regulations were ultra vires or intra vires. 
 
There is no mechanism by which orders in council can be 
examined before any committee of this Assembly. Will the 
minister admit what you must know, having been here for eight 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member may be right. And the fact 
is, the simple tabling of those regulations before the committee 
. . . And the member will be aware that they are, because all 
members are as they’re tabled. And if there is a problem with 
them, they come before this House. The member will have 
access to them in any event. And if he has any concern about 
any regulation at any time, I’m sure that he can raise it in the 
House at any time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Going at this in a 
little different way, Mr. Minister, do you view the Regulations 
Committee as having the authority — if not to 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

487 
 
 

bring back an order in council before this House to be debated 
in this Assembly — do you agree that the Regulations 
Committee does in fact have the authority to call members of 
the Executive Council to determine whether or not what they 
have done is ultra vires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Whether or not they have the power to 
call a member of Executive Council, I’m not sure. The practice 
here, I’m told, has been that the minister has informed, or that 
member of Executive Council has informed, of the problem and 
is asked to explain it, whether that’s done in written form or 
whatever. But that’s been the practice, and I don’t think that in 
the past that there has been the requirement of a member of 
Executive Council to appear before the committee. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, I think that when this 
proposed legislation actually passes — which I think likely it 
will; you’ve got the numbers there to do it even though the 
advice of myself and many of my colleagues, all of my 
colleagues . . . We see it as a flawed piece of legislation. We 
would have liked to have seen some changes made. So I think 
that if the Regulations Committee does have some authority to 
call members of Executive Council before the Regulations 
Committee to answer for some of the things that are done under 
the authority of this Bill, I think you can in fact be expected to 
be called on a fairly regular basis before the Regulations 
Committee in the future. 
 
And I’m wondering if you can clarify for us yet tonight whether 
in fact actually the Regulations Committee has the authority, if 
they feel in their wisdom that something has gone on in 
Executive Council that doesn’t quite meet with the proposed 
legislation that we’re dealing with, that the Executive Council 
can appear there and be questioned and provide evidence to the 
committee so they can determine whether or not there should be 
something coming back before this Assembly in accordance 
with their duties as members of that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll get the standing 
order and clarify that for you. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to sort of 
summarize what I understand from these discussions. I see the 
problem as really having two, maybe three aspects to it. First of 
all, the Regulations Committee does not meet often enough to 
permit effective review of the regulations that will be enacted 
under this legislation when this Bill is passed. So there’s a time 
span in there that creates a substantial difficulty from the point 
of view of responsibility and accountability to the public and 
from the point of view of review by legislative committee. 
 
Number two, the Regulations Committee will not have 
authority to get a regulation changed unless the regulation goes 
beyond the powers permitted in this Bill — beyond the powers 
— and part of the problem that we have are the powers in this 
Bill and the fact that the Bill allows the cabinet to go too far in 
making regulations. So it isn’t just simply a question of whether 
the regulation is ultra vires. We feel this is already going too 
far. But even if it does go too far and stays within this Bill, it 
can’t be 

reviewed by the Assembly. And that’s part of the problem — 
not only the fact that the Regulations Committee is ineffective 
from the point of view of providing the public with 
accountability and from the point of view of providing 
legislative review of this legislation, we are also contending that 
this legislation goes too far in its enabling powers to cabinet to 
create regulations. And they may very well be within the 
powers of this Bill, and therefore their relation wouldn’t be 
ultra vires and in effect wouldn’t be reviewable by this 
Assembly. And isn’t that the real problem Mr. Chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Two things, Mr. Chairman, the 
Regulations Committee can be called at any time and called by 
the chairman, and the chairman happens to be an opposition 
member. 
 
The second point is that . . . and this has been raised by the 
member for Regina Lakeview before. She is concerned that the 
phrase “objects and purposes” is far too broad, and we don’t 
agree with her. We don’t agree with her, but if she would 
prefer, as she has stated before, that “duties and functions” is 
more acceptable, we’re prepared to accept that as a House 
amendment. I have one ready here to put forward. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Just a point of clarification, I did not say 
“duties and functions” was acceptable. It may be more 
acceptable than what’s here, but it’s not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have another 
question, maybe two, on another aspect of clause 1. And it’s in 
regard to questioning earlier this evening by the member from 
Regina Centre when he talked about the transition of the 
Department of Supply and Service employees, plus 
accumulating all the physical assets of the government into the 
property management corporation. And if, in fact, this Bill 5, 
the proposed legislation which we are dealing with here now, 
would not give the authority for the Executive Council to do 
that, then could the minister tell us exactly where the Executive 
Council gets the authority to make such a vast change? 
 
It would seem like this Bill would be what should be used to do 
such an act by Executive Council. Where have you gleaned the 
authority to in fact create the property management corporation 
and to put into that property management corporation physical 
assets of the government and many, many of the employees of 
the Department of Supply and Services, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve answered the 
question before. The authority to set up the property 
management corporation does not come from this particular 
piece of legislation that we’re debating here tonight. It comes 
from a piece of legislation . . . section 3 of An Act respecting 
the Creation of Corporations for Certain Purposes. That was 
first passed in 1945 under the CCF government and re-enacted 
in 1978 under an NDP government. And the question raised by 
the member dealing with the property management corporation 
has absolutely nothing to do with the legislation that we’re 
debating here tonight. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

488 
 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if the 
minister could give me an example, just a very clear and 
concise example what you would do under the authority of this 
piece of legislation that you could not currently do under the 
legislation that you’ve cited that you’re able to set up the 
property management corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I guess the member wasn’t here when I 
did this before, but an example would be the proposed 
department of human resources, labour and employment. 
Currently we have a minister who is responsible for several 
separate entities. And what we propose to do under this 
legislation is to provide for a common administrative 
framework that will be called the department of human 
resources, labour and employment. We could do that by 
separate legislation; we chose to do it by similar means as 
already exist in the mother parliament in the U.K. and Ottawa 
and in Manitoba, and I believe, in British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, and I understand that when 
that happens in the example that you’ve given, that all of the 
statutes that are in place to make those various functions 
operative in fact will remain unchanged, and if they do have to 
be changed, must come back before this legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Absolutely right, and I must commend 
you on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You bet. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question to 
the minister concerns his oft-repeated references to the 
Department of Environment and the changes that have been 
undergone. 
 
And prior to the beginning of this session of the Assembly, I 
found on my desk one day a copy of an order in council which 
appeared to me, and the minister can certainly correct me if I’m 
wrong in this, but which in fact transferred certain powers from 
the Department of Labour in regards to public safety aspects — 
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act and so on — and transferred it 
from the Department of Labour to the Department of 
Environment. 
 
And my question to the minister is this: what prevents you and 
what prevents the minister responsible for the Department of 
Environment from carrying out the duties and functions 
associated with those sections of the Department of Labour 
transferred by OC — what prevents that minister from carrying 
out those duties and functions as enacted legislation by order in 
council as opposed to the necessity for this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously he can carry out those 
functions. He’s doing it today, as is the minister of employment 
and human resources, and so on. The purpose is to tidy up, if 
you like, the administrative framework rather than deal with — 
in your case, two separate entities, in this case four or five 
separate entities — we bring them into one department. And as 
already understood by your colleague from The Battlefords, any 
change in the existing legislation would have to come back to 
this House to be dealt with and, of course, would, 

I fully expect, receive the debate that it deserves at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if perhaps the minister, 
for this few minutes, could take me through the tidying up. 
What precisely needs to be tidied up in terms of the 
administrative framework of the Department of the 
Environment so that certain functions and duties contained 
within those pieces of legislation brought over from the 
Department of Labour . . . precisely what type of administrative 
tidying up are you talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A better example is going back to the 
minister of human resources, labour, and employment. Changes 
that would have to be made there are: changes to labour, the 
labour Act ultimately; the native secretariat, etc. As these 
separate entities exist now, all of them, separately, report to the 
minister, and obviously if this is brought under one 
administrative framework, that would change and streamline it, 
so to speak, and bring those efficiencies that all of us are 
seeking. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, the reason I questioned you 
concerning the Department of the Environment was that you 
used it several times in answering other members’ questions 
regarding the question of streamlining and efficiencies. And I’m 
asking a fairly simple question: what does the Minister of the 
Environment have to do . . . Let’s put it this way: why does he 
need section 12(1)(a), (b), or (c), or (2) of Bill 5 to affect 
efficiencies, first of all? And secondly, what efficiencies were 
effected, because this change has already been carried out 
without this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that on the example that you 
use that under existing powers, powers that are already in place, 
that that change as made. But to reflect what the new 
department is doing with the addition of public safety, the name 
of the department has to be changed. So I suppose you could 
argue that in this particular instance there’s no particular 
streamlining, just a moving of the public safety into the 
Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I take it then, Mr. Minister, that 
the only efficiencies affected by the change in the use of the OC 
in terms of the Department of Environment and the shifting of 
those responsibilities of the Department of Labour was that the 
name of the department is going to be changed. And I don’t 
want to appear facetious in saying that, but that seems to be the 
only efficiency that you’re talking about in that. However, I’m 
not going to get a straight answer on that one, so I’ll change to 
another attack line of reasoning. 
 
You’ve made, and if I heard you correctly, Mr. Minister, you 
said that there will be changes to the labour Act ultimately. So I 
would like to ask you, sir, if you will make a commitment . . . 
(inaudible) . . .I would like to ask you if you will undertake a 
commitment on behalf of your colleague, the Minister of 
Labour . . . pardon me, the minister for human resources, 
labour, and employment — the fourth most powerful minister 
in cabinet behind those closed cabinet doors — whether or 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

489 
 
 

not you’ll undertake this commitment that:(1) the purposes and 
duties ascribed to the present Department of Labour under The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, whether those duties and 
functions will be carried out by the new ministry of human 
resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That Act as it exists will just be 
assigned to the new minister with the new title. And if I can go 
back to one of your earlier questions — and I know you were 
only half facetious when you raised it — but you’re talking 
about the limited efficiencies that would be achieved by the 
name change, if you like, for the department of environment 
and public safety. I don’t know, but it may well be that those 
efficiencies would be achieved in the Department of Labour as 
it’s now structured by moving the public safety side of it over to 
Environment. I don’t know. 
 
The other point that I make is: do you really think that it’s 
efficient use of the House, of the time of this House, to bring 
forward legislation to deal simply with a name change for the 
department of environment and public safety? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the response to that 
direct question, yes, particularly since it can go to the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, get stamped there, it comes 
before here and takes nothing but several minutes of our time, 
particularly when it’s part of a larger Bill affecting name 
changes of other departments. I don’t think there’s any problem 
with that. And I can tell you right now that the waste of time 
and the waste of taxpayers’ money is being brought upon the 
House and upon the people of Saskatchewan by your attempted 
introduction of this Bill. 
 
You didn’t answer my question, however, in regards to a 
commitment by your government. Will you undertake a 
commitment on behalf of the Minister of Labour that the duties 
and functions as outlined by The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act which will be moved from the Department of 
Labour or amalgamated into the new department of human 
resources, labour and employment, whether the duties and the 
functions — and that includes the duties and functions of the 
inspectors for occupational health and safety and for all the type 
of safeguards for working people in this province that adhere to 
that Bill — whether or not you will undertake a commitment 
that your government will not change those duties and 
functions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The only way that 
you can make changes to those duties and functions is to amend 
that Act. The only way you can amend that Act is to bring it to 
this Chamber. So the answer to your question is that it can’t be 
done without bringing it here. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, this seems to come to the crux of 
the question in my mind. Why for is it that in section 12(1)(a) 
that to “establish, continue or vary any department and 
determine the objects and purposes of the department”? You’re 
saying the objects and purposes reside in the legislation. Is that 
your argument? 
 
(2030) 
 

That’s a pretty weak argument when in fact they can reside out 
there in the abstract as a theoretical proposition, but in fact . . . 
Let’s take for example the carrying out of the powers and duties 
and functions of The Labour Standards Act, when in fact if the 
department of human resources, labour and employment were 
to determine objects and purposes differing from, in the reality, 
different from those of the Act . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, this is what it says. This is what it says. You want to 
change not only the name of the Department of Labour but you 
want to change and determine the objects and purposes of that 
department. 
 
Won’t you at least agree that if for example the department of 
human resources were to determine that the inspection of the 
hours of work for working people in this province were not a 
priority of the department, and that no labour inspectors were to 
be assigned to that, won’t you agree that for all intents and 
purposes, while the Act may exist, the functions and the powers 
of that Act in reality will be abridged? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think what the member is 
suggesting. . . Well, first let’s understand that what we’re 
talking about here is the administrative framework, the objects 
and purposes of the administrative framework. And it’s quite 
separate and apart from what you’re talking about in the various 
Acts that exist around the government. 
 
Now if at any time a government decides that it’s going to 
change a priority, it doesn’t have to change legislation. It can 
simply change appropriations at budget time, and that will 
change priorities. And any government that does that, does so at 
their political peril. If the folks aren’t appreciative of the 
direction or the priorities that the government has set, that 
government will soon know. 
 
But what you’re saying, or the question you’re asking, is 
legislatively — that legislation or those duties and functions, or 
duties and powers, or whatever it is you’re talking about, cannot 
be changed without an amendment coming before this House. 
 
Now if you’re talking about changing priorities, you can do that 
from a budgetary point of view. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well if I were to agree, if I were to give you for 
example that the purposes couldn’t be changed except through 
an Act of a legislation by amendment that was brought before 
the legislature — and I believe that’s a moot point, by the way. 
I believe that’s a moot point in legal terms. If I were to give you 
that, not being a lawyer . . . I picked up these words around the 
caucus. Moot point, and things like that. Right? Yes, you’re 
learning some of them yourself, right? 
 
Even granted that what you have to say, won’t you . . . And I’ll 
use your example. I’ll use your example of the efficiencies 
effected, as you put it, by the Department of Labour through the 
switching of those public safety areas like the electrical 
inspection, and The Pressure Vessels Act. There’s certain 
efficiencies effected, I’ll grant you that. It’s going to cost the 
Department of Labour less because you have less people 
working for it. Those efficiencies can be effected by moving 
them into the 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

490 
 
 

Department of the Environment, I would suggest, maintaining 
the same budget for the Department of the Environment. It’s a 
hypothetical situation, we’ll all agree. But let’s just say, for the 
sake of argument, that you could move it to the Department of 
the Environment, you would then end up with less effective 
monitoring of public safety. 
 
And you and your government, of all people, have in fact been 
dealt the political consequences of that. And all we have to 
think back to is the Polly Redhot affair, in which certain 
efficiencies were effected in the Department of Labour without 
changing the legislation, right? Without changing the legislation 
but in fact changing the priorities of the Department of Labour. 
 
So I will grant you those arguments. All I am trying to get you 
to grant, sir, is that one does not need this Bill to either change 
priorities because you said yourself you can do it through 
budgetary means; change powers and duties because you 
admitted yourself you can do it through orders in councils. Is it 
not true that the most that this Bill will do will be made it a 
smoother and easier method of, in fact, cutting back in the civil 
service of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s simply not the case. And in the 
case of the public safety parts of Labour that were transferred to 
Environment, the dollars that were attached in the blue book to 
those departments or functions that were carried out in Labour 
went with them to Environment. 
 
But you do make a good argument that supports the one that 
I’ve already said, that is that you can effect priority changes 
from a budgetary point of view. But that is debated in this 
House and that’s always been the case, and anybody that makes 
budgetary priorities that aren’t in keeping with the wishes of 
those that they represent will suffer the appropriate result. And 
so I think what you’ve done, whoever convoluted it may have 
been, is supported the argument that we’ve been trying to 
advance all night. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I think maybe the convolution is 
in the minds of the drafters of this legislation, quite frankly, not 
on this side of the House. 
 
However, having responses on that line of question, I’d like to 
go into what you termed as your “evolutionary mode of 
operation” and I’d like to see how far along the line of 
evolution you and the other members of the government are in 
this respect . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Someone said 
simian; I don’t think that’s correct. 
 
Anyway, is it within your evolutionary mode and framework 
that the Department of Culture and Recreation . . . You have 
plans to disestablish the Department of Culture and Recreation 
and to replace it by Saskatchewan lotteries corporation, a 
Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would have to hear some pretty 
compelling arguments, Mr. Speaker, for that to happen. I quite 
frankly think it’s inconceivable. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — I’d just like to get that correct. You’re saying 
that it’s inconceivable that you will use Bill 5 to disestablish the 
Department of Culture and Recreation, or parts of the 
Department of Culture and Recreation, and establish the 
Saskatchewan lotteries corporation? Am I correct in that? Is that 
what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that there 
have been some outside interests that have suggested that that’s 
the way to go. But we’re certainly not contemplating that at all. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, would those outside interests, 
outside . . . are you saying outside interests in terms of outside 
the department? And is the argument that they’re making based 
on the effecting of efficiencies in the assignment of duties and 
powers in the carrying out of responsibilities of the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I quite frankly don’t know who those 
outside interests are, but they’re interests outside of 
government. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I would like to ask one more question, and it’s 
along this line of reasoning:will you make a commitment, will 
you make a commitment on behalf of the Minister of Co-ops 
and Co-operative Development . . . will you make that 
commitment that that department will not be disestablished or 
any other portions of that department assign to another 
department to, namely, the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I remember a day not that long ago 
when certain representatives of the Co-op movement asked us if 
we would consider making them part of the Small Business or 
Economic Development department rather than the Department 
of Co-ops. We didn’t consider it at that time because we felt 
that the co-ops were a very important part of the economy of 
Saskatchewan and that they deserved that kind of attention. And 
we haven’t changed our mind in that respect. 
 
However, to say that we will commit never to consider that, as 
my colleague from Melfort said the other day, for however long 
infinity is, I don’t think that I’m prepared to do that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just a final question on that:do you have the . . . 
Was that approach to government made — you said it was by 
members of the Co-operative movement. Was it made by 
Federated Co-opers? Was it made in terms of a letter? Was it 
made in terms of a verbal request? Could you explain how that 
was made, given my understanding that in fact there is a move 
afoot to assign certain powers of the Department of 
Co-operatives to Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Quite frankly, Mr. Chairman — I’m 
going from memory and it was some time ago, and I don’t 
recall who it was from the co-operative movement. I expect that 
it was a representative group that was meeting our caucus at 
that time, but I don’t know specifically beyond that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, my first question for the 
Deputy Premier is whether he’s prepared to give this 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

491 
 
 

House a guarantee this evening that as a result of introducing 
this legislation there will be no loss of jobs in the public service. 
What guarantees is he prepared to make to the public service 
that as a result of disestablishing departments no public service 
positions will be lost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, this particular 
legislation has nothing to do with the public service and what 
size it will take — maybe what form it will take, but certainly 
not what size it will take. And I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, 
that a far more direct impact on numbers of public servants will 
come from blue book, from budgetary priorities as opposed to 
anything to do with reorganization of administrative 
frameworks of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, my question to the minister 
is:first of all, is he denying that this legislation will provide him 
with the opportunity, and cabinet with the opportunity, to 
abolish entire departments and to abolish the seniority rights of 
public servants within those departments. Is he denying that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The rights of public servants are 
preserved and protected in The Public Service Act and in the 
collective agreement. I mean that’s simply the case as it exists, 
and has, and will. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister not 
acknowledge that the protection of public servants under the 
collective agreement is based on the existence of the 
departments that they’re part of. Will he not acknowledge that 
and therefore, as a result of abolishing departments, will he not 
acknowledge that their seniority rights will also be lost? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is not 
about abolishing positions. This legislation is all about bringing 
efficiencies to the administrative framework of government. 
The rights of the public service are protected by The Public 
Service Act and by the collective agreement. That’s been the 
case, it is now, and will continue to be. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister give this 
House his commitment that over his coming term of 
government while members opposite are in government over 
this next four years, that this Act will never once be used, and 
the abolition of a department under this Act will never once be 
used to abolish a public service position. Will he give this 
House that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, all I can say, is that this 
legislation is designed to establish, disestablish, reorganize, 
bring together efficiencies in the framework of the 
administration of government. The rights of the public service 
have been, are now, and will be protected under The Public 
Service Act and under by collective agreement. That’s the way 
it’s been, and that’s the way it is, and that’s the way it will 
continue, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The minister, it’s clear, is not answering my 
question, as he’s not been answering the question of 

many members on this side of the House. And I ask him again: 
if he says that this Act is not intended to abolish the positions of 
public servants, and if he says — which he has he just said a 
few moments ago — that public servant’s position are secure 
from the point of view of this particular Bill, why will he not 
give this House his assurance that members opposite, this 
government, will not use this piece of legislation over the next 
four and a half years, will never use this piece of legislation to 
abolish a public service position? Will he give us his assurance? 
And if so, why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, what crystal 
ball the member opposite has when he says that we are going to 
be here for the next four and a half years. My guess is that that 
will be the minimum. 
 
In any event, Mr. Chairman, the point that I make is that this 
legislation has nothing to do with abolishing positions. As I 
suggested earlier, the budgetary process has a far more direct 
impact on the number of positions in government. And if 
someone is — any government going to change priorities and 
delivery mechanisms, etc., etc., programs, whatever, in 
government, it will be done, I expect, through the budgetary 
process, and that has nothing to do with this legislation, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I can only conclude that the 
minister is not prepared to give the House the assurance that 
this Bill will not be used as a vehicle for eliminating public 
service positions. And I wish the minister would just stand up 
and say that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But since the minister’s not prepared to do that, I want to ask 
the minister another question and that is whether he will give us 
his guarantee that this Bill will not be used as a vehicle for 
abolishing departments and having their functions replaced by 
contracting out for profit to the private sector? Will he give us 
his guarantee that this Bill will not be used for that purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, this Bill is 
not required to do those kinds of things now. Under existing 
legislation we can contract out and haven’t, to any extent, under 
existing legislation. So in that respect there’s really nothing new 
here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister not 
acknowledge that, in fact, while it’s possible for the 
government, at this point in time, to contract out under certain 
departments and certain pieces of legislation that establish 
departmental Acts, it’s not currently possible to do that 
throughout the public service, and will he therefore not 
acknowledge that this piece of legislation gives him the power 
to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The purposes and functions, or duties 
and powers, or whatever, in other departmental Acts aren’t 
being repealed at this time and won’t be under this legislation. 
Those things are brought to this House for amendment, either to 
change or repeal or otherwise, at that time. So you know, there 
will be ample opportunity to debate those things at that time. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

492 
 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, let me ask you a specific 
question, and that is: clearly three of the prime targets for 
abolition and contracting out would be the Land Titles Office, 
the Liquor Board, and the laboratory services that are currently 
offered under the Department of Health, the provincial lab. Will 
you give us your assurance that you won’t be abolishing any of 
those departments or sections of departments and contracting 
out those services instead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know. The examples that you 
use, I don’t know if they’re right on target. In this Bill, 
department means “a department, secretariat, office or other 
similar agency of executive government.” Now that doesn’t 
include the Liquor Board. I don’t know if it includes the public 
health lab. But clearly in the case of the Liquor Board, there can 
be no change there without bringing amendments to that Act to 
the House. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, can I ask you another question, 
and that is in respect to the consequential amendments that stem 
from this piece of legislation. My question to you is: will you 
table all the consequential amendments attached to this Bill 
rather than simply the very limited consequential amendments 
that we’ve had today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s no problem, quite frankly, 
because any reorganization that is done, that consequential 
changes flow form, have to be done through amendment. The 
only way we can do that is to bring legislation to this House and 
as those things are done, the Bill will appear here. Yes. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Can you give us your assurance that that will 
be the case, that every consequential amendment that flows 
from this legislation will be brought to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. It’s the only way it can happen. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, that’s not our interpretation of 
the Bill. That is not our interpretation of the Bill, which of 
course is one of the reasons why we’re so concerned about the 
Bill. But I’m slightly comforted by the fact that you give us 
your commitment on that side of the House that at least for the 
next term that will be done. Perhaps it’s the Christmas spirit 
that’s getting to me, Mr. Minister, and, I hope, to all members 
of the House. But we will take note of what you’ve said and 
remind you of that quote in Hansard if there’s a need to do that 
on a future occasion. 
 
My next question to you is: will you table, before this Bill 
passes today, the orders in council that you expect to come from 
this Bill in this remaining session of the legislature, Mr. 
Chairman? In other words, I’m asking the minister: will he table 
the proposed cabinet regulations that will flow from this Bill 
with respect to reorganization in the coming months? Will he 
table those today before this Bill passes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it would be, I think, a 
little presumptuous to even create the orders in council until we 
have some legislative authority to implement those that we 
would pass in Executive Council. So the 

answer is no. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me ask the minister 
perhaps then a slightly different question. And that is:will he 
give the House his assurance that any order in council that is 
passed by cabinet as a result of this Bill will be tabled in this 
Legislative Assembly? Will he give us that assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, Mr. Chairman, I don’t see 
that it’s necessary, because every order in council that is passed 
by Executive Council becomes a public document and is filed 
in the office of the Clerk of the Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — What I’m proposing, Mr. Minister, is that you 
adopt an approach similar to that used in the British parliament, 
where regulations, before they’re adopted by cabinet, are tabled 
in this Assembly and are subject to debate by way of a 
resolution in this Assembly, as they are in the British 
parliament. Will you undertake to do that? And will you bring 
in a House amendment that would accomplish that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker, what . . . And we’ve 
talked about this at length; we’ve agreed after some 
considerable discussion with members opposite that we would 
bring forward two House amendments — one dealing with the 
question raised by the member from Regina Lakeview on 
regulations, and the other one dealing with the objects and 
powers as opposed to duties and functions. And we’re prepared 
to bring those in when we start going down clause by clause, 
and we’re not prepared to bring in what is suggested by the 
member from Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I have another question for the 
minister and that relates to some of the special powers and 
privileges provided for under various Acts that establish 
departments. And for the sake of an example, I want to use The 
Department of Advanced Education and Manpower Act. The 
minister will be aware that section 9 of that Act guarantees 
academic freedoms for the universities. And I just use that as 
one of many examples that might be drawn on. 
 
My question for the minister is whether he would be prepared to 
introduce a House amendment that will protect those special 
powers and privileges provided for under a host of different 
Acts relating to different departments that have been 
established. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Those kinds of powers will be 
protected in any event, because while the administrative 
framework will change, in the event that we act under this 
legislation, the legislation, the statute that is on the books, will 
continue to exist and will be the responsibility of a member of 
Executive Council as assigned by the Premier. And when 
consequential amendments come forward, as they must, those 
powers and duties, if we repeal the Act or if we amend the Act 
to suit the new scheme of things, those powers and duties and 
special privileges, etc., would find themselves probably 
embodied in a University of Saskatchewan Act, or a University 
of Regina Act, or whatever. But they still exist even though we 
act under this proposed legislation to reorganize the 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

493 
 
 

administrative framework. So the concern raised by the member 
is something that he ought not to be concerned about. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t agree with the minister 
with respect to his interpretation of the Bill. My interpretation 
of the Bill suggests that the government, if they wish to — or 
some future government, if this legislation is still on the books 
after the next election — would be in a position to utilize this 
Act to abolish some of those special powers and privileges. 
 
(2100) 
 
I’ll give the minister another example. Under the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, section 6 and 7 of the Act 
establishing that department gives the minister the power to 
order an inquiry or an investigation. Section 8 and 9 provides 
the minister with the power to issue stop orders. That’s a second 
example, Mr. Deputy Premier, of the concern that I have that 
this Bill could be used as a way of abolishing those special 
powers and privileges. And I’d ask the minister to bring in a 
House amendment that would provide all members of this 
Legislative Assembly with assurance that that will not be done. 
The only way to assure us, Mr. Minister, that that will not be 
done is to bring in an amendment that accomplishes it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I am myself assured. 
We have law officers of the Crown that have advised us on this 
matter, and they have assured us, and I accept that, that the 
concerns raised by the member are not legitimate concerns, that 
in fact those privileges, powers and responsibilities, etc., that 
exist in existing legislation, will continue to exist until such 
time as it’s brought to this House and amended or repealed or 
otherwise dealt with. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I have one final set of questions to the 
minister, and that is, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister 
why it is that this Bill is being presented to this legislature just 
before the Christmas recess. Why is it, Mr. Minister, that you’re 
bringing in this piece of legislation just before Christmas? Isn’t 
this the real reason for this sitting of the legislature, Mr. 
Minister, to push through this Bill which will be used as the 
basis for an attack on the public service of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that we’re here 
with this Bill just before Christmas is it happens to be 
December, and the legislature was called following the election 
which was in October, and so we’re here as quick as we could 
get here. 
 
But the real reason that we came in, Mr. Speaker, was to deal 
with The Farm Land Securities Act that farmers are quite 
anxious about, to deal with the pension plan, and to deal with 
the other pieces of legislation that are on the order paper, Mr. 
Speaker. And it has nothing to do with Christmas or Easter or 
whatever. We’re here because the legislature is in session and 
it’s our job to deal with the legislation. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, my final question. If the 
minister has said that this Bill is not the reason for the 

sitting the minister therefore has clearly said that this Bill is not 
an urgent matter. Therefore I’d ask the minister to withdraw the 
Bill so that we can all go home, and so that the public will be 
assured that there is not going to be an attack by this 
government on the public service. Withdraw the Bill and do it 
now. Will he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker, we won’t withdraw 
the Bill. We, as many people of Saskatchewan, are taxpaying 
members, and the citizens of our province are calling for us to 
bring efficiencies to the administrative framework of 
government. And so we’re here and we intend to deal with it 
while we’re here. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I would like to ask the minister to clarify 
something I think I heard him say, which was that the powers, 
in referring to the specific criteria that are in existing 
department Acts that are specific to the different departments, 
that even if the department is abolished, the powers within that 
Act will stay with the Executive Council. Those are the words I 
heard you say in response to my colleague from Saskatoon 
University. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Those powers, Mr. Chairman, will be 
the responsibility of that member of Executive Council that has 
that particular piece of legislation or Act assigned to him. 
 
Ms. Smart: — By the Executive Council, outside of the 
legislature, will impact on those departments; the decisions will 
be made by someone within the Executive Council, on behalf of 
the Executive Council, related to those departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Executive Council is the cabinet. All 
members of cabinet are members of Executive Council, and the 
powers and duties and functions and whatever that you’re 
talking about in any particular piece of legislation that exists 
today, that may be touched by this legislation through 
dismantlement or disestablished or established or whatever, 
those powers and duties and functions that currently exist will 
continue to exist and will be the responsibility of that minister 
to whom they’re assigned. Right? And the only way they can be 
changed is either by coming to this House and repealing the Act 
through amendment, or otherwise amending the Act to alter 
those powers and functions and duties, etc. 
 
Ms. Smart: — So a duty within, say, the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, the power as my colleague 
mentioned, the minister’s power to order an inquiry or an 
investigation would remain just with one person who’s named 
as the minister? It seems to me that that’s what’s already there, 
and why would you change it by this Act unless there’s 
something else here that is taking more power to the Executive 
Council? Because in section 7, of the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs, a person who does not comply with 
subsection 6(3) is guilty of an offence. And what I suggest is 
that by this change in legislation by Bill 5 the cabinet will be 
deciding what is an offence and who is guilty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Nothing, Mr. Chairman, changes in 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

494 
 
 

the example set out by the hon. member. Nothing changes. The 
powers, duties, responsibilities, whatever, that exist in — 
whether it’s the consumer affairs Act, whether it’s the 
universities act, whatever Act — those powers will continue to 
exist. The only way that they can be altered is for that 
legislation to be brought to this House and by amendment, 
either repealed or otherwise altered, that’s the only way it can 
be done, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Just a 
couple of very simple and brief questions to the minister. The 
minister has made a frequent reference to the purpose for this 
Bill, to implement the department of human resources, labour 
and employment, and made some reference before to what that 
new department would include which is currently found within 
the Department of Social Services now. Could you please tell 
me, Mr. Minister, again for my clear understanding, what will 
be the responsibilities, or the divisions, or the services of the 
Department of Social Services now that will be found within 
the department of human resources, labour and employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Department of Social Services will 
continue to exist. The only part, agency, secretariat, or whatever 
that is now in the Department of Social Services that will be 
moved into the new department of human resources, labour and 
employment, is the Senior’s Bureau. And the new department 
will then be made up of the Seniors’ Bureau, the Women’s 
Secretariat, native Secretariat, the Department of Labour minus 
public safety, and Employment Development Agency. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand very 
clearly then that there will continue to be a Department of 
Social Services. And just for my own clarity I understand that 
other than the Seniors’ Bureau, which is currently found within 
the Department of Social Services, everything else about that 
department will remain exactly the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t say that it would remain exactly 
the same. It may well be that during the budgetary process we 
may decide to go up with this priority or down with this 
priority, or whatever. But what I’m telling you is that Social 
Services, as it exists today, includes the Seniors' Bureau. As it 
will exist following our proposed reorganization, the Seniors’ 
Bureau will be in this new human resources department. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate that clarification, Mr. Minister, and 
thank you. I’m somewhat relieved, I must admit, to hear that 
from you. 
 
I would also ask, Mr. Minister, who will be then — and not 
necessarily by name — but who will be the Minister of Social 
Services? Is that person, by definition, going to also be the 
minister for the department of human resources, labour and 
employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are two separate portfolios. The 
Department of Social Services is one portfolio and the 
department of human resources, etc., will be another portfolio, 
and it happens that they are assigned to the same minister, as I 
believe Parks and Culture and Rec., Justice and the Attorney 
General, they’re separate, 

Economic Development and Trade. You know, it just happens 
that they’re assigned to one minister in each of these cases. And 
I should, rather than be accused later of not being precise, the 
Seniors’ Bureau that was once part of Social Services, those 
functions have already been moved in to the Department of 
Labour. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, let me read for you the terms 
of reference of the Regulations Committee. This will assist you: 
 

The special committee to consider every regulation filed 
with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. . . 

 
Let me say this is from Hansard, Tuesday, June 29, 1982: 
 

. . . special committee to consider every regulation filed 
with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. . . 

 
You’ll be interested in knowing the person who moved this. It 
seems to have been moved by the Hon. Mr. Berntson . . . That a 
committee be established: 
 

. . . to consider every regulation (moved) by the Clerk of 
the Legislative Assembly pursuant to the provisions of 
The Regulations Act, with a view to determining whether 
the special attention of the Assembly should be drawn to 
any of the said regulations on any of the following 
grounds: 
 
(one) That it imposes a charge on the public revenues or 
prescribes a payment to be made to any public authority 
not specifically provided for by statute; 
 
(two) That it is excluded from challenge in the courts; 
 
(three) That it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers 
conferred by statute; 
 
(four) That it purports to have retrospective effect where 
the parent statute confers no such authority . . . 
 
(five) That it has been insufficiently promulgated; 
 
(six) That it is not clear in meaning; 

 
Mr. Minister, would you tell me under what circumstances you 
believe any order in council could ever come before the 
Regulations Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier that I 
would get the standing orders and clarify that, and obviously the 
member has clarified it for me, so I guess I can say “thank you.” 
The fact is that any order in council is filed with the Clerk of 
the Executive Council and is therefore a public document and 
available to any member of the opposition, or public, for that 
matter. So you know, you have access to those OCs in any 
event. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what you told the member 
from The Battlefords was that the Regulations Committee could 
deal with any of these orders in council. 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

495 
 
 

I was hoping you’d say more than “thank you” when I brought 
you the terms of reference. I was hoping I’d hear the words, 
“I’m sorry; I guess I was wrong,” because I think you were. 
Would you admit you’re wrong and that those orders in council 
would not come before the Regulations Committee? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Section 12 of the Bill . . . We’re talking 
about regulations under section 12 of the Bill, and all 
regulations made under section 12 of the Bill have to go before 
the Regulations Committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No. No, only if they violate one of these 
injunction. I suggest to you, no order in council passed under 12 
could ever violate the injunctions of that section. The section’s 
just too broad. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is 
that all of these regulations under section 12 go to the 
committee. If they violate one of the things set out by the hon. 
member, then it can be referred to the House. But all regulations 
go — under section 12 — to the Regulations Committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But I take it, it’s now common ground that 
you were wrong when you told the member from The 
Battlefords that he could discuss the merits of those regulations 
establishing the departments before the Regulations Committee. 
That is clearly what you said. I gather, Mr. Minister, you now 
admit that you’re wrong. Mr. Minister, would you give us a 
definitive list of the other things you’ve said that have been 
wrong this evening, since you’re wrong on that. 
 
It took us, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, we spent a good 40 
minutes discussing this while you righteously insisted that any 
question we had with respect to the orders in council could be 
raised under The Regulations Act. I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, our ability to deal with those regulations in the 
Regulations Committee is very, very narrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the fact is that all 
regulations are filed with the committee. You have access to 
them. You can, as a member of that committee — they can be 
referred. You can review them on the following grounds: that it 
imposes a charge on public revenues or prescribes the payment 
to be made to any public authority not specifically provided for 
by statute; that it is excluded from the challenge in the courts; 
(3) that it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers conferred 
by statute; that it purports to have a retrospective effect where 
the parent statute confers no express authority so to provide that 
it has been insufficiently promulgated or that it is not clear in 
meaning. On any of those grounds it can be referred to the 
House. 
 
In any event, it is a public document once it’s passed by the 
Executive Council. And any member, once he is aware of its 
existence, can raise it in the House at any time in several forms. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m going to leave the matter by 
saying, Mr. Minister, that our argument throughout has 

been that matters of this importance ought to be discussed 
before this Assembly, because it is this Assembly, Mr. Minister, 
which is the most effective function for discussing issues of 
controversy. Issuing a press release on a regulation that we 
don’t like is not a very effective means of engendering public 
discussion. This is the means by which effective public 
discussion is engendered. Mr. Minister, the whole thrust of this 
Bill is that you seek to avoid bringing it before this Assembly 
where it has to stand in front of the light of day. 
 
Mr. Minister, you told us that the Regulations Committee would 
serve that function. Patently it won’t. I suggest, Mr. Minister, 
all of the other fanciful excuses which you put forward are of 
the same validity. Your suggestion that consequential Bills will 
provide us with an opportunity is equally ridiculous. Mr. 
Minister, I suggest that all of the excuses you have offered for 
not bringing Bills before this Assembly are of the same merit as 
your comment with respect to the Regulations Committee — 
you’re dead wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Clause 5 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, there are some questions on 
clause 5 that I want to particularly zero in on that section. It 
refers to “The Lieutenant Governor in Council . . . assigning to 
any minister any power, duty, or function, conferred or imposed 
by law on a minister.” Now I would like to ask the Deputy 
Premier what powers, duties, and functions are being referred to 
there, and whether he envisages this section as referring to the 
assignment of powers and duties and functions that may be 
created under clause 12. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, under section 12 there 
are no powers, duties, and functions being created, unless you 
want to change that. Under section 12 there are no powers, 
duties, and functions being created. 
 
Ms. Simard: — So what powers, duties, or functions are going 
to be assigned. Let’s assume we’re two years down the road; 
you’ve created a new department. What powers, duties, and 
functions are going to be assigned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Those powers, duties, and functions 
that now exist in those Acts of the legislature in departments 
that will be touched by this legislation in the event of a 
reorganization. 
 
Ms. Simard: — You mean the powers in present legislation? 
Well what if you create a new department, okay? A new 
department, an entirely new department, and you give it objects 
and purposes. And then you decide you want to reassign the 
minister in that department; take a minister from some place 
else and move them around and change the name again. What 
powers are we talking about then that you’re going to be 
assigning or transferring? 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

496 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s still the same class of powers. If we 
disestablish this department and call it something else, this 
legislation still has to be the responsibility of someone. So that 
Act is going to be assigned to some minister to be responsible 
for, and those powers, duties, and functions or whatever will 
continue to be there. And when we’re talking about objects and 
purposes we’re talking there about administrative framework, 
not powers, duties, and functions. 
 
Ms. Simard: — What if you decide you want to create a new 
department, one that doesn’t exist in law today, that doesn’t 
have particular objects and purposes, but for some reason you 
feel it’s necessary to create a new department? You can do that 
under Section 12, and then you want to assign those powers 
under that new department. What powers are you assigning? 
Where do you get the powers to assign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — An example: Science and Technology. 
The minister responsible for Science and Technology now is 
responsible for those powers, duties, and functions that the 
Minister of Tourism and Small Business used to be responsible 
for. So those powers, duties, and functions that now exist will 
continue to be the responsibility of someone else until such 
times as that legislation is brought to this House for 
amendment, or whether it’s to repeal, or to alter or otherwise 
adjust. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Am I understanding you to say that if you want 
to create new powers in a department, or a new department with 
new powers, you’ll be bringing that legislation before the 
House? Is that what I understand you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If you want to exercise powers that a 
department doesn’t now have, that don’t exist now, you have to 
come to this House to get them. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well then, why do we need this Bill? If you’ve 
got to come to this House to get powers anyway, why do we 
need this Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know if this is the 15th or 20th 
time, but this Bill dealing with objects and purposes is dealing 
with the structure, with administrative framework. That’s what 
we’re seeking to do here so we can take separate entities that we 
now — the example I’ve been using — the separate entities that 
now exist as separate entities, to bring them together under one 
administrative framework so that we can achieve those 
administrative efficiencies that everybody, including, I’m sure, 
the hon. member, is asking us to achieve. 
 
Ms. Simard: — But can’t you already do that, Mr. Chairman, 
under existing legislation? Can’t you already reassign those 
powers and duties and change around the minister. Can’t you 
already do that? 
 
And because you can already do that, why do we have this Bill 
if it doesn’t intend to go further than what you’re suggesting it 
goes? Can’t we already do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We can reassign responsibility for 

certain Acts to ministers, you know, and that’s been done from 
time to time. As . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And you’re 
right, you’re right, you can’t create new powers without coming 
back to the House. 
 
The Bill — and we’ve talked about it, I don’t know how long, 
but a long time — and one more time: what we are seeking to 
do is to streamline the administration of government; to 
streamline the administration of government, and the example 
again is the department of human resources, labour and 
employment. And we bring all those separate entities together, 
and rather than have separate entities continue to exist, 
responsible to the same minister, we make them a department 
responsible to that minister. 
 
And all of the powers and duties, etc., that exist in those Acts 
will continue to exist unless we want to come to this House and 
change those powers and duties. And what we’re looking for is 
efficiencies in the administrative framework. The only thing we 
can do to change priorities deeper than that, if you like, is to 
either amend the legislation that exists today or to change 
priorities through budgetary means. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I still believe that what you’re telling me is that 
what you want to do by this Bill is no different from what 
you’re already purporting to do and from what you already can 
do under present circumstances, virtually with the possible 
exception of changing the name of the department. And if that’s 
the case, and if you’ve got to come back to this House if you 
want to create any new powers, if that’s your feeling, then why 
don’t you just come back to this House anyway for review by 
the Assembly on the creation or the disestablishment of a 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose I could ask the hon. member: 
if the Bill is as insignificant as she’s suggesting that it is, I 
wonder why the prolonged debate. The point once more to be 
made is that we have been asked to streamline the 
administrative side of government, to bring efficiencies, to get 
the biggest bang for the taxpayers’ dollar in the administration 
of government, and this legislation will help us in doing that, 
and that’s why we’re here today. 
 
(2130) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, we haven’t suggested that the 
Bill is insignificant. It is being suggested to us that the Bill is 
insignificant. We are saying the Bill has a great deal of 
significance and that’s why we are having difficulty with it. It’s 
our feeling that it goes far beyond what it’s being suggested, 
that it creates far more powers in cabinet than what is being 
suggested by the hon. Member opposite. Under no 
circumstances is this an insignificant Bill, and there’s absolutely 
no way that we are suggesting that. I must make that perfectly 
clear. But we are being told that all it is is a simple transfer of 
responsibilities, something that we can already do under present 
legislation. It’s you that’s suggesting the Bill’s insignificant, 
and if it is so insignificant, why are you bringing it forward 
before this House now on the 23rd of December? 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

497 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, one more time. We are 
bringing this Bill forward to provide for streamlining the 
administration of government and to aid us in, I guess, the 
evolutionary reorganization of government, and there’s nothing 
dark or sinister about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you’re right, Mr. Chairman, it is the 23rd, and we’ve gone 
this far, so we might just as well finish the legislation over here. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s a House amendment to clause 12. 
Moved by the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

Amend subsection 12(2) of the Printed Bill by adding 
“except clause 20(1)(e),” after The Regulations Act. 

 
Ms. Simard: — Something I want to point out on that 
amendment, which I did earlier, but I’ll reiterate it now. 
 
One of the difficulties that I was having with the subsection (2), 
the regulations section, is that there’s a provision in The 
Regulations Act that allows the regulations to be gazetted and 
allows for the dispensation of the gazetting of the regulation. 
 
Now as I understand, that provision is going to apply in this 
case, so that any regulations passed under this Act will not have 
to be gazetted if that dispensation is given. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Under section 3 . . . no. 4, 4(3) of The 
Regulations Act, I think it’s clear under that that all such 
regulations will be gazetted. 
 
Ms. Simard: — It says . . . (inaudible) . . . But there is a 
provision in 4(3), as I read it, if I have the up-to-date version, 
that says: 
 

. . . the Lieutenant Governor in Council may by order . . . 
dispense with the publication thereof . . . 

 
So in effect, you can pass a regulation dispensing with the 
publication, is the way I’m reading that section. Is that not 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m advised that: 
 

Where, in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, a regulation is or will be available in a printed, 
mimeographed, or typewritten form to all persons who are 
likely to be interested in it, the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may by order . . . (exempt, I suppose is the word) 
— the publication — or not require the publication in a 
gazette. I understand, or my guess is that all people would 
be interested in such a reorganization regulation, so that 
there would be the requirement to gazette all such 
regulations. 

 

Ms. Simard: — So the Deputy Premier agrees then, Mr. 
Chairman, I take it, that if someone were to determine that it 
was available to persons interested and to determine who those 
interested persons were, that in effect the publication could be 
dispensed with. Or is the Deputy Premier saying he will never 
dispense with that publication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I couldn’t conceive of any situation 
that would convince me that the entire province wouldn’t be 
interested in any regulation that deals with reorganization, and I 
just can’t imagine any situation where such a regulation 
wouldn’t be gazetted. And in addition, we would want the 
whole world to know because we would be very proud of the 
efficiencies and economies that we’re bringing to government 
through such a reorganization. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I’d like to make further comments on section 
12, Mr. Chairman. The section 12, as I hope you know, over the 
last few days is the section that is causing us the most difficulty. 
When I read the section over, what it allows is for the 
government to establish a department and to determine its 
objects and purposes. And there’s been a lot of debate in this 
Assembly as to what exactly that means. Members opposite will 
contend that it just means establishing a department and setting 
out — I’m not sure what they mean by objects and purposes — 
but setting out some only administrative things. 
 
I beg to differ. I think when you determine the objects of a 
department, you determine what that department stands for; you 
determine what it’s there for, what it’s going to do, and so on. 
In other words, you are in effect setting the groundwork for 
powers. And in many cases in legislation you call that same 
section the objects and powers section. 
 
I’m suggesting that it leaves it open to the cabinet to determine 
objects, purposes, and yes, powers. It leaves it open to that 
interpretation. Consequently we have a great deal of difficulty 
with that provision because it goes beyond any precedent in 
Canada, goes beyond any precedent we’ve seen before. It 
amounts to cabinet doing behind closed doors what it chooses 
not to do in front of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — It could allow the establishment of any manner 
of agency or department, with any manner of objects, without 
any public scrutiny except for that matter coming back to this 
House pursuant to the Regulations Committee having some 
difficulty with it because it goes beyond the powers of this 
section. 
 
It may not go beyond the powers of this section. If the powers 
of this section is defined to include more than a simple 
definition of some administrative function, if objects and 
purposes goes further than that, then the regulation probably 
won’t be beyond its mandate. In other words it may not be 
reviewable by the Assembly under The Regulations Act and the 
Regulations Committee. 
 
The other problem we have with section 12 is that it allows 
cabinet to disestablish a department. It allows it to 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

498 
 
 

disestablish the department and creates no corresponding 
obligation — no corresponding obligation whatsoever, to carry 
over the substantive provisions in the old departmental Act that 
applied to the department that has now been disestablished. 
There’s no obligation to carry over those substantive provisions 
into the new order in council that establishes the new 
department. Or it may not even establish a new department. 
You may just have that Act there. 
 
This causes us substantial difficulty because there are many 
provisions contained in departmental legislation of a substantive 
nature that are fundamental to this province, that are 
fundamental to our democracy and working of our government. 
 
Without any guarantee . . . There’s no guarantee is this 
legislation that those powers aren’t, by implication, repealed or 
no guarantee that there’s going to be a minister to preside and 
take responsibility for those functions that may not be carried 
over into the new department. No guarantees whatsoever; that’s 
all we’ve heard all day long, no guarantees. The only guarantee 
I’ve noticed is found in section 19 of the Bill. 
 
Consequently you can appreciate the difficulty that the 
opposition is having with this Bill. It does not appear to be a 
Bill of simply rearranging government. It goes far beyond that. 
It allows cabinet to go much further. It allows cabinet to deal 
with matters what should rightly be brought before this 
Legislative Assembly, that should be scrutinized by all 
members of the opposition and by the public, and that should be 
voted on by this Assembly. And for that reason I wish to move 
an amendment to section 12 of the printed Bill. 
 
And the amendment reads, Mr. Chairman: 
 

That section 12 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 
out subsection (2) and substituting the following: 
 
(2) Before any order in council is made pursuant to 
subsection (1), the proposed text of the order in council 
must be approved by a resolution of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
And I move that, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
If I may just explain in very general terms and very quickly 
exactly what sub (2) does. What sub (2) would do is require 
cabinet to take an order in council disestablishing a department 
or establishing a new department and creating its objects and 
purposes — it would require cabinet to come before the 
Legislative Assembly to have that order in council approved by 
a resolution of this Assembly. And I might submit, Mr. 
Chairman, that that is the fair way that this should be done, 
that’s the proper way for this to be done, and it maintains our 
democratic traditions and our respect for public accountability. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, early in her remarks, 
the hon. member was suggesting that we were 

going far beyond, in this section, that which existed in other 
jurisdictions, and that’s simply not the case, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I refer you to the Manitoba executive government Act of 
1971, I believe, and it is almost word for word. And in that Act 
— it’s section 8 — and it compares word for word I believe 
with our section 12, except where we say “objects and 
purposes,” and Manitoba says “duties and functions.” And 
we’ve not taken a very strong or strident view. We believe that 
duties and functions is far broader than is objects and purposes. 
 
Likewise the British Columbia organization of executive 
government. It’s almost word for word the same as that of 
Manitoba and what we’re proposing here in our section 12. 
 
I simply don’t accept what the member is raising. We believe 
that this is quite reasonable. We’re prepared to offer an 
amendment that will change “objects and privileges” to “duties 
and functions,” but as it relates to this amendment offered by 
the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, I would advise and 
encourage all embers to vote against it. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Blakeney Solomon 
Prebble Kowalsky 
Brockelbank Atkinson 
Shilington Anguish 
Koskie Hagel 
Romanow Calvert 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Rolfes Trew 
Mitchell Smart 
Upshall Goodale 
Simard  
 

Nays — 33 
 
Duncan Martin 
McLeod Martineau 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Toth 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
Pickering  
 
(2200) 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

499 
 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
focus in, with respect to section 12, on one clause in this section 
that particularly concerns me and that is . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Just one moment please. Wait for the 
officials. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to focus in 
on clause (b) of section 12(1), Mr. Chairman, which, if this Bill 
passes, will give the government the right through order in 
council — in other words, by cabinet regulation — to 
disestablish or abolish any department of government that they 
wish to, without any reference to this legislature. 
 
I find this, Mr. Chairman, the most frightening clause in this 
entire Bill because the clause gives the cabinet the ability to 
essentially launch an attack on the public service of this 
province without any opportunity for debate in this legislature, 
and abolish any government department they want to without 
any reference to this legislature or without any opportunity for 
public debate. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the minister has said that this clause is in 
place to improve the efficiency of delivery of services in this 
province. I suggest to the minister that this clause is in place 
merely for your political efficiency, Mr. Minister, and for no 
other reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to point out to you 
again that there’s no assurance provided under this clause that 
the powers of one department, if that department is eliminated, 
will necessarily be transferred to another department. And you 
have refused, Mr. Minister, to give me and other members on 
this side of the House assurance this evening that this clause 
will not be used as a vehicle for your government to abolish 
public service positions — to abolish the seniority rights of 
public servants. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve also refused to give me assurance, 
earlier in debate on clause 1, that you would not use this 
provision as a mechanism for eliminating public services and 
having them moved into the private sector to be delivered by 
the private sector for profit. 
 
And so I ask you once again, Mr. Minister: will you give this 
Assembly your assurance that you will not use clause 12(1)(b) 
as a vehicle for abolishing public service positions? Will you 
give this House your assurance that you will not do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this 
legislation is to reorganize the administrative framework of 
government to achieve those kinds of efficiencies that people 
are asking us to achieve. 
 
As it relates to positions and protection of the public service, 
the public service is protected by The Public Service Act and 
the collective agreement that exists. And I said earlier, I say it 
again — if priorities of government changes and it’s decided 
that programs ought not to exist and another one should come 
into place, my guess is that 

budgetary mechanisms are a tool that are available to us now to 
do those kinds of things at your own peril. You present those 
things to this House. If the public, the electorate that put us 
here, aren’t happy with that, they could just as easily put us out 
of here. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister knows full well 
that the seniority rights of public servants are not protected if 
the departments in which those public servants serve are 
eliminated. 
 
And I ask the minister one final question and that is: once again, 
will he give this Assembly his assurance that he will not use 
this clause of the Bill that’s before us tonight as a vehicle for 
eliminating government departments and replacing those 
services with services delivered by the private sector for profit 
which will greatly increase the costs and taxes to the taxpayers 
of this province. Will he give us his assurance that he will not 
use this clause of the Bill as a way of eliminating government 
departments to be replaced by services contracted through the 
private sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as it was pointed out 
earlier, there are provisions in many, many pieces of legislation 
now where contracting out can be done. And that’s the fact of 
life. That’s just the way it is. The purpose of this legislation is 
not to provide for contracting out. The purposes of this 
legislation is to bring efficiencies to the administrative 
framework of government, and that'’ what we’re here talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister knows that the 
provisions with respect to contracting out are limited to a few 
departments of government — that that’s not a provision that 
applies right across all departments of government. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, since the minister will not provide us with 
the assurance that he will not use this Act as a vehicle for 
eliminating government departments, launching an attack on the 
public service, and replacing government departments by 
services contracted out to the private sector — since he won’t 
give this House his assurance, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Westmount, that 
section 12 of the printed Bill be amended: 
 

(a) by striking out clause 1(b); and, 
(b) by renumbering clause 1(c) as clause 1 (b). 

 
This amendment, Mr. Chairman, would have the effect of 
removing from the Bill the provision that gives the Government 
of Saskatchewan the right to disestablish any department of 
government. I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I find the amendment out of order. 
 
Order! Amendments should be proposed in the order of 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

500 
 
 

the lines of a clause. If the latter part of a clause is amended, it 
is not competent for a member to move to amend an earlier or 
antecedent part of the same clause. If an amendment to the latter 
part of a clause is negatived or withdrawn, it is competent to 
propose one to an earlier part. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Would you give us an understanding of your 
ruling. I don’t quite follow the ruling that you put forward, and 
I was wondering whether you could give it in more of a 
layman’s knowledgeable interpretation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s already an amendment been agreed 
to clause 12, part (2). That amendment is already agreed to. The 
amendment that’s proposed is to clause 12, part (1). So there’s 
an amendment ahead of it. We’ve gone by that part of the 
clause. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — What amendment has already been adopted by 
this legislature that precedes the one that you’re making 
reference to? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The House amendment moved by the 
member from Souris-Cannington was agreed to. The member 
from Regina Lakeview spoke to clause 12 after the amendment 
was agreed. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
not sure yet, Mr. Chairman, that I understand your ruling, and I 
wonder if you could just read it again and perhaps get back into 
the layman’s language with regard to the ruling. But my 
understanding is that there was an attempt by the member from 
Regina Lakeview, I believe, to amend 12(2). Is that correct? 
And that was defeated. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There was an earlier amendment that was 
passed to clause 12(2) of the printed Bill: 
 

By adding, “except clause 20(1)(e)” after “The 
Regulations Act”. 

 
The amendment moved by the member from Regina Lakeview 
was found in order because it deleted the whole of part (2) of 
clause 12. This amendment moved by the member from 
Saskatoon University is moving to amend clause 12(1), which 
precedes clause 12(2). 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to therefore move: 
 

That clause (b) of section 12(1), clause (c) of section 
12(1), and subsection (2) of section 12 be deleted. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Offer a solution to the procedural 
problem and offer the member leave to go back to that 
particular section and move his amendment at which time, Mr. 
Chairman, I will be urging all members to vote against it. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll say no more except that I 
want to first of all thank the member for Souris-Cannington for 
the procedural approach that he’s given that allows this to be on 
the floor. 
 

I simply want to say that the clear effect of this motion would 
be to eliminate the provision in this Bill that would give the 
government the right to abolish any department of government 
without coming to this legislature. And I think that provision is 
inappropriate. There is no similar provision in a Bill or in an 
Act of the Assembly either in the House of Commons, in 
Assemblies across Canada, or in the British Parliament. This 
provision, Mr. Chairman, in my view is entirely inappropriate, 
and I’d urge all members to support the motion on the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t accept what the 
member says that there’s no provision in any parliament across 
Canada, because in British Columbia it says clearly in 13(b), 
“determine a ministry that will exercise any duties or functions, 
etc., etc., and establish, vary or disestablish any ministry.” In 
Manitoba, Mr. Chairman, in section 8(a) it says clearly, 
“establish, vary or disestablish any departments.” So, Mr. 
Chairman, I urge all members to vote down the amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to . 
 
Clauses 13 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Clause 17 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to 
make one more run at this question of subcontracting or 
contacting out. And I want to put this again to the minister and I 
hope I get a good . . . I want to get a good direct answer here. 
Will the minister undertake that the government will not 
contract out to any third person any of the duties and functions, 
to use the word of the section, any duties and functions it now 
carries out if, as a result, any public servants would lose their 
job? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A couple of points to be made, Mr. 
Chairman: first, the purpose of this legislation is not to provide 
for contracting out. There are in existence now Acts that do, in 
fact, provide for contracting out, and it can be done now. The 
public service now has the protection of The Public Service Act 
and the collective agreement. You will recall in the Throne 
Speech that it was stated: 
 

Where savings are apparent, individuals and firms will be 
invited to compete for the delivery of specific government 
services. (pg.5 No. 1A) And impediments which preclude 
the effective delivery of services to the public will be 
identified and addressed. 

 
That’s not in any way to suggest that that is the purpose of this 
legislation. Those kinds of things can be done now in several 
departments in government under existing legislation. So if the 
member is asking me to give the commitment that no one will 
lose their job. I can’t give that commitment. With the kind of a 
dynamic situation in the delivery of government services these 
days all over the country — probably all over the world — is a 
dynamic situation and evolutionary in nature. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

501 
 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t want to prolong this, Mr. Minister, but 
such difficult situations arise. For example, we’ve talked earlier 
tonight about the services that were transferred to the 
Department of Environment from the Department of Labour 
which includes, for example the gas inspection service. And the 
people who are performing the gas inspection services have 
been working for this government, for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, for 20, 25, 30 years — in the case of some of 
them, made a whole career out of it. 
 
Now there’s a service where some of your right wing friends 
may argue it could be performed, could conceivably be 
performed by the private sector. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t have any right wing friends. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Neither do it, Mr. Minister. 
 
And it may save the government a few pennies, but there is the 
kind of a service which the government has been performing for 
years, which has been performing very well, in most cases. A 
service has been provided, and it would be quite wrong to 
contract that out to the private sector at the cost of the jobs of 
all of those people. And that’s why I keep coming at you, and 
my colleague from Saskatoon University keeps coming at you, 
about this question. We’re looking for some kind of assurance 
that by introducing this provision which will be new to most of 
the departments of this government, you’re not opening the 
gates to a wholesale contacting out. And I would like to hear 
from the minister as airtight an assurance as he can give this 
House that that contracting out will not occur. 
 
Now, minister, if you can’t come in terms of guarantees, and 
that’s what I heard your last answer to be, then give us as much 
assurance as you can that this sort of thing won’t happen. It may 
be, that with some new service that you decide to provide for 
the people of Saskatchewan, you may want to do something 
different with that. But so far as existing services are concerned 
where people have established careers with the Government of 
Saskatchewan, we’d like some assurance that you’re not going 
to be contacting that service out and taking these people’s jobs 
and disposing of them and leaving them on the breadline. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation has 
nothing to do with contracting out. This legislation has 
everything to do with streamlining the administrative 
framework of government, if you like. And I’m told that they’re 
all standard provisions. All of the things that we’re dealing with 
here are standard provisions. And the point that I made earlier, 
if there was to be a reduction in priorities; if as you talked of 
earlier, the gas inspectors were not a priority — and thought 
ought, I think, not to ever be the case — if they were not a 
priority or if they were to be placed some place else, or 
whatever, you can, I think, do that through setting your 
priorities through budgetary mechanisms as opposed to 
legislative mechanisms. 
 
So I don’t know how much more assurance I can give the 
member but to simply say that this legislation simply is not 
designed to provide for contacting out. That exists in many 
pieces of legislation now. And it hasn’t been done, 

to a large extent. But having said that, this legislation simply is 
designed to bring some streamlining or efficiencies to the 
administrative framework of government, as I’ve explained 
many, many times today; and that’s the long and the short of it. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, final comment to the minister. 
We’ve been searching over here for some reason why the 
government is so anxious to push this Bill through in such a 
hurry. We’re trying to understand it. 
 
As my colleagues have said earlier tonight and on many other 
occasions, most of the things that you’ve said you want to do, 
you can already do. So we’re trying to find out what this is all 
about. And, minister, I for one am more than a little suspicious 
that this power to subcontract, to contract out, is the real hidden 
agenda here. I’m led to that conclusion by what I read in the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
You say quite correctly that this power already exists in the 
legislation of some departments but not in the legislation of 
most departments. And consequently I keep rising, as do other 
people, trying to search for and obtain from you some assurance 
that will make the public servants rest a bit easier with respect 
to their jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Even if that were the case, even if that 
were the case and we decided to disestablish a department and 
contract out the duties and functions, if you like of that 
department, those duties and functions still have to come before 
this House in the consequential amendments. That legislation 
still has to come before this House for full and complete debate. 
And so you have your opportunity to present all of those 
arguments. 
 
But the fact remains that this particular piece of legislation is 
not designed to facilitate that end; it is designed to facilitate our 
desire, and the desire of many of those people out there who 
support this government, to find efficiencies in the 
administrative framework of government. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I also want to talk about 
section 17. And in particular I’d like to know whether or not 
your government is prepared to adhere to section 37 of The 
Trade Union Act which talks about: once a business or a 
department or whatever is sold or transferred or otherwise 
disposed of, those employees who are a member of a trade 
union are able to carry with them their collective agreement. 
And I’m wondering whether your government is committed, if 
this particular clause is passed in terms of contracting out, 
whether it’s committed to section 37 of The Trade Union Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that the only way that section 
37 can be overridden is by statute. It can’t be done through this 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there is a problem then. 
As we all know, the skiing facilities at Blackstrap ski resort 
have been leased out to a private entrepreneur, and none of the 
employees — I believe there may be two out of the 14 
employees— have been hired by the new lessor. The other 12 
employees, Mr. Minister, have not been hired by the lessor. 
There seems to be no 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

502 
 
 

commitment on behalf of the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources to have those employees transfer over to the new 
lessor; or in this case, this is contracting out, there’s no 
commitment on behalf of the new employer. So I’m wondering 
where your government really stands on section 37 of The 
Trade Union Act in view of the past practice, I believe at 
Blackstrap ski resort and at Kenosee Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the situation as set out 
by the hon. member simply has nothing to do with this Act. 
This Act simply provides for streamlining of the administrative 
framework of government. And that’s what we’re here for. 
That’s what we’re dealing with today, this particular piece of 
legislation. We’re not dealing with The Labour Act. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we are dealing with The 
Trade Union Act. As my colleagues have already told you, 
there are provisions in some pieces of legislation here in 
Saskatchewan for contracting out. One of the provisions exists 
in the Act governing Parks and Renewable Resources. And in 
that case, Mr. Minister, the employees of the Parks and 
Renewable Resources that used to work at Blackstrap Mountain 
are no longer employed. Their functions and duties have not 
been transferred over to this private sector person who is now 
running the ski resort. Their rights under section 37 have not 
been adhered to. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you want to have this kind of 
contracting-out provision apply to all departments of 
government. What can the public servants of Saskatchewan 
expect when section 17 of this Act is passed? What can they 
expect in terms of their rights under The Trade Union Act, their 
rights under section 37 of The Trade Union Act? I’d like you to 
answer that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The powers and provisions of The 
Trade Union Act are in no way overridden by this legislation. 
 
Now the situation that you present to us, if it were done 
wrongly, those employees have the right to go before the 
Labour Relations Board and have it dealt with that way. But 
that’s a labour issue that you’re dealing with. It has nothing to 
do with this particular Bill. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t disagree, except section 
37 of The Trade Union Act, a section of your particular Trade 
Union Act, has not been adhered to by this new lessee at the 
Blackstrap Ski Resort. Now I have asked the minister a series of 
questions, and unfortunately I haven’t yet had a response from 
the minister responsible. When it comes to this leasing 
arrangement, we are of the understanding that there were no 
provisions made between the Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources and this new lessor. There were no 
provisions made for any protection for those employees. I want 
your assurances, Mr. Minister, that if Section 17 of this 
particular Act is passed, that employees, civil servants of this 
province, will have protections under Section 37 of The Trade 
Union Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Quite simply, Mr. Chairman, what 
you’re suggesting — however accurate it may or may not 

be, it is a labour issue. It is a labour issue under The Trade 
Union Act, and those people, if they have been wronged — 
even if they haven’t been wronged, if they feel that they’ve 
been wronged — they have the recourse that’s available to them 
under The Trade Union Act. It has nothing to do with this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, it certainly does have, and I 
just would ask you to answer the question. Can you guarantee 
the civil servants of this province that if this legislation is 
passed, and if Section 17 is passed in its entirety, that your 
government will recognize your obligations under Section 37 of 
The Trade Union Act? That’s all I ask, and I would ask you to 
respond to that, either yes or no. Very simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, we recognize our 
obligations under section 37 of The Trade Union Act, and this 
legislation in no way, shape, or form overrides the provisions of 
section 37 of The Trade Union Act. And if the people at 
Blackstrap were treated not in accordance with section 37, I 
suggest to you that they do have recourse. But it has nothing to 
do with Bill 5 before us here at this time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear that you 
recognize your obligations under section 37 of The Trade Union 
Act. I presume tomorrow morning you will ensure that the 
employees — the 13 employees at Blackstrap — will have their 
jobs with that lessor, because my impression, Mr. Minister, is 
that you don’t. 
 
And all I want to know, Mr. Minister, is if section 17 is passed 
— and it’s a section that I call the contracting out section — if 
it’s passed and there are some employees who wake up Monday 
morning and don’t have their jobs because their particular jobs 
have been transferred to the private sector, will you, Mr. 
Minister, assure those employees that they will go to the private 
sector, they, along with their jobs, and that they will have 
protections under section 37 of The Trade Union Act, and that 
they will still have their union on Monday morning? Simple yes 
or no, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I guess the answer, Mr. Chairman, is 
that if the Act applies, it applies. And I guess you have to in 
each situation put it to the test. I don’t know. This piece of 
legislation, this proposed legislation, Bill No. 5, has nothing to 
do with The Trade Union Act and provisions under that are 
obviously labour issues and don’t have anything to do with Bill 
No. 5. And . . . No, I won’t say that. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to. 
 

Clause 18 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, clause 18 provides that the 
minister may make grants on any terms or conditions he may 
prescribe up to $10,000 without obtaining any approval. And I 
have been told here this evening that that’s not an unusual 
section, that it exists in other legislation. 
 
And I maintain that, yes, it does exist in other legislation, but 
we already know what the objects and purposes and 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

503 
 
 

powers of that department is and for what reason that money 
would be granted. However, this allows cabinet to go ahead and 
create a new department with new objects and purposes, 
something that has never come before this Assembly — totally 
new — and this section will apply to it. In other words, they can 
make grants up to $9,000 without any approval and without 
prior approval in this Assembly. They may have to obtain a 
special warrant to do it, but they can do it. 
 
And what I want to know is whether we’ll have an assurance, 
whether we can obtain an assurance from the Deputy Premier, 
that he will not permit grants to be made under this subsection 
by a department created with new objects and purposes, or 
different objects and purposes from the department that was 
disestablished, without first getting approval from this 
Assembly for the spending of the money. Not by special 
warrant, but by coming before this Assembly in estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve talked about this 
earlier in the evening, and the facts haven’t changed. I can think 
of several special warrants that have been put forward to 
provide for situations that have arisen from time to time, like a 
drought payment, like cattle cash advance, etc., etc. And we do 
those things. That appropriation shows up in the legislature as a 
supplementary estimate, and those things are done now, so what 
we’re doing here is not particularly different. 
 
There can be no expenditure without appropriation, and that’s 
the long and the short of it. If we set up a new department that 
is establishing a new department — obviously it’s going to have 
to have responsibility for something. And the appropriation that 
follows with that responsibility will be, I suspect, the 
appropriation from which that $10,000 or 999 or whatever 
you’re talking about will come from. 
 
Clause 18 agreed to. 
 

Clause 19 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman,, I would like some clarification 
on clause 19. It says that: 
 

A minister may, for any purpose relating to any matter 
under his administration . . . 

 
Now we’re talking about a minister of a newly created 
department created outside of this Legislative Assembly, 
created by cabinet without coming before the Legislative 
Assembly, that minister may: 
 

. . . provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, 
guarantee or other similar means . . . 

 
I would like some clarification as to exactly when the Deputy 
Premier envisages this section being used. I would like him to 
pay particular attention to the word “guarantee.” Does this mean 
that the minister could, for example, guarantee someone else’s 
indebtedness to the tune of half a million dollars — the minister 
of this newly created department — without this having come 
before the Legislative Assembly? What is the full extent, and 
how 

do they intend to be using section 19 with respect to these new 
departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This is set out in this way because in 
several other pieces of legislation the term “financial 
assistance” was used and there was some question as to what 
financial assistance was. So this was set out to clarify, I guess, 
what financial assistance . . . what format can take. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, in dealing further with 
section 19, a couple of questions to the minister. 
 
From remarks I’ve made on other occasions in the House, the 
minister will know some of the concerns that I’ve had with the 
way that the government proceeded to implement the housing 
program that was announced on the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The question before the committee is 
clause 19 of Bill No. 5. I would ask the member to relate this 
remarks to clause 19. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I am indeed doing precisely 
that. Precisely that. And my point is this, to the minister. The 
concern I expressed with respect to that other piece of 
legislation, the Saskatchewan Housing Act, is a concern that I 
believe at another time and place the government could, if it 
wanted to, rectify by section 19. And I want to explore that 
point with the minister just briefly, and I won’t take much time, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
My point, Mr. Minister, is this:and if you’ll just accept the 
argument to make the point for a moment, I think there is an 
argument that could be advanced and might be tested 
somewhere, some time, that a particular program that a 
government was putting forward exceeded the authority of a 
certain section in enabling legislation that’s on the statute books 
elsewhere. 
 
And my specific example of that, where an argument might be 
advanced, is the housing program in relation to a certain section 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Act. Now having said that, is it 
your view, Mr. Minister, that if that defect — as a matter of 
argument for the point I’m trying to explore here — if that 
defect did in fact exist in relation to section 16 of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Act, is it your view that section 19 of 
this legislator would correct that defect for the purpose of all 
new programs that a government might want to pursue in the 
future. It’s the omnibus nature of the language in section 19 that 
troubles me, and I would like the minister’s view on that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, two points. Number 
one, we’re dealing, I think, with a very, very hypothetical 
situation. Number two, I think the member is asking me for a 
legal opinion, and clearly outside of my competence and quite 
simply unable to offer a legal opinion on the question. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Could I ask then, Mr. Chairman, if the 
minister regards section 19 as an omnibus spending authority 
for any minister to pursue any program without any requirement 
for a discuss of that program to arise in this Legislative 
Assembly? 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

504 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The short answer is no. These can only 
be for matters under his administration or for which he is 
responsible. And in any event, they still have to be from 
appropriated funds. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2245) 
 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Farm Land Security Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, members of the 
legislature, to my right, I have Jack Drew, deputy minister; to 
his right, Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister; behind me is 
Ron Rilling, acting general manager, Farm Land Security 
Board; seated next to him, Terry Scott, manager, research 
section, economics branch. 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make a few 
comments on this. First of all, as we all know there’s a lot of 
outstanding debt in Saskatchewan:3.2 billion on land, 1.5 on 
operating, and 1.5 on machinery, totaling about $6.2 billion in 
farm debt. Now we have recently seen the change in policy 
where the Crown land lessees have been come down quite 
heavily upon to pull in their leases. I think this sets a dangerous 
precedent in the fact that we know that Farm Credit Corporation 
has many outstanding debts. Many of our lending institutions 
have many outstanding debts. And the government has been 
saying with this Bill:we’ll secure the land. But they won’t 
secure anything else, setting a precedent that they’re taking the 
lead on one hand with foreclosing, while out of the other side of 
their mouth they’re saying that we’re going to stay off this 
foreclosure. I would just like to quote a couple of things from 
this memo, and it says: 
 

It is not acceptable to allow lessees to continue farming 
lease land which is in serious, long-term arrears. Therefore 
I have recently approved a policy which takes a firm stand 
on these lessees in arrears. Lessees will be required to be 
no more than one year in arrears by December 31, 1986, 
and failure to do so will result in further collection. 

 
It also goes on to say: 
 

I would also caution you not to give these lessees false 
expectations. To retain lease security the required 
payments will have to be made. 

 
Now on one hand we have the situation where, by this 

Bill, we are going to secure the land, foreclosure upon land, and 
in the same breath the government is saying that they are going 
to cut off leases. I think this is very, very inconsistent. 
 
We also have another inconsistency whereby Sask Power has 
implemented a surcharge on motors over 60 horsepower for 
irrigation purposes. So what we’re doing is securing the land by 
this Act, and yet the fact that they cannot secure machinery, do 
not secure livestock, basically they’re putting it in one pocket 
and taking it out of the other. I believe this is just a 
smoke-screen, Mr. Chairman, for what the real objective of this 
government is. 
 
We also have other situations that relate to the necessity to 
secure land, to secure machinery, to secure livestock and other 
assets. These things are such as free trade, an agreement 
whereby we lose the stability of our marketing boards. We need 
security, full security. When we lose security in these marketing 
boards, we lose the viability. And these boards come along and 
are reviewing the operators and they’re saying, I have to prove 
that I’m a viable operator. By undermining all the stability they 
have, it is obvious that the viability will not be there. 
 
Free trade puts a threat on the wheat board. As we know, many 
governments buy centrally and sell centrally . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The Bill before the committee is An 
Act to amend The Farm Land Security Act, and I would like the 
member to relate his messages or his comments to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’m simply pointing out the need for securing 
not only the land but the need to secure all the assets for all 
these reasons that have been placed before us to provide further 
insecurity of the family farm unit. I’m trying to say that because 
of these things like free trade and the other things that I’ve 
mentioned, we need full security, not just of land but farm 
machinery, livestock, and inventories. 
 
Another one is the fact that the deficiency payment . . . We have 
seen the need of $3 billion; we’ve got much less than that, again 
undermining security of the farmers of this province. We need 
total asset security, and we must do this by enlarging upon this 
Bill and not having another ad hoc, short-term program. 
 
We have a situation where we have family farms now and 
they’re being foreclosed upon; we’re losing our numbers — a 
situation that points us in the direction of corporate farms and 
fewer rural communities. And I suggest if this Bill would go 
further to secure assets, that could be reversed, at least put on 
hold. Because Saskatchewan cannot afford to lose any more of 
its farmers, farm families, and social infrastructures that we 
have. I believe that we have a system built; we must maintain it. 
And unless we have this government go much further than this, 
it will not be maintained. 
 
I understand that this government does see it differently, 
because their leader in 1977 expressed a desire to rid rural 
Saskatchewan of many of its family farms. In the Business 
Review of 1977, Dr. D.G. Devine said: 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

505 
 
 

You realize that most of our food is produced by less than 
20 per cent of the farmers who tend to be good business 
men as well as producers. Society may not wish to support 
higher food prices for producers’ security so that the 
non-productive 80 per cent can live in this country at a 
profit. 

 
I think that’s what we’re seeing right now with this policy, is 
the fact that we have the smoke-screen of the short-term, ad hoc 
program, the reality of insecurity because Bills like this do not 
go far enough to provide any security. 
 
We are losing our farmers at an incredible rate, and some say it 
is beyond the control of the provincial government to stop this 
trend but I ask, is it? Or is it simply the underlying theme of the 
government. As far back as 1933 we’ve had governments that, 
like the Anderson government, who had debt adjustment. In ’71 
we had the New Democratic Party pass the family farm 
protection Act. That’s what we need, further security. 
 
In 1985 Saskatchewan farm income hit its lowest point in 13 
years. We have the number 17 per cent of our farmers are 
estimated to be in moderate financial difficulty, a further 10 per 
cent in severe difficulty, and 9 per cent to be non-viable. This 
Bill simply does not go far enough, seeing in the light of this 
severe situation. We have a realized net farm income that has 
dropped 35 per cent in the last year, and when you take into 
account inflation, it is the lowest since 1940. And yet our major 
chartered banks seem to be turning a good profit, and I think the 
banking system in this province has an obligation to be a 
responsibility to the people of this province, to take their share 
of the problem at hand. And yet this government seems 
unwilling or unable to address or even acknowledge the urgent 
need for debt adjustment or debt restructuring. Without that 
there is a great danger that Saskatchewan will not only lose a 
generation of young farmers but will lose thousands and 
thousands of farm units. And what happens to the face of rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Members opposite may like to pretend that this existing Act is 
really effectively protecting farm foreclosures. But as we see in 
the numbers, because it does not protect against the seizure of 
livestock or machinery, the fact that, I say again, these assets 
could be taken, the viability of the farm goes down, and the 
foreclosure is automatic. In fact, the decisions have been two to 
one in favour of the banks when the final decision came down. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say that this Bill, 
because of the problems that we have in this province, because 
of the numbers of farmers we’re seeing in trouble, because of 
the fact that they need security — they need security of not just 
the land but they need security of their other assets — I think 
we’re moving into a situation where it’s already happened that 
we’re seeing venture capital projects and livestock industry. 
These programs I’m sure are, and I hear are, being possibly 
extended to farm land. 
 
The problem is we’re treating the symptoms and we’re not 
getting at the disease. And unless we have Bills like 

this go much further to ensure the security of that farmer and 
therefore stave off that disease that’s eating us up, we will see a 
further erosion of a system that we have in this province of 
family farm units, small towns, and a society that has been 
developed over a number of years that I do not want to see 
change. 
 
It may be the view of some members opposite, or many 
members opposite, that it’s inevitable that we’re going to see 
the erosion of the basic family farm unit into large 
argi-business, multinational corporate farms farmed by tenant 
farmers, and I think that would be just very unbearable for me 
to watch. Therefore, I think that this Bill has to go much further 
by securing not only land but livestock and the machinery. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. members, the 
hon. member has covered a goodly number of topics ranging 
from venture capital corporations, lands branch leases, free 
trade, security of marketing boards, corporate farms, debt 
adjustment, debt restructuring, and we could probably spend an 
evening or more debating some of those issues but what, in fact, 
is in front of us is this Bill. And the only reason this Bill is here 
is because, in fact, of the difficulties farmers are facing and the 
fact our government acknowledges the difficulty they’re facing. 
The reality is we now have two years’ experience to draw upon 
with this Bill. After two years of experience we can say this:this 
Bill works. Quite simply, this Bill works. And you can twist 
and warp the statistics, but the reality is this has something of 
over a 60 per cent success rate for the farmers. 
 
(2300) 
 
The issue you raise that I will touch on insofar as why do we 
not broaden the Bill to include machinery, the answers I would 
give are the same as I gave in 1984, that to do so would drive a 
wedge between those who live in the country and those who 
live in the rural communities; drive a wedge between the farmer 
and his fuel dealer; the farmer and his fertilizer dealer; the 
farmer and his machinery dealer; and in fact everyone who 
works for those people in that farm service sector. And without 
that farm service sector the very network, the very woof and 
weave that you describe in rural -Saskatchewan would be 
jeopardized. 
 
I sometimes think, listening to the opposition rhetoric, that their 
motives for wanting, for example, the fuel dealer covered, are 
not so much to do with protecting the farmer but maybe perhaps 
more to do with the fact that the fuel dealer might be a 
multinational corporation. It might be Esso, or Texaco, and in 
your minds every one of those are corporate robber barons. 
 
The second point I would make here is the federal debt review 
board, and that legislation offers the farmer some protection to 
things over and above and in addition to the land, and augments 
the Bill that we have before us. 
 
And the third point I would make as to why we did not include 
these other sectors is that if you go back to the history of the 
Bill . . . You talked about the farm protection Act; I think it was 
1971. At that time, and some of these members in this House 
remember, the machinery dealers 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

506 
 
 

saw that as exactly what I described earlier, an attempt to drive 
a wedge between themselves and their farmers saw that as 
exactly what I described earlier, an attempt to drive a wedge 
between themselves and their farmers. And in fact we have 
members in our government caucus today who experienced the 
unfairness of that, who experienced how that drove a wedge 
between them and their farmer clientele. And in the two years 
that we’ve had this Bill in place, in fact, I, on more than one 
occasion, have had machinery dealers come up and tell us that 
this made sense. And as well, Mr. Chairman, I can say that 
farmers have not come, saying we should cover specifically 
machinery. 
 
The fourth and final reason before I take my place, Mr. 
Chairman, is this:it has to do with simple common sense. What 
banker in his right mind, knowing full well that foreclosures are 
stayed, is going to grab the tractor? It does not make sense. He 
knows that if the farmer is going to maintain and hold that most 
precious resource, which is why we focused it on that single 
most important asset, the land, it would make no sense for him 
to go after the tractor or the cultivator or the discer. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Chairman,, I would argue that that is what is 
happened. Common sense has prevailed in the light of what this 
legislation does. It’s good legislation. It has worked, it has 
worked well, and I know it will work well for the next year or 
two. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, I hope that a year or two from 
now we don’t even have to deal with this kind of legislation, 
that farming will be healthy and viable again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clause 2 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, for many of the reasons 
that I outlined before, I would like to move an amendment to 
section (3)(a) by renumbering it as section 3.1 of the printed 
Bill; and (b) by substituting the following as section (3) of the 
printed Bill. Section (3) is repealed and the following 
substituted: 
 

Purpose and application of the Act. 
 
(3.1) The purpose of this Act is to afford protection to 
farmers against losses of their farm land, farm machinery, 
livestock and other assets and inventories necessary for 
farm operations. 
 
(3.2) In order to give effect to the purpose stated in this 
subsection 1, this Act applies mutatis mutandis to actions 
respecting debts incurred in the purchase of farm 
machinery, livestock and other assets and inventories 
necessary for farm operations. 

 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 8 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just a couple of technical 
points for the minister with respect to clause 8. First of all, 
could he advise us of the specific purpose for making 
information gathered under the provincial program that we’re 
addressing tonight, making that information available to the 
farm debt review boards that are established federally. Is that 
simply a matter of avoiding duplicate kinds of investigations, or 
is there some other purpose envisaged here. 
 
And secondly, could the minister advise us what information 
security provisions exist federally to ensure that information 
gathered provincially, transferred to a federal farm debt review 
board, stops at that point and doesn’t go further and violate the 
security of the individuals involved. 
 
We have recently seen a number of rather unfortunate examples 
where the federal system for keeping information confidential is 
a rather leaky system, to say the least, and I wonder if the 
minister could just advise us what safeguards there are federally 
to make sure that information gathered provincially doesn’t 
become a matter of broad public knowledge and filed on 
microfiches and distributed to news-rooms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to your first 
question, it is as you mentioned, to avoid duplication in having 
them go before two panels, which just makes eminent good 
sense from the farmers’ standpoint and from efficient 
management, if you like. Relative to what safeguards are in 
place to ensure confidentiality is (a) that is the expectation, it is 
confidential, and in fact, oaths are taken to that end. 
 
And I suppose one can never guarantee anything for sure, but 
that is the expectation. And at this point in time there’s been, as 
far as we know, no breach of confidentiality because they are 
dealing with the personal list, if you like, of the financial and 
personal lives of these farmers and their families, and it 
wouldn’t be right and proper if in fact that information was 
divulged except in the sources where it is supposed to be going. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just as a matter of clarification 
on that point, could I invite the minister to be in touch with his 
federal counterpart and to attempt to secure, insofar as the 
federal minister can, a specific assurance on this point because 
it is a matter of some concern, given the unfortunate incidents 
that have occurred in other federal departments in the last 
number of weeks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sure. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

507 
 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Council of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Farm Land Security Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2315) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine that Bill No. 2 — An Act to 
amend The Farmers’ Counseling and Assistance Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 3 — An Act to 
establish a Mortgage Protection Plan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 4 — An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 6 — An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Farmers’ Counseling 
and Assistance Act 

 
Clause 1 

 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just one or two brief 
comments in general about this Bill, while we’re on clause 1. 
I’d like to raise with the minister and would welcome his 
comments about the differences that exist between this piece of 
legislation, or the program that we’re referring to here, The 
Farmers Counseling and Assistance Program, and other parts of 
the government’s general collection of programs in relation to 
agriculture. 
 
And the one fundamental point I wish to raise and the question I 
want to ask and welcome the minister’s response is:why, in this 
program, there are eligibility criteria, rather precisely defined as 
to who can participate and who can’t, and in other government 
programs relating to agriculture there are no such criteria. And I 
think as a specific example, for example, the production loans 
program. 
 
Under the counseling program there is a requirement that net 
worth cannot be more than $500,000 or 60 per cent of total 
assets. I think I have those basic provisions correct. In other 
words the applicant has to have a serious debt problem in order 
to qualify for participation under this program. 
 
But in relation to the production loans program, as another 
illustration of government programming, there’s no criteria at 
all. Basically, everybody’s eligible for that particular program. 
And I would like to hear the minister’s explanation as to why 
the difference. The restrictions applied to the counseling 
program mean that really only the toughest cases can come 
within the ambience of this particular program and therefore, in 
an indirect way, the banks are obviously getting a rather large 
advantage because it brings the program . . . includes under it 
the loan portfolios that will be the most troublesome for the 
banks, because it’s only the most serious debt problems that get 
brought within the ambit of this particular program. And I 
simply would like the minister’s explanation as to why that is 
true in relation to the counseling program, and yet there are 
much broader and more generous criteria in relation to other 
agricultural programs brought forward by the government from 
time to time. 
 
And specifically, if the minister could address this point in his 
reply: does any part of the reasoning have to do with the flow of 
agricultural problems, over time, and the possibility that 
agricultural problems being dealt with more recently, that is for 
example under the production 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

508 
 
 

loans program, are now judged by the government to be 
somewhat more serious, and the problems afflicting agriculture 
are somewhat more broadly spread than when this program was 
implemented a period of some two years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, members, before I 
answer the question, I would just introduce one official that was 
not in committee earlier tonight, and that would be sitting 
behind my deputy here, Barry Andrew, program chairman, 
counseling and assistance for farmers program. 
 
In answer to the hon. member’s question, I should state at the 
start that relative to the counseling assistance for farmers 
program there is no targets or means test, if you like, for those 
seeking counseling. Anybody can have counseling, so it’s wide 
open if you like. There are criteria for those looking for loan 
guarantees, and the difference between that kind of program and 
some of the other ones you mentioned are that in the counseling 
assistance for farmers, those seeking guarantees are those 
farmers who are in, I suppose one could say, a severe financial 
distress. And in the programs like cash advances, farm fuel 
royalty refunds, the 6 per cent production loan program, those 
deal with farm input costs. And in those cases we are 
attempting to reduce farm input costs for all farmers, and that’s 
one of the stated purposes of our government’s policy relative 
to farming. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, bearing in mind the minister’s 
comment, does the government have any intention in future, 
perhaps, to bring forward amendments that would broaden the 
eligibility criteria for the counseling and assistance program, 
bearing in mind that the difficulties affecting farmers are getting 
broader, they’re getting deeper. Some people that might have 
been regarded as absolutely secure and beyond danger are 
finding themselves precariously close to difficult financial 
circumstances, people that we wouldn’t have imagined could be 
near that kind of difficulty a couple of years ago. Is the 
government giving any consideration in future to a broadening 
of the criteria of this program so that more people could be 
brought within its ambit? 
 
The Premier, in introducing the legislation, made the point that 
the program is working, and from the evidence that I’ve been 
able to gather, I would agree fundamentally with that assertion. 
The program, insofar as it is available to farmers in 
Saskatchewan, does appear to have had a beneficial impact. 
And accordingly, I wonder if thought is being given to relaxing 
some of those eligibility criteria. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The first point I would make in 
response to the hon. member’s question is that there are no 
criterion for the counseling. I think if we were to have some of 
those who have over the past couple of years been out in the 
field with this program — when they stand back and look at the 
program, in their assessment the counseling has perhaps been 
the most valuable, although we tend as legislators often to get 
tied up with the numbers of dollars guaranteed and the average 
dollar guarantee and that kind of thing. In reality those 
counselors, who have been very close to a lot of very difficult 
cases, time and time again tell me how, in their 

minds, the counseling is the most valuable tool — and getting 
that counseling in place and into those homes early. 
 
(2330) 
 
The second point I would make is insofar as whether our 
criterion meet the need out there in terms of the target group, if 
you like. It’s something we’re ever mindful of. And I can say 
that the last time this Bill was before the House we did amend it 
with a view to changing the criterion, because after a period of 
time we found that we needed to fine tune it in that way. I guess 
I can also say at this point in time that since then that that fine 
tuning seems to be fitting the Bill, if you like, and I recognize it 
will always be a balance. 
 
Another point that I would make for the member’s information 
is that there is no sense putting in place guarantees for those 
who don’t need them — in fact, some might argue, for who 
don’t want them even. In fact, some might argue that all you’re 
doing is really letting some of the financial institutions off the 
hook if you took the approach of guaranteeing everything, for 
example. 
 
So there is a question of balance. I think we have found the 
right balance. In the event that it wasn’t there before, we 
haven’t been afraid to fine tune it. And if it was the view that it 
should be fine tuned, I suspect we would, but, and I reiterate 
again, that counseling is for everyone who wants it. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, two final, quick comments. 
I’m certainly pleased that in the minister’s preliminary remarks 
that he drew the House’s attention to, and introduced Mr. 
Andrew, who is here as one of the officials this evening, who 
obviously has been doing a fine job in his responsibilities in 
relation to this program. And I would want to reconfirm some 
comments that have been made in this House and elsewhere 
with respect to the farm counselors who have worked under this 
program. 
 
All of the reports that I’ve received have indicated a good job 
done by them as they have established a good rapport with the 
farm clients that they are working with. The minister will know 
that I have one of those counselors particularly in mind in the 
person of Ms. Linda Boxall, who has been helpful under this 
program — in the counseling aspect of it — but I think she and 
the others who have participated in the program deserve to be 
congratulated and commended for the kind of effort that they 
have made on behalf of farmers in this province in difficulty. 
 
The final point, Mr. Chairman, that I would want to make 
relates to some rumours that have been broadly circulated in the 
media respecting a federal program that is not identical but is 
somewhat parallel to the program that we are discussing this 
evening, and I refer specifically to the Family Farm 
Improvement Loans where there has been a good deal of 
speculation in the last number of weeks that the Government of 
Canada may have in mind the elimination of that program. I 
wonder, since it is a program that runs a little bit in parallel with 
the provincial program under consideration this evening, if I 
could have 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

509 
 
 

the minister’s assurance that he is vigorously lobbying his 
federal counterparts to ensure that the Family Farm 
Improvement Loans are not removed or eliminated by the 
Government of Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just a couple of comments, and the 
first one addresses your comments about the panel members 
and the counselors on this program. And for you who were not 
here at the time that this Bill was first introduced, I appreciate 
your comments, because there were some in the opposition at 
the time that this Bill was introduced that said these panelists 
and these counselors would be nothing more than political 
hacks and partisans for the Tory party, if you like. I think you 
remarks indicate that in fact, as I said at the time, that they 
would not; they would be highly respected farmers, the peers of 
the farmers out there. In fact, I suspected that they were of all 
political stripes and I think that’s probably been borne out. 
 
And the other comment I would make further to what you said 
about the job that they have done out there is that in my time, 
both as minister and since then, I can probably count on one 
hand the number of complaints I had about the way the 
counselors conducted themselves on the farms and in the 
interviews with the farmers that were affected. And given the 
kinds of cases and the emotions surrounding those cases they 
were dealing with, that’s a tremendous credit to these officials 
and the people who work with Mr. Andrew and the crew that he 
has doing the job for him. And I would want that to be on the 
record. 
 
As it relates to federal initiatives on farm finance, and I think 
you mentioned specifically farm improvement loans, I suppose 
I could go back in history and detail hours of discussion and 
debate at ministers of Agriculture meetings and special 
ministers of Agriculture meetings relative to that whole 
question of farm finance and the options that could be looked 
at. And as I understand it, the one that you refer to specifically 
has been given a six-month breathing period if you like. And 
it’s not as though we’re not concerned about it. Albeit that it 
may not be as useful, as effective as it once was, but our 
concern has been more on the operating side, I suppose. And 
that doesn’t mean to say that we don’t consider that important, 
but our overt concern has been on the operating side. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan 

 
Clause 1 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I would sure 
like to spend a lot of time on this, Mr. Chairman, but I see the 
hour is drawing nigh, and I would just like to indicate to the 
minister that we will be supporting this Bill this evening. Our 
party does support the principle of mortgage assistance to home 
owners. The only regret that we have is it’s not 7 per cent. If we 
could arrange some 

sort of an amendment that it would be a 7 per cent mortgage 
plan instead of nine and three-quarters, I’m sure it would make 
a lot of folks happier. 
 
But I have a couple of points I wanted to make on the Bill. One 
is that even though we do support it, it doesn’t really address 
the housing start problem or the long-term job creation problem 
that this province is now undergoing. It also, in our view, 
doesn’t provide decent, affordable housing to those who are in a 
seniors situation or a low-income bracket. And I think it does 
provide, to a certain extent, a means test for those that are 
mortgage holders. 
 
So I wanted to make those points, Mr. Speaker, and I wanted to 
raise a couple of questions with the minister, if I may. One, that 
Bill 3, the mortgage protection plan, is quite similar to a 1982 
bill, which was the mortgage interest reduction plan, except that 
it does not provide for an appropriation of funds. And I was 
wondering if the minister could explain to me why that is not 
the case in this new Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may respond to the hon. member, 
firstly, with regard to the appropriation. The legislative drafting 
people now advise us that because an appropriation can only 
come about through a withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund 
that it’s redundant in the legislation and it’s no longer 
necessary. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the 7-7-7 program, I suppose, like 
most people in the province, I would be curious to know which 
7-7-7 program you were referring to because we did have at 
least seven different variations during the course of the 
campaign and prior to it. For example, we did have the 7 per 
cent interest rates and $70,000 maximum mortgages for seven 
years which would cost, in our estimation, $950 million over a 
seven-year period. I notice that there was some retraction by 
some members opposite on that proposal. 
 
There was the $7,000 down payment assistance for first-time 
home buyers available for three years. Our estimated cost of 
that is $17.5 million or $52.5 million over three years. 
 
And finally, the $7,000 renovation grants to all existing home 
owners over the next seven years, and I refer to the opposition 
leader’s news release of September 11, 1986, would cost 
approximately $1.75 billion. So I throw those . . . 
 
With regard to your comments on construction, I can indicate 
that the number of employed in the construction industry 
increased from 22,000 to 26,000 in the years 1982 to 1986 — 
that’s April to November. And for a similar time period under 
the previous administration, September of 1977 to April 1982, 
the number of employed in construction declined from 27,000 
to 22,000. 
 
So we can debate the statistics on employment. That debate has 
been going on for the last 70-some years, I think, in the 
province, and it will continue over the next several years. And 
we will both put our interpretations on them, and we will both 
take our messages to the people of 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

510 
 
 

Saskatchewan. But I don’t know whether it’s necessary to 
prolong that debate. I think I’ve answered your questions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I do have a copy of the 7-7-7 program if the 
minister wishes to review it. And I’d be happy to sit down with 
the members opposite at length and explain how the program 
would work and how it would not only solve the unemployment 
problem that we have in this province that this government has 
been the architect of, but I think that at this point I would do 
that in private. And I would like to ask a couple of other more 
questions, if I may. My colleagues here are anxious to get home 
to their loved ones. 
 
I wanted to know as well, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us why 
the Bill does not outline the matching grant program or the 
$10,000 loan program at 6 per cent. Where do those two 
elements of the home program obtain funding and where do 
they get their legislative authority in terms of the program 
delivery? That interests me. I’m not quite clear on how that is 
set up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They’re funded and operated through the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and our legal advice is that 
that is in the normal powers of the SHC and they have the 
appropriate resolution to deal with those programs. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The other question I had, Mr. Minister, 
applies to those that are locked in at rates that are lower than 
thirteen and a quarter per cent, yet higher than nine and 
three-quarters, and a longer-term mortgage. Are they going to 
be afforded any protection under this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Which sector again? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Those people that are locked into mortgages 
that are less than thirteen and a quarter, which those that are 
locked into mortgages higher than that are subsidized by the old 
Bill of ’82, but those that are in that twilight zone of thirteen 
and one-quarter and nine and three-quarters that are longer 
term. Are they going to be helped by this Bill or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They’ll be covered on renewals. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So then they will not be helped until such 
time as they do renew, which could be up to three or four or 
five years in some cases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s not very many of any lengthy term 
at those higher rates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay. I would like to comment about section 
4. I think that’s a good article. It prevents people from receiving 
double protection from the MIRP (mortgage interest reduction 
program) and the new home program. 
 
Section 8, final question, Mr. Minister, section 8(3):is there an 
appeal process set up in this Bill for those that wish to appeal 
the decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They would have to challenge the validity 
of the certificate, and there are some technical procedures to do 
that. It’s not a formal appeal, but it 

would be challenging the correctness of the decision, or 
whether there was proper authority, or whether proper 
procedures were used, but not a formal legal appeal. It would be 
a challenge to the operation by the civil servants. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just one specific question to 
the minister as a supplementary to one of the points raised by 
the member for Regina North West. 
 
He noted that the mortgage protection plan before us tonight is 
one-third of the announcement made by the Premier in August, 
I believe it was, in respect of housing in Saskatchewan. The 
other two-thirds being the home repair loans and the matching 
grants. The member for Regina North West asked for the 
authority for those other two sections of the program was, and 
the minister made reference to the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation and legislation appertaining thereto. 
 
I wonder if the minister could be just a little bit more precise in 
terms of the Saskatchewan housing Act to tell us this evening 
the sections precisely that the government relies upon as the 
authority for the matching grants and the home improvement 
loans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I suggest to the hon. member that it’s 
not germane to the legislation before us. The legislation deals 
with the mortgage protection. The challenge or the questions 
with regard to Sask Housing Corporation can more 
appropriately be done in Crown corporations. I believe from 
time to time we’ve done it on estimates as well — and I think 
that’s where the debate is — and I don’t think that anyone is 
unduly prejudiced by not debating that aspect tonight because 
I’m not sure that any of the recipients under those two programs 
are anxious to challenge the validity of the programs before the 
courts or the authority. Suffice it to say the advice that I have, 
that we do have outside legal opinion which advises that Sask 
Housing Corporation has the appropriate authority to carry out 
those two programs. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I take it then from the 
minister’s response that in relation to the mortgage protection 
part of the government’s housing program, it is the 
government’s view that no legal authority existed for that, and 
therefore we have the Bill before us tonight which would 
provide the government with the legal authority for that 
particular element of the program. It is the government’s view 
as well that there was existing legal authority for the other two 
parts of the program and therefore no special legislation was 
required. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That is correct. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, before I report the Bill, if I 
may introduce the officials with me:Keith Laxdal, deputy 
minister of the Department of Revenue and Financial Services; 
and Russ Moore who is the director of revenue operations 
branch of the revenue division. And I move the committee 
report the Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

511 
 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to wish the officials a Merry 
Christmas. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

 
Clause 1 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I again 
introduce Mr. Laxdal and Lorelle Schoenfeld, who’s with the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Simard: — There are a number of concerns I have with the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan and therefore with this amendment 
Act. Mr. Chairman, I raised them in some detail during the 
second reading debate, and therefore in order to save time this 
evening, I will just ask some questions concerning it as opposed 
to going into the explanation. 
 
Now I understand that at this present time if an individual takes 
old age security and guaranteed income supplement from 
Ottawa, that any moneys paid under the pension plan will be 
deducted from the guaranteed income supplement. Now if that 
is indeed correct, I’m wondering if the minister in charge could 
advise me whether there are negotiations or attempts to 
overcome that problem so that the money paid under the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan would be an additional payment 
over and above the guaranteed income supplement. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As it applies to guaranteed income 
supplement, that’s a tax back of 50 per cent. So there still would 
be, on that aspect, an advantage to contributing to the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Those that are receiving both GIS and SIP would be tax backed 
at 50, and we have some on-going discussions going on now 
and have been for some time of if there’s any way to restructure 
the SIP to continue an advantage contributing to the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I also understand, Mr. Chairman, that there are 
problems with respect to the portability of this pension plan. For 
example, if a person moves from Saskatchewan to another 
province and they don’t have a similar plan, their entitlement to 
contribute under the Saskatchewan plan discontinues, and there 
isn’t an equivalent plan in the other province to which they can 
contribute or to which this plan can be transferred and apply. Is 
that correct, and what is the minister doing, if anything, to 
improve on that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, certainly I don’t say it’s a problem of 
portability because we indicated at the time of introduction of 
the legislation and passage that we would be more than pleased 
to enter into negotiations with any other jurisdiction that will 
have similar plans. Until that time we do not think it appropriate 
that we be subsidizing people beyond the province. And with 
the incentive for people to contribute to their pension plan, we 
felt that that significant factor in the proposal would warrant us 
to demand from other jurisdictions reciprocity so that our 

people will have the same benefits if there is to be an incentive 
aspect to other programs. 
 
But while the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, are making some contribution, we didn’t think it 
appropriate that we be paying for other people within the 
country. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Wouldn’t it be more appropriate, Mr. 
Chairman, to have a federally financed plan through CPP or 
some other federal arrangement, so that portability throughout 
Canada would be in place? Wouldn’t that be more appropriate, 
and what steps is the minister taking to achieve that result? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we’ve indicated for some time that 
certainly, ultimately, the desirable situation would be to have a 
national home-makers’ pension plan. 
 
There has not been much movement towards that. We would 
hope that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan would heighten the 
awareness of the issue. I think it to some extent had that effect. 
We do note those interest groups that have promoted a national 
plan have expressed some frustration over the years at the lack 
of movement towards a national plan. And I note the statements 
recently by the president of the National Action committee on 
the Status of Women who is putting the blame now for lack of 
movement at the federal level at the federal bureaucracy. So 
there is a frustration. I sympathize with that frustration. 
 
In our view as a provincial government, the lack of action at the 
national level was not a justification for Saskatchewan to do 
nothing. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The one very serious problem with the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that it is 
not universal. In other words, it’s not available to everyone. 
Theoretically, individuals can contribute to it, but the fact of the 
matter is, is when their income is very low, they cannot afford 
to contribute to it. 
 
Therefore, we have suggested on other occasions and I would 
suggest again, that we would like to see the Saskatchewan 
pension plan be a mandatory plan where everybody is required 
to contribute to it who isn’t otherwise covered by an adequate 
pension plan, and that it be made available to people who can 
afford through some government subsidy to those individuals 
who cannot afford to pay the monthly premiums. And I would 
like to hear the minister’s opinion on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well obviously it would be nice to have a 
plan that everybody could afford to pay. But one argument that 
arises on the question of the matter of very low-income people 
and the pension plan, the question that actuaries raise:are we 
really prepaying welfare? Because we have an obligation to 
society, obviously to make certain payments to low-income 
seniors, and I will freely grant the argument that they may not 
be adequate. But are we simply bringing those payments 
forward and prepaying in the case of very low income? We did 
try and structure the plan so that the amount of 80 cents per day 
would not be beyond the possibilities of those that were very 
much interested in their pensions. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

512 
 
 

Finally, we keep in mind that we did indicate during the 
development of the plan and as part of the overall thrust, two 
other major items that often don’t get taken into account when 
we’re discussing the plan — one being the guaranteed 
minimum pension to deal with those who would not be able to 
contribute to the pension plan for a long enough period of time 
to generate a pension that would be worthwhile to them; and 
secondly, increases in the Saskatchewan income plan as very 
much part of the proposals for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
So I think in fairness and within reason, we did try and deal 
with some of the legitimate concerns that you raise. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, there’s two comments I wish to 
make in that regard. The member opposite had said that this 
would be a prepaying of welfare, and of course if he’s not 
already aware of this, proponents who feel that there should be 
a universal plan say that’s precisely the reason why we want a 
universal plan so that we’re not talking about welfare payments 
down the road. The stigma that may be associated with welfare 
payments is not there — that everybody has a pension. That’s 
the whole purpose for a universal pension plan, and to suggest 
that it’s prepaying welfare is begging the question. 
 
The other comment I’d like to make with respect to the 
guaranteed minimum pension and the Saskatchewan income 
plan that was made by the member opposite, I’d just like to 
point out that those people with no retirement income than OAS 
(old age security) and GIC are living $1,000 below the poverty 
line. And a $15-a-month increase, which is what I understand is 
given under the Saskatchewan income plan, is hardly adequate 
and certainly does not bridge that gap of $1,000. And therefore, 
although it may be some effort, it is inadequate. 
 
The other point that I wanted to raise is with respect to the 
criteria used in determining the eligibility for a matching grant. 
I understand it’s individual income at this time and we have 
suggested that the government should be looking at family 
income. I gave the example during the second reading debate of 
a small-business person, for example, who earns $26,000 and 
therefore wouldn’t be entitled to a matching contribution 
whereas his or her spouse earns $15,000 and has a pension 
through his or her business or place of work. The accumulated 
income would be $41,000 and the government would make no 
matching contribution. Someone else, however, a family with 
an income of $80,000 with one spouse not working would be 
entitled to a matching contribution if it’s the non-working 
spouse who applies for the plan. And I’m asking the minister 
whether he thinks that’s fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, let me answer first of all the question 
of the matter of welfare. Whether it be a stigma, that debate will 
go on in the country for some considerable period of time. 
Really, I suppose, the more fundamental argument being put 
forward is the question of a guaranteed annual income, but this 
is not the forum to be debating that particular issue. 
 
The matter of family as opposed to individuals, I have some 
difficulty with your position in that. On the one hand, one wants 
to talk about equality of individuals — 

the male and the female. And let’s take the traditional marriage 
example of the male and the female and we have equality. We 
attempted to look upon them as individuals. Can there be an 
unfairness? There can be an unfairness if we have a situation 
where the working spouse at a high income is very much part of 
his or her planning, making adequate retirement provisions for 
the other spouse. 
 
(2400) 
 
But let’s take a situation where that is not the case, and I think 
all of us can identify or would recognize and accept that even in 
situations where there may be one high-income souse and the 
other not earning income, where there is not adequate provision 
being made for the non-working spouse. And to say that all of 
those situations are unfair because one is making plans for 
financial security for the other, and a second situation where 
they’re not, we weren’t prepared to pry into that. And we felt 
that this would, at least, deal with those situations. 
 
And we’ve had many examples where people, if we were to 
look at the family, have indicated, finally I’m going to have 
something of my own, because they don’t feel that they were 
sharing in the family wealth — if I can use that phrase, and I 
use it guardedly — and that they now have an opportunity to 
make some provision for themselves. So I don’t think it is 
unfair. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Just one comment on that, Mr. Chairman, and 
then seeing as it’s midnight, I will shut it down here. That is 
precisely why it should be mandatory. If it was mandatory, that 
problem wouldn’t exist, and then perhaps you could look at 
family income with respect to matching contributions. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly a mandatory pension would solve 
that particular problem. I have yet to see any well-accepted 
studies in terms of what the cost of a national mandatory 
pension plan would be. We get all sorts of estimates, and I 
would think that most taxpayers would want to see some 
precise cost estimates and know exactly what it’s going to cost 
them before they’re prepared to commit to a national pension 
plan. So rightly or wrongly we are, I think, a ways away from, 
on the national agenda, a national pension plan, because of cost. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I guess I have to make one more comment with 
respect to that, Mr. Chairman. The problem of course is that we 
talk about the cost of a mandatory plan, and there’s no doubt 
that this plan may be cheaper than a mandatory plan. But the 
fact of the matter is the people that need the help aren’t getting 
it. Therefore is the cost of this plan too high if the people we 
want to really help are not getting it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But I do think, in fairness, that most people 
see at least it’s a reasonable first effort to deal with a problem 
and, I suggest, not only an immediate problem, but given the 
demographics of the Saskatchewan population, a problem that 
will grow over the next 20 years. And I think the program is 
being accepted as a minimum, at least a reasonable first effort. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

513 
 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just one brief question to the 
minister. In view of the exchange that he has just had with the 
member for Regina Lakeview, will the minister indicate what 
kind of lobbying effort he or his government is undertaking 
vis-à-vis the federal government to urge them to shoulder their 
legitimate responsibility and not create a situation where we 
could have a confusing and inadequate patchwork of provincial 
pension programs where provinces have tried to fill holes that 
the federal government is leaving, instead of developing a 
national and cohesive plan that satisfies the need across the 
country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We indicated some considerable time back 
in the last couple of years to the national government — and 
we’ve indicated this public — our support for a national 
home-maker’s pension plan. 
 
If you’re asking me:is the lobbying intense and ongoing? No, 
it’s not. From time to time at the Finance ministers’ 
conferences, for example, there has been discussion, informal 
admittedly, of the Saskatchewan plan — how it’s working, and 
our expression to all other provinces that one, are we not only 
prepared to co-operate; secondly, we have indicated most 
clearly to the federal government that if there is any movement 
towards a national pension plan we want to participate in the 
development thereof; thirdly, we have also offered to all 
jurisdictions any assistance we can give, given our experiences 
to date. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Just two questions to the minister — and, Mr. 
Minister, this comes back to the question of a public subsidy for 
low-income earners who could not possibly consider putting up 
the matching $300 per year that would be required to get the 
provincial government $300 contribution towards their annual 
pension. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: will you be prepared to 
bring forward a provision to this legislature in the new year that 
would ensure persons in the range of, shall we say, less than 
$15,000 a year of family income, with government assistance, 
to meet that $300 that they need to put up before they are able 
to qualify for the matching $300 that’s currently provided for 
under the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, I wouldn’t be prepared to give you that 
type of guarantee. Of course one of the difficulties with having 
a poverty line is that you’ll never solve poverty, and that line 
will keep floating up. And as long as we have someone with 
more income than another, as long as we have a poverty line, 
someone above it, we will have the poverty of those below it. 
So that argument about the poverty line always creates some 
difficulty. 
 
We’ve indicated that the cost of 80 cents per day contribution to 
the plan is . . . Certainly there are those who cannot afford that. 
We have made some provisions — members opposite feel 
inadequate — we believe at least reasonable given the 
circumstances in the province that the amount is relatively 
small. It can start a plan, and many people have indicated 
already that given the amount of contribution level of 80 cents 
per day, that they may be reallocating their own expenditures to 
allow a contribution. 

Mr. Prebble: — Well my second question to the minister is 
this . . . You know, 80 cents a day, Mr. Minister, is a significant 
amount of money when you’re only making $4.50 an hour and 
you haven’t had an increase in the minimum wage for a very 
substantial period of time. And my question to you, Mr. 
Minister, is: will you at least give a commitment to this 
legislature that you will undertake a study with respect to what 
percentage of Saskatchewan residents whose family incomes 
are below $15,000 a year are in fact able to take advantage of 
the plan, and will you table that information in this legislature? 
 
And will you further give us your assurance, Mr. Minister, that 
you will make a serious attempt to tackle and eliminate the 
problem of poverty at least for those who are over 60 years of 
age in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I hesitate to remind the hon. member 
that the plan is not based on family income, so a compilation of 
the statistics is not something that the plan did. And we debated 
that already. 
 
Secondly, I believe that we have moved . . . Obviously we will 
be debating this issue over certainly the next four years — the 
question of the adequacy or the adequate level of the minimum 
wage in the province of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan does have 
the highest. There are statistics which indicate that that may be 
causing some youth unemployment. We have to take a look at 
that. 
 
With regard to the matter of low-income seniors, I think some 
of the initiatives we’ve announced in conjunction with the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan I will freely admit will not solve 
the problem. But I do believe that given the expenditures of 
government, the priorities, the fact that we are moving, 
recognizing the problem, we have made some steps — and I 
think very positive ones — to at least begin to deal with the 
problem. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, before I report the Bill I 
would like to thank my officials. In this case I would like to 
make sure that it is on the record of this Assembly. They have 
done a tremendous job in setting up and establishing the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. It is new legislation. It’s a new 
program and I would like to make sure that my appreciation is 
on the record. They’ve done a tremendous job and I join with 
all members in wishing them a very Merry Christmas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Clause 1 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Bryan Middlemiss, administrative assistant to the 
executive director of MCIC; and on my left, Gerald 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

514 
 
 

Tegart, solicitor with the Department of Justice. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, if I might, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, the Health critic, asked several questions in second 
reading debate to which I would now undertake to respond and 
go from there. But I think the answers will be to the member’s 
liking. 
 
One of the questions . . . and I’ll just go through them in order 
as they appear. One of the questions ended with, and I quote 
now: 
 

. . . it appears to me that the cabinet would, by regulation, 
be mandated to make these amendments that we have in 
the Bill retroactively. So I’d like some clarification on 
that. 

 
And the answer to that, for the member’s clarification, is that 
according to the legal interpretation provided by our 
Department of Justice, legislative amendments are required in 
order to implement the dues check-off retroactive to January 1st 
of ’86, this current year. 
 
The second question, you suggested that: 
 

. . . nowhere in the agreement do we have any reference to 
a compulsory check-off by the SMA on doctors in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And I know in that that you were referring to the Saskatoon 
Agreement II and the little booklet that was provided to the 
members of the public. The Saskatoon Agreement II, by way of 
answer, provided the mechanism and basis for negotiations 
between the government and the physicians, and did not 
incorporate all the details on future negotiations. The check-off 
provision was included in the agreement reached during the 
1986 fee schedule negotiations which were separate and apart 
from the other. It should be noted that a provision for dues 
check-off has existed in The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act for a number of years. 
 
(0015) 
 
The third question, and I quote again: 
 

. . . what assurances do you have that the SMA does 
represent a majority of doctors in the province when it 
comes to the Saskatchewan Medical Association acting as 
the sole bargaining agent for doctors. 

 
And the response, Mr. Chairman, is:(a) the SMA is recognized 
by statute as the body representing the medical profession with 
respect to the establishment of payment schedules; secondly, 
the SMA is the only organized body representing the physicians 
in the province, and it represents over 80 per cent of the 
physicians, which I think you outlined in your remarks as well; 
thirdly, with respect to the dues check-off provision, the SMA 
clearly identified specific costs associated with the bargaining 
process, and the dues check-off is justified on the basis of 
covering those costs. 
 
This bargaining process results in agreements that benefit all of 
the physicians. On this issue the SMA sent ballots to 

all doctors in the province, including those not members of the 
association, and 83 per cent of those who voted favoured dues 
check-off. 
 
The fourth question, and I quote again: 
 

What assurances does he have that doctors are prepared to 
have a compulsory check-off go through the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association? I’d also be interested in knowing 
what individual protections there are legislatively for 
doctors when it comes to their dealings with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 
And I think it’s important to refer back to my prior answer, and 
secondly it’s important to point out that other professional 
organizations do have legislative protection for their members, 
and I’m not aware of any evidence to indicate that physicians 
require this kind of protection. 
 
Now the fifth question, and I quote again: 
 

. . . what rights do individual doctors have when it comes to 
the principle of natural justice when there’s a dispute 
between the doctor and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association? 

 
The answer: The SMA is a legal and democratically constituted 
body, and I’m not aware of any need for the type of protection 
indicated in the question. The principles of justice that apply to 
the physicians apply to many other professions as well. 
 
Sixth question, and I quote again, Mr. Chairman: 
 

I’m wondering whether doctors have any individual 
protection when it comes to matters of grievances or 
arbitrations that the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
may wan t to act on behalf of doctors. I’m wondering if 
there’s reasonable notice given by the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association to individual doctors. 

 
On this, Mr. Chairman, I’m not totally clear on what the 
member said, and she may want to clarify that. However, I 
think it’s important to note that the amendments being 
considered to the Act do not affect how the association relates 
with its profession. It will continue to function as other 
professional associations do. 
 
If the member is referring, Mr. Chairman, to the SMA initiating 
grievances or arbitrations on behalf of individual doctors, it 
must be borne in mind that an employer-employee relationship 
does not exist with respect to the medical profession in general, 
and consequently consideration of grievances and arbitrations 
on behalf of individual doctors does not occur. 
 
The seventh question, Mr. Chairman, and I quote again: 
 

. . . is there any protection for doctors when it comes to 
voting on a final offer by the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission? Would the SMA have to call a vote on that 
final offer? 

 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

515 
 
 

The answer, Mr. Chairman, is: the SMA distributed the first 
agreement under Saskatoon Agreement II in its entirety to all 
members of the association for their approval. Furthermore, the 
question of compulsory dues check-off was distributed to all 
physicians for their vote. 
 
And the last question, the eighth one, and I quote here: 
 

I’m interested in knowing whether individual doctors have 
protections that individual employees do when it comes to 
dealing with their trade union. 

 
And the answer to that, Mr. Chairman, is: while need for such 
protection may exist in employer-employee relations in 
situations, that need does not exist where physicians are 
self-employed. The relationship between physicians and the 
SMA is no different than the relationship between other 
professions and their associations. The compulsory dues 
check-off provides a means for the physicians to build on a 
relationship that has existed for a number of years and which is 
intended to benefit all physicians. 
 
And if there’s other back ground and so on, I’d just ask the 
member to carry it from there, but I think that, Mr. Chairman, 
should clarify many of the — and most of and hopefully all of 
— the questions that the member has. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, are you aware of any other 
professional organizations that act in the capacity of the SMA 
when it comes to bargaining collectively with an institution 
that’s similar to the Medical Care Insurance Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, we’re aware of others in the 
health care field — optometrists, chiropractors come to mind. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I guess, Mr. Minister, your government saw 
fit to bring in some amendments to The Trade Union Act that 
would protect employees in their dealings with their trade 
union. I guess I’m interested in knowing whether individual 
doctors who aren’t members of the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) deserve the same kind of protection when 
it comes to their individual dealings with the SMA. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I think there is a difference in the 
sense that the physicians are deemed to be, and in fact are, 
self-employed. And the relationship is not exactly the same; nor 
in fact many would say it’s not very much the same at all. So I 
don’t think it’s the same. The employee-employer relationships, 
which are addressed in The Trade Union Act, I don’t think are 
addressed here, nor should they be. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’m not suggesting that they 
should be. What I’m talking about is the relationship that 
individual doctors have with the SMA. And I think that there is 
to a certain extent a parallel between the relationship that 
doctors would have with the SMA, and I’ll give an example. An 
individual employee of the Government of Saskatchewan has, 
by statute in The Trade Union Act, certain protection when it 
comes to dealing with their trade union and how that trade 
union 

deals with them as individuals. What I’m suggesting to you is 
perhaps there is a need for individual doctors to have the same 
kind of protection when it comes to their dealings with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. And I don’t think that 
there’s any need to differentiate because of the 
employer-employee relationship because we’re not talking 
about that, we’re talking about individuals’ relationships to their 
employee association or doctor association. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I just could respond in saying that 
I don’t believe there is a need for the kind of protection that the 
member suggests that there may be. And I don’t think there is. 
The SMA has been recognized for — I know I’m not just 
totally on the question that you’ve asked — but the SMA has 
been recognized for a good long time as the association of 
physicians in the province. And I also know that there are 
something in the order of 20 per cent who are not members of 
the SMA and so on, but it has not come to our attention that 
there would be a problem in this area and so on. 
 
But I would just say that I don’t believe that there is that sort of 
need, even though I suppose a case could be made in terms of 
protections of this individual or that individual regardless of 
whether they’re in a profession or wherever. I recognize that 
trend in some of the questions that you’d asked earlier. But the 
short answer is, no, I don’t believe that it’s there, at this time, 
the need for that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Just one final question, Mr. Chairperson. 
What if a doctor, on religious grounds, has a problem belonging 
and paying dues through this compulsory check-off to the 
SMA. Are there any provisions legislatively for that doctor to 
not have to have his or her money going to the SMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think it should be clarified. The 
check-off provision that’s being provided here does not 
constitute a membership in the SMA. And I know you know 
that. I think you were clarifying that. Okay. So that’s good. And 
the member has indicated that she knows that’s the case. So the 
75 per cent of a normal membership fee which is being checked 
off is deemed to be a reasonable amount on the basis of the 
doctors throughout the province benefiting from the activities of 
the SMA in terms of negotiating on behalf of them and 
whatever. 
 
The clear point here is the point that I made at the very 
beginning of this answer, and that is that it’s not a membership. 
I know you asked about the case of a conscientious objector on 
the grounds of religion or whatever, and I would say there’s 
been no suggestion of that, and there’s no provision here for 
that. Although if it came to our attention, I suppose that there 
could be something done, but I can’t think of what it might be 
just now. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies, Mr. Chairperson. One final 
question. What are we looking at in terms of a percentage 
check-off? Are we looking at a flat rate, a percentage rate? Can 
you give me any details on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe it’s 75 per cent of the SMA 
membership fee, whatever that may be at a given year. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

516 
 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(0030) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Farmers Counselling and 
Assistance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 12:32 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Farm land Security Act 
Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Council of Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act 
Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Farmers’ Counselling and 
Assistance Act 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan 
Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Act 
Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:34 a.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move, seconded by my colleague, the member from Maple 
Creek: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker, upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible by registered mail, of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just prior to putting the 
adjournment motion, I think I, on behalf of all members on the 
government side, and certainly I’d like to wish you and all 
members of the House, the staff at the Table, members of the 
press gallery — if their editors are watching it could be noted 
that they are all there. It’s obviously been a very eventful year 
for all of us — 1986. I believe that we all deserve a rest. All 
people in this province deserve the joy, and so on, that 
Christmas brings, and I would say to all members here a Merry 
Christmas and all the very best in 1987. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
Deputy Speaker and the House Leader in extending to you our 
best wishes for the holiday season, and I want to join with the 
House Leader in wishing all members of the House a happy 
holiday season. It has been a good 1986 for those of us who are 
here, and we look forward to an equally good 1987. 
 
I want, as I know the House Leader will join with me in 
extending our best wishes to the staff who serve us — the pages 
and the Clerks at the Table. We want to wish each and every 
one of you a holiday season that will be memorable, and a 1987 
which will be particularly memorable, and we will all define 
that in our own way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before moving the adjournment motion I, too, 
would like to take this opportunity to wish each and every one 
of you a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. I know 
that the Christmas season is spent in different ways by different 
people. Some use it as an opportunity to spend it with family 
and friends; others use it as an opportunity to perhaps go to the 
church of their choice; others use it perhaps to go away 
somewhere. But whichever way you choose to spend your 
Christmas and which . . . any combination of ways, I wish each 
and every one of you the very best, and I hope you have a 
lovely Christmas day and beautiful holiday. 
 
In the absence, ladies and gentlemen, of Mr. Craig James 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

517 
 
 

who is not here tonight, I would like to take this opportunity to 
also thank him on your behalf for the good work he has done 
for us. I understand that Mr. James and his wife are moving to 
British Columbia to take up similar duties in that legislature, so 
I would just like to pass on our good wishes to him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I, too, would like to thank the Clerks and the 
pages and all the members of the Assembly who have done any 
work to make this Assembly run smoothly. And with that, hon. 
members, the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it being past 10 o’clock, I 
move this House do now stand adjourned. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:39 a.m. 


