


















































April 10, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 10, 1986 
 

483 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 
the eighth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
to the Legislative Assembly during the 20th Legislature. 
 
It is also a special report in reference to a recurring matter arising 
in the committee. The matter is the refusal of the Municipal 
Employees’ Superannuation Commission to follow the 
committee’s, and indeed the Assembly’s, instructions to prepare 
the commission’s financial statements in accordance with the 
recommendation of the Provincial Auditor in his 1984 and 1985 
annual reports to the Assembly. 
 
The reservations of opinion as to the quality and accuracy of the 
commission’s financial statements are made abundantly clear in 
the Provincial Auditor’s 1984 report, and on pages 23 and 24 of 
his 1985 report, on pages 55 though 58. 
 
Your committee passed a motion at its meeting this morning 
respecting compliance by the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission. The motion read as follows: 
 

That the Municipal Employees’ Superannuation 
Commission be required to prepare their financial 
statements in accordance with the Provincial Auditor’s 
report of 1984 and to otherwise comply with the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. 

 
We adjourned the public hearing on the matter and agreed to 
report to the House this afternoon to present the committee’s 
observations on the commission by their ignoring the office of 
the Provincial Auditor, the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts, and especially this Legislative Assembly, which has 
concurred in the two previous committee reports dealing with the 
Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
Your committee is as much concerned with the fact that the 
Municipal Employees Superannuation Commission’s financial 
statements do not accurately reflect what the Provincial Auditor 
says they should, as with the commission’s continuing defiance 
of the Assembly when it adopted the recommendation of the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
At a public hearing into the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission by this committee on May 29th, 
’85, produced the following motion: 
 

That the Public Accounts Committee recommend to the 
Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Commission that 
the fund shall report its activities to show the financial 
position of the former plan, the financial position and the 
results of its annuity underwriting activity, and the financial 
position  

and results of operations under the new plan, including a 
comparison of the new plan assets to obligations to pay 
allowances to new members, and for the municipal 
employees’ superannuation fund to report back to the 
Public Accounts Committee as soon as possible. 

 
The commission’s administrators are still deficient in fulfilling 
this request. 
 
A few personnel comments before I move the motion that the 
report be concurred in. The commission administers 
approximately $100 million worth of assets, which are not assets 
of the Crown in that sense. These are pension funds belonging in 
part to municipalities and in part to employees of municipalities 
and some school boards. 
 
We have not had an audited financial statement since 1982, 
which your committee regards as wholly unsatisfactory. The 
problem has been that the fund the commission administers is, in 
essence, two and three different funds. There are three different 
classes of employees. In the early ’70s the nature of the pension 
fund of municipal employees — and this includes some school 
board employees, but we’ll call them municipal employees for 
the sake of simplicity — the nature of the pension scheme was 
changed from a money purchase plan to a formula plan. And thus 
they went, in a sense, in the opposite direction from the public 
servants, who went from a formula plan to a money purchase 
plan. 
 
The contributions for this come not from the treasury of the 
province, but from the municipal governments, the school 
boards, the employees. They were reporting the entire fund as if 
it were a single fund. And I’m over-simplifying a bit, but it’s 
basically accurate. 
 
The Provincial Auditor felt that since in fact the pay-out was 
different on the old pension scheme and the new pension scheme, 
the two ought to be kept separate. The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission, for reasons that were not 
satisfactory to the committee, took a different view. The matter 
was discussed at length in the spring of 1985 by the committee. 
We issued a recommendation which was crystal clear in its 
effect, and it was adopted by this Assembly, not that it’s relevant, 
but after a comment by myself and, I believe, a comment by the 
member from Rosthern. 
 
The commission, however, chose to go its own way. We felt — 
I think your committee felt, Mr. Speaker, that there are two 
principles at stake. One is that the . . . I think the committee was 
unanimously of the view that, with respect to the issue, the 
Provincial Auditor was correct. These are not our moneys; the 
financial statements ought to accurately reflect to the local 
governments and to employees what is in the fund. Of equal 
importance, however, was the fact of a commission defying the 
Provincial Auditor, but then when the matter we felt had been 
resolved by the Public Accounts Committee in the legislature, 
then continuing merrily on their way as if the legislature of 
Saskatchewan was merely a body advising them. 
 
Some members of your committee, I think it’s fair to say,  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

484 
 

took umbrage at that position, and accordingly we decided to 
issue a special report. If the special report is concurred in, I think 
it will be an end of the problem with the Municipal Employees 
Superannuation Commission. I think they will now comply, I 
think, as well, we are establishing an important principle and that 
is that when reports of the Public Accounts Committee are 
concurred in by this legislature, they must then be treated by the 
agencies of government as if their ultimate authority had spoken. 
 
To compare it to a private company — I suppose one might — 
financial statements are prepared, not for the board of directors 
but for the shareholders. In the case of public moneys, the 
financial statements are prepared, not for the members of the 
commission but for the public. The public acts in and through 
this institution, and when this institution speaks, to put it in the 
language of the private sector, the shareholders have spoken, and 
the officers must comply. 
 
With those background comments, I will move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Mayfair: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be concurred in. 

 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, just to add some notes that were 
commented by the chairman. To put it mildly, the committee is 
not at all pleased that the people who run the plan have decided 
to ignore the direction that this House and that committee has 
given them over two years. We do not argue with the benefits 
they pay their people who receive benefits. We argue with the 
way they report their funds, and that their annual report does not 
reflect the proper financial position of each of the funds. 
 
For an example, Mr. Speaker: of the 200 per cent money that is 
put in, 100 per cent by the employer, 100 per cent by the 
employee — in other words, it’s a matching share — presently 
the funds says it only needs $1.656 to operate and pay out what’s 
required. But what they do is: they report it and pay out in such 
a way that they violate the pensions Act, by not only paying a 
formula plan, but they have an equity plan for the extra money 
contributed; and then they use the equity put in by the employer, 
or the people of Saskatchewan in the R.M.s, to do other things 
with. The argument is not about those things, but is about the 
honest reporting, so that everybody knows where the dollar is 
being spent. And what the committee is saying is the Provincial 
Auditor is correct in arbitrating a dispute between the municipal 
employees and the Provincial Auditor. We say the committee is 
correct: cease, desist, correct yourself, and report your funds so 
that everybody knows what’s going on. That’s really what the 
committee said this morning. 
 
As far as . . . There’s several plans mixed into it, and we won’t 
go into that here, Mr. Speaker. But our concern is one thing: the 
annual report that was tabled here must be accepted by the 
normal principle of reporting of the fund and the amount the plan 
has; if it has funds to meet its obligations; or if it has surpluses. 
 
What we have asked, and I think we got an agreement that the 
department will get at it right away to correct it,  

and that’s what we’re really looking for. We don’t want to be 
ignored any more. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder if perhaps the chairman of the 
Public Accounts Committee would accept the question. And 
what I would like to know before voting on this is the nature of 
that particular commission, how its authority works, and the 
auditor, and who does the auditing? Is it the Provincial Auditor; 
is it an outside auditor; and what are the reactions of the various 
municipalities who, I take, are the participants of this particular 
plan? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — With leave of the Assembly, I’ll answer the 
question. The commission is set up pursuant to a statute where 
the Provincial Auditor does the auditing. And as for the reaction 
of the municipalities, I doubt that any — perhaps that’s stretching 
it a bit too far — I doubt that any would understand the issue, 
given the explanation they’ve got. One must appreciate — I’m 
sure the member from Kindersley appreciates — that the 
municipalities, if they’ve receive any explanation, have just 
received the explanation of the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission. I doubt that they’ve received the 
comments of the Provincial Auditor. I am not sure, written in the 
language which it must necessarily be written, if the report of the 
Provincial Auditor, even if they did have access to it, would be 
all that meaningful. 
 
So I think we just simply don’t have a reaction from the 
municipalities. But the commission is established pursuant to 
statute, and pursuant to statute the Provincial Auditor must do the 
reporting. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 24 grade 8 
students from Glen Elm Elementary School that is situated in the 
north-east corner of the constituency of Regina Victoria. They 
are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Moleski and Mr. 
Thordarson, and are seated in the west gallery. 
 
I hope that their stay here is both entertaining and educational, 
and I look forward to meeting them at 3 o’clock for pictures and 
refreshments. And I ask all members to welcome them here to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the 
legislature, on behalf of my colleague from Kinistino, a group of 
15 students, grade 10, 11, and 12, from the Dixon Lake High 
School. 
 
I might admit, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit confused when I read the 
name of the town. I thought that with the water purification that 
we have here in Regina, they had renamed the town. These 
students are from Crystal Springs. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

485 
 

I look forward with meeting them after question period for 
pictures and refreshments. I know you will find question period 
informative. And I ask members of the Assembly to greet the 
students from Crystal Springs. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have the 
pleasure of introducing to you, and to the opposition also, seven 
students from Swift Current, accompanied by two teachers, Mrs. 
Diane Yee and Melon Whitney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group is in what we call a job entry program. 
And for those in the Assembly that are not familiar with it, it’s a 
very unique program and it consists of class-room experience 
tied with work experience. And I would hope that today they find 
some of the experience of this Assembly beneficial to their 
educational experience. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you after, if you have any 
questions, and I would ask that this Assembly welcome them 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Price Drop in Initial Grain Payments to Farmers 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier 
and the Deputy Premier, I will direct my question to the Minister 
of Energy who recently returned from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is: in the face of the 20 
per cent cut in the initial grain prices to farmers in Saskatchewan, 
when you, sir, went to Ottawa this week, can you explain why 
your message to the Government of Canada and to your friends 
in Ottawa was to force the price of gasoline and diesel fuel back 
up for the farmers who are already facing bankruptcy as a result 
of your federal government putting the price of grain down 81 
cents. How did that make any sense to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, our record on working 
with Ottawa for the betterment of all Saskatchewan, in fact all 
Canadian farmers, is a good one, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
largely because we have a man like the Premier who himself is a 
farmer and understands the issues facing farmers today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had it not been for our Premier and the efforts by 
other federal MPs in Ottawa, I doubt that farmers today would 
have access to an interim grain stabilization pay-out that helps 
cushion the effects of lower world wheat prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t for this kind of co-operation, we 
wouldn’t have capital gains tax removed. Mr. Speaker, if it 
wasn’t for that kind of co-operation, we wouldn’t have had 
drought payments made; we wouldn’t have had flood payments 
made. And when it comes to the issue of gasoline prices, Mr. 
Speaker this government’s record,  

this government’s legacy to Saskatchewan farmers, to 
Saskatchewan consumers, Mr. Speaker, is clear. Gas prices go 
down, gas taxes go off, oil royalty benefits get passed back to our 
farmers; that’s the legacy of the PC government to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oil Prices 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. 
What the farmers in my area are telling me is they don’t 
understand the position of the Premier when he makes public 
pronouncements that he’s going to force Sheikh Yamani to 
reintroduce the cartel to force oil prices up. They don’t 
understand that. And what I want to ask you, sir, is whether or 
not you agree with the Premier’s position that the oil companies 
are in such dire straits in Canada and Saskatchewan that the 
farmers and the consumers should be paying more at the pump 
for gasoline and diesel fuel in order that the hard-pressed oil 
companies should have more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, my recollection of the 
only people making a clear call for minimum or floor prices for 
oil in this country are the NDP in Ottawa. That is the only people 
I have heard clearly calling for a minimum oil price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What our Premier has said — if we want to get the facts out on 
the table, Mr. Speaker — what our Premier has said is we must 
be open-minded, be prepared to look at all options. And that is 
exactly what we are doing, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at all 
options. But I remind you, the record is clear of the NDP: gas 
taxes, that’s fine, put it on; and minimum floor prices, the 
hypocritical argument at one hand saying lower the prices and on 
the other hand saying, put it up to a minimum oil price. That is 
their legacy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, for years the big oil 
companies have been arguing that the secret to success in the oil 
industry was deregulation. And they have fought consistently for 
a world price on oil. And now they have deregulation, and now 
they have the world price, and they say they don’t like it, and you 
are off to Ottawa saying all that they’ve asked for is bad. Can you 
explain why you now want to re-regulate the industry and have 
gasoline and diesel prices go back up to 45 cents a litre, or more. 
Why do you think that this is a good time to do that in the face of 
the difficulties being experienced by Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member suggests 
that the oil industry, consumers, Saskatchewan politicians, 
believe that the answer to providing fairness and stability out 
there, providing security of long-term energy supply for Canada, 
ultimately which becomes an issue of maintaining jobs in the 
inside and outside the Saskatchewan oil patch, is to get into 
re-regulation. I suspect he’s talking about the old kind of concept 
that shut our oil patch in and cost us jobs; the national energy 
program, the ill-founded and ill-conceived. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

486 
 

I will tell the hon. member that under the Western Accord, Mr. 
Speaker, we can deal with spikes and dips as need be. We need 
not get back into the re-regulation and the mumbo-jumbo of the 
NEP kind of approach, which the NDP were obviously party to 
and comfortable with. That would not be our approach, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister has spoken of jobs, saying that their policy of forcing oil 
prices up will save jobs. Mr. Minister, how many more jobs will 
be lost if farmers go down the tubes, thanks to your push for 
higher gasoline and diesel prices? How many more jobs will be 
lost along Main Street, Biggar and Main Street, Wadena and 
Main Street, Hafford and Melfort if you persist in saying that I 
know farmers has suffered a 20 per cent cut in income, and I 
know that farm incomes are lower than they’ve been in real terms 
since the 1930s, but never mind, farmers must be called upon to 
pay higher prices for gasoline and diesel. That’s what your policy 
says and I ask you: how many more jobs will be lost in the 
agricultural and agricultural service sectors in this province by 
your policy of demanding higher prices for gasoline and diesel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a 
traditional and classic NDP attempt to pit the oil patch worker 
against the farmer — to pit the oil patch worker against the 
farmer. To say on one hand we must ignore the oil industry and 
let the jobs out there go by the wayside, and on the other hand try 
and say, because we do that we’ll be charging our farmers more 
for their fuel. There are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, there are two issues here. 
And it’s not good enough in this day and age, Mr. Speaker, to 
reduce things to a simple duality — to reduce it to an either/or: 
either they get it and I don’t, or they get it and I don’t. That’s not 
good enough any more, Mr. Speaker. There has to be a balance. 
There has to be a balance, Mr. Speaker, and that is the approach 
we would take. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, how we have done that is: we’ve said, if we 
keep a healthy oil patch in place in Saskatchewan and keep jobs 
in place, then we can take that oil royalty and pass it back to the 
farmer. And today Saskatchewan farmers enjoy lower prices than 
virtually anywhere else in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. In view 
of the fact that you are calling for a balance which favours big oil 
companies and higher prices, and in view of the fact that a 
number of Saskatchewan farmers are reacting to this policy by 
driving across the U.S. border to buy their gasoline and diesel 
fuel in bulk, because even with the cost of transportation they still 
save almost 10 cents a litre, or 45 cents a gallon — can you 
explain why this pricing spread exists? 
 
And can you tell Saskatchewan farmers and consumers  

why you haven’t called upon the big oil companies, and 
particularly Petro-Canada, which is operated by Mr. Mulroney’s 
government, not to predatory-price in this way but to give 
Saskatchewan farmers the same break that they’re giving to 
Montana and other U.S. farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what I favour 
for Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan farmers. I favour the 
approach, Mr. Speaker, of taking off gas taxes, of passing back 
oil royalties to the Saskatchewan farmer, of developing our 
natural gas reserves so they can power their tractors with natural 
gas. But additionally, Mr. Speaker, I expect fairness. And if oil’s 
going to be $9 a barrel, Mr. Speaker, then I want to see gas priced 
at $9 a barrel at the pumps. And I applaud, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the members ask questions, I 
think they should be polite enough to give the minister an 
opportunity to answer. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I applaud, Mr. Speaker, the 
initiative of the Weyburn area farmers. I applaud that initiative, 
Mr. Speaker, and in fact it’s working, Mr. Speaker. As I 
understand it, the price of fuel dropped 3 cents a litre yesterday, 
and I would expect that them raising the issue has gone some 
long way to helping do that locally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said before, if oil’s going to be at $9 barrel, if it’s going to 
be there, then it better be passed on to the consumers, including 
the farmers. And to that end, Mr. Speaker, this government will 
be meeting again with the refiners to make sure that they 
understand their role in this whole business of the passing along 
and staying competitive. 
 
I think what we saw in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and others who 
are exercising the so-called loop, is the free market and free trade 
at work for the benefit of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Minister, earlier 
today we contacted a bulk dealer in Plentywood, Montana, who 
reports that he will be making two trips into Saskatchewan today 
— today — two trips to deliver some diesel fuel. And no wonder. 
He’s selling bulk diesel fuel for 25 cents a litre Canadian, while 
a dealer we contacted in my constituency of Coronach has to sell 
his bulk fuel for 33.8 cents — and that is at a much smaller 
margin than he normally would take. That’s a difference of 40 
cents a gallon, Mr. Minister — 40 cents a gallon. 
 
When will you turn your attention to these kinds of wholesale 
price spreads rather than running off to Ottawa demanding that 
big oil companies get even higher prices for their products? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, once gain the facts are 
these. Number one is, a healthy oil industry in the long run and 
in everybody’s best interest. If the hon. member opposite thinks 
that, for example, if it takes $5 a barrel on the world market to 
shut every oil well in  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

487 
 

North America and in the North Sea — if he thinks that that is a 
correct policy, if he thinks that’s a correct policy and once they 
get it shut in, if he thinks for one moment, Mr. Speaker, that the 
OPEC nations of the world are going to keep it at $5 a barrel, he 
is very, very naïve, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That would be the sort of short-term thinking, classic of a 
socialist, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Try and 
drive wedges in between people, try and distill a very complex 
problem . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . into something simple; 
such is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Another bulk 
dealer in Montana reported this morning that he buys his fuel 
from a refinery in Calgary — I don’t know if you know where 
Calgary is or not, Mr. Minister — but that refinery happens to be 
a Canadian refinery. They’re delivering fuel to Chinook, 
Montana, for — listen to this — 19 cents a litre Canadian. A 
Calgary firm delivering to Montana for 19 cents a litre. Right 
across the border in my colleagues riding, in Frontier, 
Saskatchewan, they buy their bulk from the same company for 
38.3 cents a litre. More than double, likely for the same refinery. 
 
Can you tell me how diesel fuel refined in Calgary can be sold to 
a bulk dealer in Montana for half-price and you think that’s 
helping the Saudis. I would like to know the Conservative 
thinking on this one. Why should we be giving our fuel to the 
Americans for half-price of what we’re paying and you’re 
guaranteeing them a price and going to Ottawa, and asking for 
still higher prices for Canadian farmers who are, by the way, 
selling their grain for half-price. You’re asking us to sell our 
grain for half-price to the Americans, and yet you’re giving them 
our fuel for half-price. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I say, Mr. Speaker, thank 
goodness in this country that these farmers have the opportunity 
to stay competitive . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and to buy 
where it is cheapest, Mr. Speaker, to buy where it is cheapest. If 
we were to follow the hon. member’s logic, Mr. Speaker, what 
he is saying to us is, when I went to buy my Lincoln I wouldn’t 
necessarily buy it at the cheapest place. I’d buy it in the more 
expensive place. It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, there’s a lot of turbulence out there in 
the market today. Market competition must be maintained, as I 
said earlier. I want to see fairness out there. I want to see 
competition amongst these refiners. And to that end this 
government will be meeting with the refiners, Mr. Speaker, 
because we want to see that fairness. We want to see 
responsibility, the responsibility of making sure that there isn’t 
any . . . to make sure that things are being done fairly, Mr. 
Speaker, quite simply. 
 
As well, if you looked at U.S. gas prices, there are a couple of 
other issues that enter into that question because it isn’t a simple 
one. Number one is, there’s the question of taxation here and 
there. At the federal level, certainly there are still some taxes and 
excise taxes, that kind of thing. 
 

Secondly, another dimension, Mr. Speaker, is to my 
understanding some of the OPEC nations are bringing not just 
crude oil into the U.S. to have it refined, and the 60-day lag of 
getting it refined. They are in fact moving in gasoline. So you’ve 
got the automatic spot price being transferred into the 
market-place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, it’s a complex issue, but if anybody over there thinks 
that this government doesn’t stand for lower prices and fairer 
prices for our farmers, they are wrong. Our legacy is: no gas 
taxes, 21 cents a gallon oil royalty pass-back, and fairness for the 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Question one more time, Mr. Speaker. How do 
you consider it fair, when you’re telling Canadian farmers, go it 
on the world market on your own at $3.15 a bushel, 3.18 for 
wheat? The American farmer is getting six bucks and 15 cents a 
bushel for wheat. How do you rate that as fair, when they can buy 
our fuel for half price — 19 cents worth is 38? 
 
Tell me how you, in any kind of logic — and all the words you 
used escape me — stand up for the farmer and tell me it’s fair to 
sell my wheat at half price and pay double for my fuel. Tell me 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says: 
what is fair here? I will tell the hon. member what is fair. Was it 
fair, Mr. Speaker, in the early ’70s in the LIFT (Lower Inventory 
For Tomorrow) years, when farmers had no help, that decade of 
high gas prices? Which is fairer, Mr. Speaker, to have gas taxes 
on, or to have no gas taxes? To have an oil royalty pass-back to 
the farmer, reducing his costs, or to have no oil royalty 
pass-back? 
 
Or what about that famous NDP ploy, Mr. Speaker? You know, 
the $89 dollar gas rebate, the peekaboo grant. Here’s an election 
— now you see it; and the election’s over — now you don’t. 
That’s the NDP policy, and that was not fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to the same question, I would like 
an answer on the current problem with respect to the differential 
in gasoline prices, the U.S. versus Saskatchewan consumers. I 
talked to a Turbo dealer in Belle Plaine last night. He was 
spending 36 cents a litre on wholesale fuel into his station. He 
suggests it’s very unfair. He would like an answer, not only from 
the government, but also from the company, and he suggests it’s 
passed on to the consumer and the farmer in this province. I 
would like a current answer today. You can’t blame us for 
gasoline taxes, sir, so let’s just answer the question currently and 
put it into perspective for the Saskatchewan consumer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, briefly the facts would be 
these. Number one, gasoline prices have been moving down; two, 
and I would be among these, I think there’s an increasing view 
out there that we have some disparity due to the turbulence in the 
market and, certainly, in some areas they haven’t been moving 
down quick enough. 
 
Now there may be some very rational reasons for these.  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

488 
 

Number one, the inventory lag time; number two, the fact that 
some of this is coming in from OPEC already refined. But as I 
said earlier, to make sure that there is fairness in the system, to 
make sure, we will be meeting with the refiners. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to your policies, you do and have 
recommended a floor price for oil in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You have and the Premier has suggested it as a 
solution. You don’t have support from Getty in Alberta. I ask you 
what you plan to do for the consumer and how you can respond 
to the consumer when you’re suggesting oil prices in 
Saskatchewan should rise artificially and not with the market. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, just for 
the record, the only one that I have heard clearly advocating in 
favour of a floor price is the NDP. It has not come from any 
member of this government. What we have said is there are likely 
going to have to be two approaches to this problem. Number one, 
an interim approach, a short-term survival package, if you like, 
to get us through this next three months until we see some 
stability in the market. Approach number one. Number two is to 
whether we may have a look at something under the terms of the 
Western Accord, Mr. Speaker, something more dramatic; after 
that we will have to wait and see. 
 
However, rather than sit on our hands and wait until three months 
down the road and find ourselves facing still a somewhat very 
unstable and fundamentally changed situation as a result of the 
meetings in Ottawa, federal officials, provincial officials from 
the producing provinces are working at options that we could 
possibly explore if we have to, once again under the terms of the 
Western Accord, Mr. Speaker. Certainly for any suggestion that 
this government has said the only approach here is the floor price 
would be clearly in error. We have said we will look at all 
options, and we are open-minded, and that’s the way we’ll 
continue to approach this. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you and the 
Premier will turn your attention to the real cartel. The Premier 
has made a laughing stock out of himself and this province by 
railing against a cartel, which is visibly crumbling. Mr. Minister, 
at the same time you’re ignoring a cartel which is doing an 
enormous amount of damage. I suggest it’s obvious that what is 
happening is that the Canadian retail oil industry is dumping 
surplus gas south of the border to keep Canadian prices 
artificially high. That, Mr. Minister, is the real cartel. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you again: will you and the Premier turn your 
attention to the real cartel and stop tilting windmills with the 
Arabs in the Middle East? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m having a little trouble following the 
logic, Mr. Speaker. At one moment I thought he liked what 
OPEC was doing in terms of driving gas prices down. I’m not so 
sure now that I understand where you’re totally coming from 
there in your thinking. 
 

What this government will do, Mr. Speaker, what our 
commitment is: number one, to maintain the jobs out there in the 
oil patch and outside the oil patch. It’s too important — the 
human dimension cannot be overlooked. And if that means, Mr. 
Speaker, that we, as a government, must rethink this logic that 
the oil industry is simply there to act as a cash cow, rethink it we 
will, and rethink it we must, because today the bottom line out 
there is we must encourage and maintain capital investment and 
jobs. 
 
If we maintain a healthy oil patch, we maintain our security, 
because tell me, tell me, where does it leave the farmer, Mr. 
Speaker? Where does it leave the consumer if we get us all shut 
in and then they jack the price up to $60 a barrel. Where does it 
leave us then? In a very precarious state, Mr. Speaker. We 
recognize that the world is undergoing some fundamental, 
structural changes in this business of energy today and we will 
deal with that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I wonder if you recognize that in your slavish devotion to free 
trade you are ignoring the fact that the oil industry is not free, that 
the oil industry is keeping the prices artificially high. I wonder if 
you will admit, Mr. Minister, that your slavish devotion to free 
trade is not in the best interests of the Saskatchewan farmer 
where it concerns the oil industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it 
both ways. I kind of like it that the Weyburn farmers can flip 
across the line and pick it up, and by God, that might bring a little 
competition into the market-place, and if that’s free trade and the 
free market working, I like it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, do you think 
that farmers would feel it as convenient if they cold buy that gas 
in Weyburn and Regina as distinct from having to drive south of 
the border for it. Do you think they’d find that as convenient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I missed the 
question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You missed more than the question, Mr. . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please! I’ve recognized the 
member for Regina Centre. He cannot be heard with all the 
shouting, and I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. In light of 
your comment that your farmers in Weyburn find it so convenient 
to drive 100 miles to the south to pick up their gasoline, I wonder 
if farmers and small-business men in your constituency would 
find it as convenient to purchase that gas at that price in Regina 
and Weyburn, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, wrongly the hon. member 
draws the conclusion that for some reason or other he thinks that 
the rural network of farm fuel dealers are the villains. Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest that they are not the villains. They are 
caught in the middle, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, between, on 
the one hand, perhaps  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

489 
 

some fundamental forces acting in the U.S. that aren’t acting in 
Canada, and secondly, maybe not quite as competitive an 
environment with, on the other hand, the farmers wanting cheap 
fuel supplies, Mr. Speaker. And to that end to make sure that 
everything is being dealt with in a fairer manner, we will be 
meeting with the refiners to get their side of the story. 
 
(1445) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do have some 
questions. I appreciate the opportunity to get involved in the 
discussion of the Health estimates. It is fundamentally the most 
important department that we have in the province, and I don’t 
think you’ll get any quarrel with anyone. I think we all agree that 
the health of the residents of the province is fundamental and 
very important. 
 
Having said that, of course, the New Democratic caucus has a 
great deal of concern about some of the things that are taking 
place in the area of health in the province today. And over the 
coming hours, myself and my colleagues will be asking the 
minister, with the assistance of his staff, to answer a good number 
of concerns that have been raised to us. 
 
And I want to indicate here as well that, regardless of what 
government is in power, obviously we understand that there 
always will be problems in any department. And the questions 
will be put in that light, that we understand it’s a big department 
with many, many hundreds of people working in it, and many 
hundreds of thousands of people who use the services of the 
Department of Health. 
 
But what we are seeing today, Mr. Chairman, is a preponderance 
of health care issues each of them in their own way very, very 
important to the people who are being negatively affected as a 
result of what we see to be underfunding in a number of areas. 
 
And we have, obviously, concern in the hearing-aid plan, where 
we have seen a nine-month waiting period now for people who 
are being assessed to get hearing-aids in the province. And many 
of these are elderly people who are at loss to function properly 
without a hearing-aid. And here again I say that it’s not that there 
weren’t people who had to wait when we were in government, 
but every indication is that the waiting time period for people to 
get assessment and then hearing-aids is increasing, and 
increasing very rapidly. 
 
The other area, of course, Mr. Chairman, is the area of dental 
program. And we hear concerns about waiting periods for young 
people who were being checked  

maybe twice a year, who are now being told that that has to be 
reduced to once a year. Many rural areas are being cut back and 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right, they are being sent to the 
dentists. And in a way the program is being eroded because most 
parents, rather than wait the year or 18 months to have their 
children’s teeth examined, will take them to the private dentist. 
 
But in a way, what we are having is an eroding of the program in 
the long term, not in an announcement by the minister that the 
program is ending, but an eroding of the program to where people 
are not moving out of it but seriously looking at supplementing 
the program by getting their check-ups done at a dentist’s office, 
simply because the dental nurses are not enough in number, are 
overworked, and can’t provide the service that the program was 
set up to do. 
 
Now there’s two main reasons why that is not right, Mr. 
Chairman. Of course, obviously, the first and most important part 
of it is that the children’s teeth are not being taken care of. And 
all of the reports and studies that were done in the 1970s clearly 
indicated that the dental program, using nurses in the dental 
program, where many people argued in the early 1970s and the 
1960s that it couldn’t be done by dental nurses — by the end of 
the 1970s it had been proven conclusively that the health care, 
the dental care of children graduating from Saskatchewan high 
schools were better than anywhere else in the world. And that 
was basically being done by health nurses, by dental nurses in the 
dental program in conjunction with a very good team of dentists 
throughout the province. And it was a system that was working 
very well. 
 
Now I say to the minister and to the government that, when 
you’re looking at cost-saving, it makes very little sense to look at 
it department by department or, more appropriately, area by area 
— and I say here, the dental program. You may save a dollar by 
laying off a dental nurse or by laying off 20 dental nurses. But 
the Finance minister is not saving any money, because instead of 
putting it into the dental program and paying the dental nurses, 
they are being laid off. They are going on unemployment 
insurance at taxpayers’ expense, not because they don’t have 
work to do, or they don’t want to work, but simply because 
they’re being laid off. 
 
And I say very clearly that, if you look at the overall cost to the 
government, you’re not saving a cent by laying off dental nurses 
or cutting back on the number of them, and then those people in 
one way or another find themselves onto the public payroll 
through unemployment insurance or through the welfare system. 
And then the Social Services minister sees them on welfare and 
says, what is needed is, we have to retrain them; we’ve got to 
retrain them because they are untrained. 
 
Well I say to you that the number of people who are now termed 
to be unemployed employables has gone from 4,000 — 5,000, 
close to 5,000 — to 15,000 in the province. Well how did they 
suddenly get unskilled? In 1982 they were working. Many of 
them were carrying bricks or mixing mortar or, in fact, were 
dental nurses. But now we’re spending money in two areas — 
unemployment insurance; welfare. And then the member  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

490 
 

from Rosemont, the minister in charge of welfare, gets up and 
says we have a to retrain all these people. 
 
Well obviously the people have seen though this, whether it’s 
SUN or whether it’s the working people or the farmers — say, 
no, what we need is to get the economy of the province going. 
Obviously these people were working. And people, who are now 
called unskilled and uneducated and insulted by the minister of 
welfare over and over again, were working before 1982. The vast 
majority of them had jobs and were working, some of them in 
professional positions, some of them in unskilled positions. And 
to be run at continually by the minister in charge of welfare, over 
and over again, and being told that you’re not educated and not a 
useful citizens and you have to come to my department to be 
retrained; if you do that then I’ll make sure you get a job — that’s 
not a great feeling for somebody who was earning a living and 
doing what they thought to be a very useful purpose in the 
society. 
 
So I say that when you’re looking at the cost saving of laying off 
dental nurses, or not hiring enough dental nurses to do the job, 
we really have to look at the overall performance of government. 
What is being saved in one department, if it’s being paid out in 
the welfare rolls, are we really saving any money? 
 
And we all know that as the unemployment goes up, so does 
alcoholism; so does child abuse; and so does marriage 
breakdowns. And then we have to put more money into the 
welfare department to set up safe houses and set up transition 
houses and set up programs to assist people who are battered and 
those who are doing the abusing. 
 
I say the most important part of your program, sir, is to obviously 
offer health care to the residents of the province. But also you 
have to look at the other side, of being a major employer in the 
province, and the fact that each position you cut is not a saving 
to your department, but in effect is really a great cost, a great cost 
to the people of the province and particularly to those you’re 
laying off. 
 
Well I hear the Minister of Social Services shouting from his 
desk that more people should be hired in the province, and doing 
it in a jocular manner. But I say that is the point, that there should 
be more people hired in the province. The welfare rolls have gone 
from 42,000 to 65,000 under that individual’s administration. 
They’ve increased by 50 per cent. The amount being paid on 
welfare has gone from 98 million to 210 million. And I say that 
much of that money could be saved if the minister of Highways 
hadn’t transferred all those people to the private sector and then 
on to welfare. Or, if in the area of health, you had used some of 
that money to hire nurses; that the nurses are telling us very 
clearly, and to the people of the province — and they agree — 
that there’s a shortage of nursing staff in the province. 
 
And there are a number of other areas. We have very clearly seen 
that in the area of eye examination. I believe that falls within your 
jurisdiction. It’s been changed. Where examinations which were 
being paid for on an annual basis, that has been changed to once 
every two years. 
 

We met with a number of nurses who talk about the fact that the 
nursing component in the hospitals hasn’t changed in the four 
years — or in the nursing homes, where the level of care in the 
nursing homes is much heavier than it was in 1982. And they say 
that the positions aren’t there, and I know you, sir, have said 
many times that you have increased the staff. And before we’re 
done the estimates we will be going hospital by hospital, from 
1982 to 1986, and finding out where those increases were, 
because there’s a great discrepancy about what the health 
caregivers are telling us, what the people are telling us, and what 
you are saying. 
 
You’re saying you’ve increased the number of nursing at 
bedsides by 500 over the last four years, and before we’re done 
estimates we’re going to find out where that increase is. Every 
hospital, we will go through one by one — and I will give you 
notice of that now if your staff want to prepare that list — so we 
can find out where that increase of 500 is. 
 
The nurses say there’s been 20 people, 20 new people in the four 
years, and you say there’s been around 500. One of my 
colleagues was saying that in estimates the other day you’ve now 
reduced that to something like 250 or 300. But at any rate, we 
want to find out where that increase of whatever you’re saying 
is, and we will spend some time going hospital by hospital to find 
out where the increase is. And if you can get that list ready for 
me, it may save a good deal of time. 
 
And you have also announced that you’re going to be increasing 
the nursing staff further. And here again we will want to spend 
some time going over where they will be at. We want to spend 
some time, because the nurses are asking us to try to find out 
from you. They haven’t been able to find out because you won’t 
come to the meetings. And when you did come to the meeting in 
Regina, the one you did come to, you wouldn’t say where they 
were, and you said, obviously, I don’t have that with me. Well, 
this is the forum where we will be able to ask on their behalf. 
 
They have legitimate concerns and they’ve brought you Code 99 
postcards by the thousands — I believe 25,000 of them — where 
people have sent back in postcards concerned with the level of 
nursing care in the province. And that obviously will be an area 
where we will want to spend some time as to try to find out — 
and here again, not only for the nurses, but more importantly, for 
the people who use nursing care in the hospitals — where the 
staffing component changes have taken place. 
 
And I say as well that I understand when you get up and you will 
explain why you’re legitimate in doing what you’re doing 
because of a previous government. And I want to get that out of 
the way as soon as you get up and then get on to the real world 
of 1986. And we will state our point about the 1970s and you will 
state yours and we’ll get that over with early and then we’ll talk 
about the present. 
 
And hopefully we can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, 
we don’t want to talk about the Anderson government back in 
1929 to 1934 and things they did with the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

491 
 

separate schools and all that. We don’t want to talk about that and 
nor will we — nor will we, or the former minister of energy, or 
anything like that. We don’t’ want to talk about the past. What 
we want to talk about is health care and nursing staff. And we’ll 
allow you your shot about how many this was suggested to be 
cut, or were, and then we will get on with the present and the 
future, because that’s what your job is. And we will want to know 
where that list is and how many changes have taken place. 
 
(1500) 
 
So with that short introduction, Mr. Chairman — and I want to 
say as well that we look forward to a not necessarily lengthy, but 
a good exchange. And I also want to make it clear now that, in 
doing the estimates, my colleagues have insisted with me that 
they have an opportunity to question at some length. And I hope 
the minister and his staff will bear with us, because it’s an 
important process. 
 
And I know the member from Pelly has a number of questions 
about a hospital in his area, and the member from the Quill Lakes 
has questions about home care and other things. And so we will 
want to get into it, and I hope that we get the answers that people 
are asking us to put forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly the purpose 
of estimates is for the opposition to ask questions and the 
government to supply answers to those questions and defend the 
policies that we have in place. And to that end I have no difficulty 
in defending the policies of this government in health care. I think 
it’s well understood across this province and even further than 
that, Mr. Chairman, across this nation, that the Devine 
government in Saskatchewan leads the field in health care in 
Canada. 
 
I was glad to see that the member alluded to the true fact — that 
he said the health care now is my responsibility, and he also said 
the health care in the future will be my responsibility — and I’m 
glad he acknowledges the direction we’re taking. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ah, it’s not what he said . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly . . . You can check Hansard, and 
you’ll see that he said, it is your responsibility, sir, for health care 
in the present and in the future. However, let us move along here. 
I listened with interest to some of the things the member said, and 
certainly we are willing to provide the answers to any questions 
that they care to ask. 
 
I think he led off with a concern about underfunding. And I 
believe, if you would check, an 11.6 per cent increase to health 
care in this budgetary year — that that will compare favourably, 
and I believe in excess of, the contribution to health care of any 
other province in the Dominion of Canada. I think that is a 
substantial contribution. 
 
That shows that the priority of this government, when a third of 
the budget of this government is in the health portfolio — and I 
agree with the member opposite —  

certainly health care, irregardless of the government that sits on 
this side of the House, is a priority of the people of Saskatchewan. 
We understand that, and we are bound to maintain that as one of 
the priorities of our government: to provide free, universal, and 
accessible health care to the residents of this province. 
 
Getting down more specifically to some of the questions that the 
member asked, I think he asked some questions about the 
hearing-aid plan, and I would begin by replying to those 
questions for the member. 
 
There are a couple of concerns there that come to my mind. And 
the first one is that, of course — and you realize that as well as I 
do, and I think we’ve discussed it before on various occasions, 
and I’m not using this as an excuse. It’s a fact that the population 
are getting older. And as they get older, older people, their 
hearing isn’t as good, and they require more hearing-aids. And 
that is happening. 
 
And SHAP (Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Plan) is, I think, a very 
good program. It’s a program that both governments have shared 
in the past. We have in the most recent time, in the last two years, 
in ’84-85, we added two audiologist positions in ’84-85, and a 
further two audiologist positions were approved for the ’85-86 
fiscal year, to be based in Prince Albert and North Battleford. 
 
We had rather a serious set-back on February 19th of 1985, Mr. 
Chairman — and I don’t know if you’re aware about it — that 
there was a fire in the Gordon Building, and it destroyed a 
considerable amount of the SHAP equipment, as well as causing 
extensive damage to the building. So that fire did set us back 
somewhat. 
 
But I share your concern. I mean, I am concerned that there are 
people having to wait for a hearing-aid appointment or an 
audiology test. I would be happy if no one had to wait. But I 
think, as the member correctly said, people have had to wait in 
the past, and they’re waiting perhaps a little longer now — I’ll 
admit that — because, as I say, partly of the fire. 
 
But I just want to indicate to you one initiative that we’re taking 
to show that we are concerned and to show that we, as a 
department, and the people who run SHAP are concerned, there 
are many people who come for a hearing-aid who don’t come 
through a referral pattern. In other words, they don’t go to a 
doctor and get a referral; they just understand themselves that 
their hearing is somewhat impaired so they go directly to SHAP. 
 
Well a big part, and one of the important parts of the hearing aid 
program in Saskatchewan, is that you just don’t take and plug a 
hearing-aid into a person. You put him through a very good test 
to find out just what type of a device he needs. So toward that 
end, to try and speed things up, we’re looking at using nurses as 
doing some of this preliminary screening. 
 
So I am hoping, Mr. Member of the Opposition, that that will 
help that situation in the coming months and year, that with 
nurses doing some of the preliminary screening, then the SHAP 
people can take some of their findings and people will be able to 
get through the system faster and  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

492 
 

have their assessments done and their appliances fitted and 
provided for them. So I’m optimistic that this will help impact 
upon it. 
 
As well, we do have some vacant positions now in the area. 
We’re actively recruiting. I think you realize that audiology is a 
highly specialized type of science, and there isn’t a great 
abundance of these people walking the street looking for jobs. So 
therefore it is something that we’re actively recruiting. But I 
share your concern, and I can understand you raising that 
question. That’s a very legitimate question, and I hope you 
understand that we are trying to do things that will help reduce 
that waiting time. 
 
Going to the next one, was the dental program, and you 
mentioned some concern about the dental program. And I just 
wanted to refer you to the Saskatchewan Health dental plan 
annual report. And I realize, and I remember in my days in 
opposition, these reports come pretty thick and fast at you, and a 
person sometimes doesn’t get time to go through them all in 
detail. And one’s research staff can’t either. 
 
But if you’d look at page 19, I think it indicates some of the 
impact of what the dental plan in its form, which has changed 
somewhat — we are using more of the private dentists, as we 
discussed last year in estimates, than was previously done — but 
if you look at this, this is the impact, as I’m told, on six-year-old 
children. And I think we’re both pleased to hear this: that in 1974 
and ’75, if you look at the graph, and if we’re interpreting it right, 
it will say that the average number of decayed teeth was five in a 
six-year-old child, and now we’re finding it’s 1.2. 
 
So certainly, what we have been doing in Saskatchewan over that 
period of time, a 10-year period, we have had a significant impact 
on improving the dental condition of the children of 
Saskatchewan. And I think we’d all be very happy in this House 
if that graph follows the route it’s taking. You can see it here, 
very dramatically, and that could be extended down to where, 
perhaps, a six-year-old child will appear with very few cavities, 
or no cavities. That would be the ultimate and, of course, from 
that point on, then one of the main things of the dental program 
is to bring about good dental hygiene practices within those 
children as they come from six years old up to 18 and into adult 
life. 
 
You mentioned about lay-offs. You were concerned. You were 
concerned. There has been no one let go from the dental plan. 
There are some vacant positions. We haven’t filled the vacant 
positions, as you see. Perhaps the need isn’t as great as it was a 
few years ago, but there has not been anyone let go or released 
from the dental plan. 
 
The next topic I think you raised was the nurses. I can assure you 
that following the meeting we had the other day with the nurses 
— and you did correctly indicate and you attended that meeting 
with me in Regina where I think both of us put out our party’s 
positions quite well to the assembled group of nurses — the other 
day the SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) did come here to 
the legislature and deliver some Code 99 cards to me. At present 
I’m having my staff go through each and every  

one of those cards, tabulating — yes, each and every one. You 
have my assurance that is being done right — tabulating the 
concern. 
 
The member opposite smiles. He doesn’t think that we take this 
serious. You can come down to my office following . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I invite you down, sir, the member 
from Regina East; come to my office at 5 o’clock. I will show 
you what has been done today. You can look at the cards. You 
can look at the comments. I invite you to come if you are sincere, 
sir, to see the concerns of the nurses, not to make light by 
laughing in this Chamber. I invite you to come with me. You 
have my invitation. 
 
You mentioned, the member from Shaunavon mentioned, about 
the positions, and I would give you some enlightening on this at 
this time. I think from your question you’re wanting a little more 
detailed information. We would be pleased to supply as much 
information as possible to you. The actual number of nurses, 
increase in nursing staff, in the hospitals in 1985-86 were 91 
registered nurses; and for the base hospitals, between April 1, ’82 
and April 1, ’86, there were these additions. This is in registered 
nurses. I’m not dealing with CNAs or other positions, just the 
registered nurses, because I believe from your questions that’s 
what you were indicating: in the Regina General there were 30; 
in the Pasqua, 13; in the Plains, 14; at City Hospital, 25; at St. 
Paul’s Hospital, 36; and at University Hospital, 39, so that is, in 
registered nursing positions, 157 during that period of time. 
 
But it seems from your question you’d like a little more 
information on that. Please outline to me what you would like, 
and we will do our best to provide it to you as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Yes, I’d just like, for the minister’s benefit, to 
preamble the estimates for a short period. I attended four of the 
nurses’ meetings, and I’ve certainly had input on health care from 
other professionals, and certainly from people requiring health 
care in the Regina area. 
 
I’d like to first off tell the minister that buildings and equipment 
don’t translate to adequate bedside care wherever you are in 
Saskatchewan. And one of the complaints that was present at 
every meeting that I attended, and of the four meetings I attended 
in various parts of the province, was that in many hospitals there 
is currently a great deal of equipment that goes unused, 
equipment that has been part of a budget, equipment that was 
purchased on behalf of the Health budget and, in some cases, it’s 
not used simply because the professional people involved in its 
use are not available to the hospital. 
 
There were other things raised in some of the health care 
meetings. I think one interesting concept was the possibility or 
the idea that health boards should be elected, at least in part. I 
realise that isn’t possibly an area of discussion, but they do 
allocate the funds, and appointed boards are sometimes just 
slaves to their bureaucrats and to their minister. 
 
Alberta does have a system of elected health boards in  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

493 
 

many jurisdictions and are currently exploring the idea of 
privately managing one hospital in Alberta. I don’t know if that’s 
. . . I realize the situation in that hospital was a dire situation and 
was out of control of the local board, but it appears that the 
hospital management will be done by Extendicare for a lot less 
than the cost to the board when it was under the control of the 
hospital. 
 
Also I’ve had an opportunity to have extensive discussions with 
companies in Alberta who privately offer the services presently 
offered by the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) 
program, for instance, in Saskatchewan. With our expenditures 
in health care rising at such phenomenal rates and governments 
able to compare those increases, as you recently did with 
improvement of bedside care, I think we have to look at avenues 
wherein costs can be trimmed, and I think privatization of some 
areas within the health care system would certainly be one area 
that possibly health care costs could be trimmed from. 
 
(1515) 
 
I would just ask that you examine the system in Alberta for 
providing the tools that SAIL provides the patients in 
Saskatchewan and see, you know, if it can be done cheaper, why 
aren’t we doing it through the private sector rather than through 
the bureaucracy structured by your department, sir? 
 
Again, equipment is certainly a large party of any health budget. 
But the recent announcement of six CAT scans which will be 
placed throughout the province, I believe to be no less than an 
election promise. CAT scan equipment is certainly diagnostic, 
but it does require staff to manage. And I don’t know why that 
equipment wouldn’t have been placed over the past several years, 
and not suddenly six going out into a province that only has two, 
and suggesting that it’s going to elevate our ability to administer 
the health programs in Saskatchewan in a more efficient manner. 
It’s only a diagnostic tool, and only when we have professionals 
that are adequately trained on the CAT scanner can it be of any 
benefit to the patient. 
 
Concerns about expenditures on equipment, as I mentioned 
earlier, were raised by the nurses. And I think it’s a very valid 
complaint when, in fact, studies that have been done indicate that 
our bedside care level, the numbers of nurses at the bedside in 
Saskatchewan, is certainly not at the national average and has to 
be elevated rapidly in order to protect the interests of the patients. 
 
I think when you look at the General Hospital situation, where 
patients are being admitted through the observation room in 
emergency, and in some cases will spend a night or two in the 
cast room, I think there’s also a danger that the patient’s health is 
in some jeopardy, simply because the level of care in those two 
areas isn’t adequate to address a coronary care patient or a patient 
who might have a very serious health illness that requires a 
hospital bed. 
 
I know hospital beds are a problem. They’re being addressed to 
some degree. And I think that efficient use of  

the hospital space has got to be a concern, and I know you’re 
looking carefully at that. 
 
And last before I sit down, I realize that the use of our hospitals 
for the purposes of abortion has been somewhat, I think, trimmed 
somewhat by your current administration. I see Mr. Pawley 
recently, in Manitoba, enthusiastically brags that the number of 
abortions in Manitoba were up 38 per cent over the period ’83-84 
in Manitoba, taxing the health care facilities greatly in Manitoba. 
He suggests he’s neutral on that particular position, but certainly 
doesn’t hesitate to enthusiastically address the fact that abortions 
in Manitoba were up 38 per cent over that same period. 
 
You might indicate to the Assembly the expenditures and, in fact, 
if your record does compare with that, or if it is, in my mind, 
better, and do we have fewer abortions, and what is the 
percentage increase with respect to abortions in Saskatchewan 
hospitals? 
 
In this same article, which was published in the Western Report 
on April 14th, for anybody that’s interested, a former NDP MLA 
in fact received a letter from Mr. Pawley and he was no less 
appalled by the figures that the Premier was enthusiastically 
addressing. So that’s another area that I think hospitals in 
Saskatchewan and throughout Canada do find themselves under 
some pressure from this type of activity, and certainly it’s a cost 
to the taxpayer. So I would like to address those things during 
estimates, and those are my comments for the preamble, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — thank you very much for your concerns. I 
think they are sincere concerns. I’ve been jotting a few points 
down as you have been speaking. You were at the meeting in 
Regina and you heard me put forth our point of view to the nurses 
that night, as you did for the party you represent. 
 
Going to the CAT scans, I don’t think it’s really fair to compare 
equipment to staff. I think they go together to make up a medical 
team and a medical service. As I said that night, when you look 
at a hospital, the hospital is more than the doctors in a hospital; a 
hospital is more than the nurses and more than the physios and 
radiologists. A hospital is a team of medical experts working 
together. And to provide the best service, you’ve got have a 
balance in there. I think we all agree with that. I think from our 
comments that night, I think you support that. But to try and play 
equipment off against personnel — I see that equipment and 
personnel go hand in glove together to improve health care 
service. 
 
Now in the topic of the CAT scans here in Saskatchewan, I think 
that the movement towards counter-trade or more simply put, 
barter, is well received by the people of this province. You know 
as well as I do — you follow the trends in the sale of potash and 
of grains and high tech and so on — if we can have those 
commodities go out of our country in trade for high-tech medical 
equipment, to me and to many people of Saskatchewan that 
makes eminent common sense. Furthermore, there will be a 
flow-back of money into Saskatchewan for those products that 
otherwise, if there hadn’t been an avenue for sale, would be 
sitting here. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

494 
 

Now the CAT scans . . . You mentioned, did we get the type . . . 
And you’re in your observation. If you get new technology, you 
have to have people that are able to run them, or else what value 
is it to you. Well I’m proud to say that the decision on the number 
of CAT scans that we would buy for Saskatchewan, where they 
should be placed, and the type that should be bought, was made 
by a committee of radiologists. We put together a committee of 
radiologists, the people in the field, the people that use them, to 
say: what do you think is the number we need to adequately 
address the demand for CAT scans in this province? They 
indicated six new CAT scans. This is no election promise. 
 
Those CAT scans — they’re preparing the rooms in two of the 
hospitals for them now. Two hospitals have CAT scans, but 
they’re the obsolete ones. They will be traded in, so within a 
couple of months I think you’ll see the first two go in. Within 18 
months all of them will be in place. There will be people trained 
to operate them because it was exactly those people that went 
down to look at trade shows in the United States and so on, to see 
the world’s top CAT scans, and their decision was to recommend 
the ones that we are purchasing at this time. 
 
You mentioned about private management. We do have contracts 
with Extendicare in the nursing home field. They do manage 
nursing homes. They have done that for some time in 
Saskatchewan, and from all indications that I get they do a good 
job of managing nursing homes. 
 
As far as privatization of hospitals — certainly not! We have no 
intention to turn hospital management over to the private sector. 
 
On the topic of SAIL and Alberta’s model, you indicate it’s 
cheaper in the private sector to do it. My information is that 
Alberta’s SAIL program is much more expensive than ours. Now 
I can give you the information on this, but I have had my officials 
look at the Alberta program. You indicated it would be good to 
look at other provinces, and I concur with you. One cannot sit in 
isolation. And to that extent I have travelled through Canada to 
look at various other systems, had my officials visit areas. I don’t 
believe we should take the system from here and put it right into 
Saskatchewan. I believe in making it a Saskatchewan system. 
 
I think the best example of that is the new rehab centre which is 
in the city that you represent — and I’m sure you’ll be proud of 
— where the best ideas on rehab medicine from across Canada 
have been brought together to build that centre. And I’m sure 
when it’s up and running, each and every one of us in this 
Chamber, irregardless of our political affiliations, will be proud 
to see that type of facility here to service Saskatchewan people. 
 
On abortions, certainly the position of our party is well 
articulated on abortion. Both the Premier and I have spoken on 
many occasions, and I’m sure you’re aware of it. I think you 
asked me something about the statistics. Certainly Howard 
Pawley and I — there’s a distance between us on this type of a 
topic. In Saskatchewan the number of abortions since we became 
government,  

which were approximately 1,630 in 1981-82, are down to 1,132 
in the most current year. So there has been a significant reduction 
in the abortions. It is quite possible for a person to receive an 
abortion under the best conditions in Saskatchewan. There are 
eight hospitals that have therapeutic abortion committees and 
perform abortions, and those abortions are done within the most 
hygienic situations. They’re all accredited hospitals, all 
professional staff, and that access is here. But the number of 
abortions in Saskatchewan has been declining year by year to a 
low of 1,132 in our last reporting year. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Just a couple of comments to the minister. He 
mentions that a hospital is a team effort, that it’s usually a team 
decision as to the equipment purchased. One thing I did her that 
came through very clearly at the meetings I attended, and I was 
the only member at more than one meeting that I’m aware of, 
was that it wasn’t a team effort in many cases where equipment 
was purchased. The nurses were asked to leave the board 
meeting, in fact, where the decision was made, usually before the 
discussion on, in fact, what equipment was going to be 
purchased. That was a complaint that was raised at three or four 
of the meetings I attended. So that the team work, I suppose if it 
is there, you’re absolutely right, the people that deliver at the 
bedside in many cases should know the equipment required for 
the hospital. But as the nurses enunciated at their meetings, that 
wasn’t done effectively in many, many cases. 
 
Another situation that you failed to address, just presently, is the 
safety of the patient who is lined up on a stretcher waiting for a 
hospital bed. And that is happening in Regina, and it is happening 
on a daily basis at the Regina General Hospital. I just ask you, 
sir, if in fat, there is a short-term solution for these patients; and 
some of them wind up on a stretcher and in a stretcher situation 
for up to three and four days, and they don’t have a bed to go to, 
and they are forced to stay in the observation room of the 
emergency or in the cast room. It’s a very serious situation for 
that patient, and certainly for the family, when adequate care 
cannot be guaranteed in a Saskatchewan hospital, which is the 
case in that particular hospital, under that particular setting. 
 
So while team work is definitely a part of the hospital situation 
and is required, I ask you and your department, through your 
bureaucrats to study maybe a little more efficient method of 
addressing that team work problem, and maybe a little more 
efficient method of looking at what equipment is ordered for 
hospitals. You don’t order equipment that can’t be used in some 
of the rural areas and it has been done, and it’s been enunciated 
to us through some of the hospital boards, and certainly through 
some of the meetings. 
 
A couple of other areas, and I know that you’ve examined this on 
occasion in order to cut costs, but with respect to our drug 
program in Saskatchewan — and I’m talking about our 
pharmaceutical — the program that is currently in place to pay 
for pharmaceuticals that are prescribed by physicians. I believe 
that the whole program should be examined very carefully. 
Again, Manitoba has a program where there’s a deductible fee of 
$50 so that anything over 50 is paid for, which cuts down greatly 
on the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

495 
 

bureaucratic staff required to run the program 
 
I recall last year in question period you mentioned that 57 people 
manage your program in Saskatchewan. If that figure has 
changed, I am not aware of it. In Manitoba there are far fewer 
people running the same program, and it gives a little more 
freedom to the pharmacists and to the pharmaceutical trade in the 
province. And it certainly doesn’t interfere with the orderly 
prescription of drugs in the community. In fact, it makes it a lot 
less expensive, sir, because a lot of the elderly patients who are 
on chronic drug care are likely buying pharmaceuticals on a 
monthly basis. The $50 fee would be far less expensive to those 
individuals than three or four prescriptions monthly over the 
course of a year. 
 
So I would ask you top examine the costs in that department. And 
I’ve always questioned the need for a drug formulary committee. 
I mean, these new drugs that come into this province are 
examined usually in Washington, or Zurich, or Ottawa, and done 
so in a fashioned that is very professional and very, very upbeat, 
and in many cases, it takes as many as 10 years, and the research 
over those 10 years, to introduced a new pharmaceutical into the 
market-place. 
 
I know at one time I quizzed you on exactly that committee, and 
you suggested that it helped slow down the introduction of 
high-cost drug therapy into the Saskatchewan market-place. If 
that is the reason for the formulary committee, sir, I say to you 
that that also takes away from the patient who requires that drug 
therapy, the immediate benefit, and maybe doesn’t allow him to 
use it for up to six months to a year. I know there are cases where 
that has happened in Saskatchewan, and the cost of that 
formulary committee is within the estimates, and I believe just 
from memory it’s around 6 or $700,000. I believe that’s an area 
where you could critically examine costs and eliminate a great 
number of them, just based on some practical use of common 
sense, knowing that these things don’t come into Saskatchewan 
on a free-wheeling basis. They’re all examined very carefully in 
many other jurisdictions, usually, before they reach our 
pharmacies in this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
Also within the same structure, I think you could examine again, 
through your own bureaucrats, some of the cost inefficiencies. 
And I won’t get into that here, sir, but I’ll just wait for your 
reaction on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Going back to the team concept and so on 
— you know, we both realize that the world isn’t always perfect; 
that sometimes in some places the concept will work very good, 
and other ones it will not be as good. But certainly in the majority 
of situations I think our boards often seek input from the various 
aspects of their staff. 
 
Certainly there is avenues for the nursing profession to have input 
into the major decisions in the hospitals. I indicated that night at 
Regina that within the collective bargaining agreement the nurses 
do have an avenue by which, if they feel that their message is not 
getting through, there is another body that they can put together  

that can address those. In very few situations are those bodies 
instituted in the hospitals of Saskatchewan. So I believe there are 
avenues for nurses to have their input — and other health 
professionals — into the decisions of the hospitals. And I 
encourage them to do this. 
 
I don’t condemn our boards. I think we have some very dedicated 
people on the hospital boards of Saskatchewan. And on the topic 
of the elected or appointed, as I pointed out the night of the 
nurses’ meeting in Regina, I believe there are some drawbacks 
— there could be some possible drawbacks to a complete elected 
board because it can lend itself to certain types of issues 
dominating the action of a board. I’m not against exploring 
alternatives. Perhaps, as I said that night in Regina, a mix of 
elected and appointed might be a viable alternative. So I’m 
saying we’re not set on this. I’m willing to explore other avenues. 
 
Regarding the drug plan, I just would relate to you — and I think 
you’re aware of this — soon after taking over the ministry we 
had an evaluation of our drug plan. At that time, the consultant 
that did it indicated after an exhaustive study of all drug plans in 
Canada that Saskatchewan had far and about the most superior 
drug plan in Canada. And to that extend, the Ontario government 
has, from time to time, been contacting us to see if there are 
things that they could implement in their plan which we have. 
 
The second thing is that you mention about the formulary 
committee. Well you and I have discussed this before. I know 
that you question the need for a formulary committee and my 
thoughts are these, sir, is that I am of the school where a second 
look is often beneficial — a second look. And the second look in 
the case . . . If you look back in the history of Canada to the time 
of the thalidomide problem, if there had have been a second look, 
how much suffering and illness and so on — things that happen 
to families, people who have been handicapped through life — 
could have been avoided? 
 
And, sir, as long as I’m the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan, 
we will continue to take a second look at drugs that are coming 
into the market in this province because, Mr. Chairman, I believe 
the amount of money that’s spent on taking that second look is 
very valuable in safeguarding the lives of Saskatchewan people. 
 
So although you may think we could do without it, I would think 
it would be a very retrograde step to do away with a very 
competent committee of scientists that just check the figures of 
those other people. He says they’re checked in Zurich, so on; 
that’s true. But, Mr. Chairman, those are often checked by the 
company that is wanting to sell them, and I don’t put all my faith 
in Canada Food and Drug. I feel a lot safer and a lot better with 
Saskatchewan people taking a second look at products that will 
be used by Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well I don’t question the minister’s integrity 
on having a second look, but I do suggest to the minister that 
health care costs and all costs within society are rising at an 
alarming rate. We have an $8.5 billion deficit, if we include the 
Crown corporations, in this province today. And I suggest — he’s 
saying it’s a second  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

496 
 

look — it’s usually a third, fourth, or fifth, or sixth look. 
 
All the jurisdictions — the United States of America, Canada, 
Switzerland — they all have their own formulary committees. 
They all have their own requirements that have to be met by the 
drug companies that are formulating new preparations. 
 
He suggests that thalidomide may have been overlooked before 
it hit the market-place, and that a Saskatchewan formulary 
committee may have in fact recognized that weakness in that 
particular drug. If the minister was aware of the scientific 
background of the development of pharmaceuticals, he would 
realize his statement is nothing short of ridiculous. It required 
long-term therapy and pregnant women. And the formulary 
committee in Saskatchewan does nothing more in most cases 
than examine the current literature, which is provided by the 
companies who are in fact involved in the innovation of the 
drugs, and from the government agencies in the several 
government areas that in fact control the release to the 
market-place of these drugs. 
 
And I suggest to the minister that he have a close look at that 
expenditure. You are looking at a $2 billion deficit, and you’re 
suggesting that health care expenditures are up 7 per cent. And 
that’s your only political tool for demonstrating that 
Saskatchewan has the number one health care system in the 
country. 
 
Sir, it does not have the number one health care system in the 
country. The NDP used to say that, and when you came into 
power you realized the weaknesses of the program that they had 
introduced over the 11 years they were in power — and there 
were many weaknesses in their program. 
 
But I say to you, sir, there are several weaknesses in yours, and 
some of them are as a result of the copy-cat attitude your 
government has had in copying, and no less than copying the 
NDP administration’s attitudes to health care. In Saskatchewan 
it’s been a political football for a long time. But let’s get back to 
the reality that the patient is the one we should be concerned 
about. 
 
We shouldn’t be concerned about electing governments. And as 
you just mentioned, with respect . . . On the backs of the patients, 
I might add. The NDP thought that was funny. I suggest we 
shouldn’t be electing governments in Saskatchewan at the 
expense of patients in this province. And I think we should 
provide those patients with the best service available in the 
world, which I suggest to you, sir, hasn’t been done. Because in 
many areas, and the formulary committee is one, we do not allow 
the free flow of pharmaceuticals into our market-place that can 
be used by cancer patients, patients who are dying in hospitals, 
and whatever. 
 
The member from Shaunavon suggests I’m repeating myself. 
Well I think it’s important, because the reality is we can’t afford 
in this province to continue year after year after year to introduce 
budgets in health care and social services that are running the cost 
of the debt in this province beyond the payment ability of our 
people. And we have to guarantee good health care. 
 

So, sir, I say there are some weaknesses. And while you defend 
the program that we just discussed on drug . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Drug brain drain. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The NDP have got a brain drain problem. 
That’s why there’s only eight of them sitting there. They’ 
couldn’t’ address the health care problem in ’82. They couldn’t 
address the problems in other areas which are related to health, 
such as high interest rates in ’82. They couldn’t relate to the 
farming problems in ’82, and they can’t relate to the health 
problems in ’86. They can’t. 
 
So I would like to say that all I insist you do, Mr. Minister, is 
carefully examine these programs. You suggest Ontario comes in 
here, the OHIP comes in here from time to time to examine your 
drug program. Well I’m sure they do. But they do have a very 
efficient program in Ontario, and I’m familiar with it. They do 
have a more efficient program in Manitoba, and I suggest, sir, 
that you take a closer look at it. You don’t just brush it off as 
saying that we’ve got the best drug care program in Canada, 
because while we may have a good program, they do run a less 
expensive program and a more patient-oriented program in the 
Manitoba market-place. And that’s under the administration of 
an NDP government. The one NDPer that ever had any brains, 
René Chartier, designed the program, and it is a very good one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, questions on the drug 
plan and the validity of it — as I answered in my previous answer 
— we had this evaluated after coming into office. And it was by 
an independent consultant who said that undoubtedly, after 
examining in much detail all the other drug plans in Canada, that 
Saskatchewan had the best drug plan in Canada. And furthermore 
. . . and one of the members said from his seat that Ontario 
haven’t been phoning to us since the Peterson government has 
come into power. That is absolutely wrong. My director of the 
drug plan tells me that he’s getting calls constantly from Ontario 
to look at some of the methods that we have in our drug plan so 
they can implement them as means of containing costs and 
improving their plan. 
 
You know, you went on, sir, and I remember you mentioning this 
last year in estimates, the same thing about the formulary. Well I 
want to indicate to you that the formulary committee here in 
Saskatchewan I think is headed up and contains some very, very 
dedicated and capable people. 
 
We have Mrs. MacPhail, is the chairperson. We have Dr. 
Remillard, from the College of Pharmacy We have Dr. Amies, 
from the Saskatchewan Medical Association; Dr. Gordon 
Johnson, from the College of Medicine — he’s the head of 
pharmacology at the University of Saskatchewan; and Dr. 
Gordon Johnson is sought after as a speaker all across Canada. 
 
We have Dr. Davies, from the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association; Mr. Nestor Shevchuk, who was the head of the 
Saskatchewan pharmacy association just a year or two ago; Dr. 
Wolfe, from the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association; and 
Mrs. Eileen Bayda, from the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

497 
 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. 
 
Now be that as it may, I think there is a number of very capable, 
clever, dedicated people on the formulary. And as I say, I believe 
in a second look. But the member opposite says, well what about 
the cost of it? Well I’d just like to inform you — I would like to 
inform you — what the cost of a second look for the formulary 
is in Saskatchewan. Out of my budget of over $1 billion, the 
administrative costs of the formulary in the last year were 
$15,000 — I think money well spent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to call on the 
minister to outline in some detail the steps that took place leading 
up to the introduction of the Bill to end extra-billing as it related 
to the chiropractors in the province. 
 
Having consulted with and talked to a number of these 
individuals in my area, I would say to you very clearly, Mr. 
Minister, that they are very upset with the department, and 
particularly yourself, for not having met with them and talked to 
them and discussed to any extent and to giving them any lead 
time before the legislation was introduced which covered their 
area and ended extra-billing for the chiropractors. 
 
They’re saying that, very clearly, for the past number of years 
their fee has not been increased to reflect the inflation rate in the 
province. The second main point is that they were not consulted 
and not taken into your confidence and given the outline of what 
would take place when the Bill was introduced an passed. 
 
And I think it’s important to know that these people who play a 
very important role in the giving of health care in the province, 
and in many ways in the rural areas — because I think it’s fair to 
say that many farming people, it seems to me, who ride tractors 
or are involved in the farming operation, use the chiropractors 
probably more per capita than people who live in the city — that 
they play a very important role in delivering health service in the 
rural areas. 
 
I think the other main point is that on the economic basis they are 
an important part of the business community in the towns where 
they are, whether it’s Shaunavon or the other areas. Assiniboia, I 
believe, there’s an individual who practises. I say to you that 
you’ve left them in a very, very difficult position. And clearly, 
they’re upset with you and are telling us that when we meet with 
them, as we did yesterday at their request. We had an opportunity 
to meet and discuss some of the problems that they have had with 
your government. 
 
(1545) 
 
And it’s not unlike the problem that exists with other health care 
givers, whether it’s the nurses or others who say that when they 
meet with you, the odd time they do get to meet with you, that 
they are given ultimatums and that they are not consulted, and 
that they do not have input into changes that take place. 
 
My question to you here, first of all — and I have a number of 
them — is whether or not the changes that took  

place were as a result of the changes to the Canadian Health Act 
that was introduced by the federal government, and that I know 
a number of provinces subsequently changed their Act to reflect 
changes at the federal level. But I know there were a number of 
provinces where the provincial Act was not changed to end extra 
billing for chiropractors. And I wonder: was it necessary, in light 
of the changes to the health Act, that this took place, or whether 
this was done outside of the discussion that went on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems from the 
member’s question that he seems to be opposed to the elimination 
of extra-billing. I think it’s interesting to see him taking that 
stance that he would be supporting the continuation of 
extra-billing within Saskatchewan. I wonder if that is the issue 
that he is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, speaking for 
myself, it’s evident that we brought about the elimination of 
extra-billing, something that you never could do in 11 years. 
There’s no extra-billing in this province today, by anyone. And 
it was achieved by this government here. 
 
You talked through both sides of your mouth for 11 years, 
mumbling that you didn’t like extra-billing. You didn’t have the 
courage to meet with the doctors to work out Saskatoon 
Agreement II. Your idea was to go back to the 1962 and have a 
fight. That’s what you wanted to do. Certainly, it is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well, why didn’t you then, sir? You were a member of that 
government. Why didn’t you take action? Did you ever approach 
the doctors once between 1971 and your defeat in ’82 to 
eliminate extra-billing? Did you ever? The answer to that is no, 
they never did. They never did. They didn’t have the moral 
courage or the fibre to put their action where their mouth is. This 
government eliminated extra-billing right across the province of 
Saskatchewan and did it without the terrible fights of 1962 and 
the bitterness that racked this province. We’re proud of that 
achievement. 
 
Now, listening to the member opposite, who it appears wishes 
that the chiropractors in this province could still extra bill — that 
was the indication I got from his comments. Certainly, my deputy 
minister met in March 1985 with the head of the chiropractors 
and told him that extra-billing for all health professionals in the 
province of Saskatchewan was going to be eliminated. 
 
Following that, we entered into a series of discussions with the 
SMA because there was an agreement, there was an agreement 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association that pertained to extra-billing — an 
agreement called Saskatoon Agreement I. It was signed in 1962 
after a series of very, very bitter, very bitter fights and arguments 
in this province between the then government and the medical 
profession. We sat down; we worked out an agreement called 
Saskatoon Agreement II with that medical association. If you’d 
listen, you’d know what I’m talking about. With the medical 
association, that was achieved without any of those fights or 
bitterness or suffering that plagued this province in ’62. 
 
The chiropractors do not extra bill in this province. We’re  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

498 
 

at the present time in negotiations with them. I realize that the 
chiropractors were not happy about losing extra-billing. I 
understand that. But certainly my deputy minister let them know, 
as well as every other health profession in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that extra-billing was going and that we would try 
and do this with the least problem. And I think we achieved it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister always 
carries on with his ranting and raving and making accusations. 
My question was whether or not the changes to the Canada 
Health Act made it necessary to change the extra-billing as it 
applied to chiropractors. Was there any cost saving in making 
that change? 
 
That was the question and the political raving that you do ever 
time someone asks a legitimate question — I don’t under stand 
it. And the chiropractors said that they wanted me to ask this 
question and they said they’d be watching today. And they won’t 
understand. You get up and somebody asks a question; you go 
ranting and raving about 1962 and on and on. It’s unbelievable 
that you always do that. 
 
What they want to know is whether or not it was necessary in 
order to get money from the federal government that extra-billing 
end. That’s the question. I’m not arguing my position. That’s the 
question, and maybe we could get an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, the 
chiropractors in this province know very well that under the 
Canada Health Act we would not have been penalized if they 
extra billed, but we believe in being fair and consistent. We’re 
concerned about the people of this province that use the services. 
We believe that extra-billing by doctors, by chiropractors, and 
other health professional was not in the best interests of services 
to the patients of Saskatchewan. So therefore, when we chose to 
remove extra-billing, we did if for all professionals — for all 
professionals. 
 
And we are presently in negotiations with the chiropractors, as 
we are with many other medical professionals. Many of them 
have settled to this point in time. I’m optimistic that we will come 
to a settlement with the chiropractors of this province in the 
not-too-distant future that will satisfy the chiropractors and other 
medical professions. 
 
So the short answer: you know it; you have every right to as it to 
me: the chiropractors know it. Certainly there was no penalty 
under the Canada Health Act if chiropractors were allowed to 
extra bill. But to be consistent, to be fair, and to also take into 
consideration the people that use the services of medical 
practitioners, doctors and chiropractors, this government decided 
to eliminate extra-billing. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we clearly have here a clear 
indication from the minister that there was no financial penalty 
that would have come to the taxpayers of the province had we 
not ended extra-billing.  
 
And here again I want to make it clear that what the chiropractors 
are saying is not a unanimous voice that  

they all wanted to extra bill, but what they’re saying is that one 
of two solutions could have been found for them. One of them is 
that their fee schedule be increased to reflect inflation over the 
last number of years, or that they be allowed to extra bill. You 
have done neither. 
 
You have put then in a terrible position, and that’s what they’re 
telling us. You may argue with them and say that they’re wrong, 
but they’re telling us clearly that you put them in a very, very 
tight box. You didn’t consult with them. You made the change. 
You didn’t give them the option, and they’re saying that they’re 
in a difficult spot. 
 
What I would like to ask, Mr. Minister, is: can you tell me which 
other Conservative provinces — where you have Conservative 
governments — have gone this route that you have chosen to go 
in Saskatchewan of ending extra-billing for chiropractors? 
Which other Tory provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, to that question, I‘d have to have that 
researched. I don’t have that offhand. I don’t know what 
Alberta’s doing or so on. But we’ll find out. We’ll find that out 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sit down and let me answer, 
please. Certainly we will check that out but . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the responsibility placed on me as the 
Minister of Health is to deal with the Saskatchewan situation, to 
work to improve Saskatchewan health And I have confidence 
that Mr. Dave Russell in Alberta is doing exactly the same think 
in Alberta. In fact, I believe that Larry Desjardins is doing that in 
Manitoba. I have some admiration for Larry Desjardins. 
 
So to expect that I should be able to indicate what is happening 
in Nova Scotia or in Alberta or in Newfoundland, I don’t believe 
that the people of Saskatchewan expect the Health minister to be 
running the plans in those other provinces. They want him to 
hone in and to look after Saskatchewan people, and that is my 
number one priority. 
 
In talking about consultation with the chiropractors, I’m glad that 
the member opposite asked the question. We have over the past 
year had 10 meetings with the chiropractors, between my staff 
and the chiropractors — more consultation with chiropractors 
than ever existed before. And furthermore to that, tonight, tonight 
my staff are meeting with the chiropractors of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to get one thing 
clear. Did you say that Alberta allows their chiropractors to . . . 
does not allow them to extra bill? Dave Russell in Alberta. I 
thought I heard you say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I said about Dave Russell is that Dave 
Russell is a very capable person. He is looking after the Alberta 
health plan. Graham Taylor is looking after the Saskatchewan 
health plan, and Larry Desjardins is looking after the Manitoba 
health plan. I didn’t say . . . What I indicated to him, that my staff 
would research. He wanted to know what other Tory 
governments have taken the action we have. We will find that 
information and pass it on to the member. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

499 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister 
would ask his staff who are sitting with him — he has five of 
them right close by; there’s seven in the back and there are, I 
think about 50 up in the gallery — if he would ask one of them 
all of them — who the lowest paid would be getting 40,000 a 
year — if he would ask his deputy this simple question, and it is 
. . . I’m sure they know, and I’m not being critical of them; I’m 
being critical of you for not asking them and not having the 
courage to answer the questions. How many Tory provinces have 
taken the same route as you have, sir, in ending extra-billing for 
chiropractors? And what’s the problem with answering it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I told you previously: as soon as we have 
the information, we’ll provide it to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to ask you very clearly. Your 
deputy minister is sitting in the next desk to you. Are you saying 
that he doesn’t know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I am saying that my deputy minister, when 
he has the information, will provide it to me. And the moment 
that I have it, I will give it to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to be clear on this, because I think 
you’re stonewalling, and I don’t think the taxpayers appreciate 
having qualified staff come to help you answer the questions and 
you won’t let them do their job. 
 
There are at least 50 staff in this building who are being paid by 
the taxpayers to answer the questions, and they can do it. And I 
want to ask your deputy: how many Tory provinces have ended 
extra-billing for chiropractors? What’s the issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There is no attempt to stonewall anyone. 
As soon as we have the information, we will provide it, Mr. 
Chairman. We are here to defend the estimates of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I have a number of very, very capable staff people 
here, and I take exception to this kind of an allegation that they 
can’t get the answers and so on. These people are here, and we 
will answer whatever question is asked about health care in 
Saskatchewan that we have the facilities to answer. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think any logical person would realize that 
my staff, who are professionals in health care administration, are 
not charged with the responsibility of keeping track of other 
political parties, be they Tories, Liberals, or NDPs in Canada. 
Mind you, Mr. Chairman, mind you, I could tell you it’s much 
easier to keep track of the NDPs, because there aren’t very many 
of them — thank God. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here again we have a 
minister who is incapable of even listening to his staff. He is so 
incompetent, and now I believe . . . I was questioning whether 
the nurses were totally right in their opinion of this minister, 
whether the chiropractors were correct in their opinion of this 
minister, but now I see what is happening. We have a minister 
that is so incompetent that he can’t even lean over and ask his 
deputy minister a simple question. And every time he has  

an embarrassing answer to give, he won’t do it. He simply won’t 
do it, and he refuses to give the answers. That’s what’s happening 
here. 
 
Obviously the people whom you have hired and surround 
yourself with know these answers. They go to meetings with 
health ministers around Canada, paid for by the taxpayers — as 
well they should — to learn what the health care system across 
Canada is all about. They know all these answers; they’re 
professional people; that’s what they get paid for. And I’ll tell 
you, you’re putting them in a difficult position by not answering 
the questions, because you make it look like they don’t know the 
answers. 
 
And I say to you, sir, that that is unfair of you as a minister to put 
a professional civil servant in to that position of not allowing 
them to support you and give the answers because they’re 
politically embarrassing for you. And I can’t for the life of me 
understand what would be politically embarrassing about 
answering this question. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now I would like you to, if you’re really serious that they don’t 
know the answer, if you would get one of them to go and phone 
and tell the committee that you will have the answer in, let’s say, 
five minutes. That’s about how long it would take to go to the 
office and phone and see what the answer is, or go to the file. But 
will you tell us how many governments in Canada, provincial 
governments that have Conservative governments, allow their 
chiropractors to extra bill? That’s what I’d like to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said for the 
third time, as soon as we have that information we will provide 
it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well can the minister give an indication of 
how long that might be before he would get one of his people 
who are in the gallery or sitting behind him, how long it would 
take him to ask them. Because they are here, paid for by the 
taxpayers. They’re professional civil servants trained to do this 
job. And I know the deputy minister of Health. He’s a very 
qualified individual. He’s worked for many different people and 
he knows his job and he knows the answer. I know Mr. Podiluk 
knows the answer. I know that. 
 
It is you, sir, who are not doing your job and you’re getting paid 
close to 100,000 bucks a year — salary and expenses. And 
anyone who wants to look at Public Accounts last year will see 
clearly that that’s how much you make. And I just want to know 
the answer to the question: how many Conservative 
governments, provincially, across Canada, allow their 
chiropractors to extra bill? And I don’t see what the issue is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, the answer 
to how long will it take . . . As soon as I have the information we 
will provide it for him. Otherwise, if he wants to go on to more 
questions, fine. If not, let’s move on item 1. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to ask the minister: have you 
asked your deputy if he knows the answer to the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

500 
 

question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can indicate that my deputy has people 
looking into this situation and as soon as we have the answer 
we’ll provide it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want you to answer the question: have 
you asked your deputy the answer to the question of whether he 
knows how many Conservative governments allow their 
chiropractors to extra bill? Are you saying that he doesn’t know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the deputy minister is not 
deaf. He’s been sitting here. He has sent people to find this 
information out. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order please. I’ve been 
listening to what has been going back and forth here, and under 
Beauchesne’s, 494: 
 

The whole management of a department may be discussed 
in a general way when the committee is considering the first 
item of the Estimates of that department . . . 

 
I find that this clearly states that what we’re into here is irrelevant 
to the question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, on a point of 
order. The question of the Canada Health Act and how it applies 
across Canada and how it relates to the Department of Health in 
Saskatchewan is relevant to the Department of Health. And I 
simply don’t understand, when there’s cost sharing, when there’s 
cost sharing from the federal government to our Department of 
Health, that it’s not logical that we would ask what the standards 
are across Canada for different areas of health. I want you to be 
clear on this, whether or not any federal program, and funding or 
programs that are being carried in other provinces are not allowed 
in this committee. Because this is a new rule, because we’ve 
always been able to ask questions as it relates to what is the 
comparable programs across Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have listened to what the member from 
Shaunavon has said, and while he may be correct in talking about 
the expenditures across Canada, I maintain that they do not relate 
to the estimates that are before us in this Assembly, and therefore 
my ruling stands. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister in stonewalling . . . And 
I just received a note from a chiropractor who has been watching 
the performance of the minister, and he says he can’t believe . . . 
And the members will laugh, but they are watching; people watch 
the performance of this government. One of the reasons that in 
Regina North East you got 20 per cent of the vote, 20 per cent of 
the vote, is simply because of the fact that they . . . The minister 
of jelly beans is now sitting in his seat. The former minister of 
crop insurance who couldn’t run the bloody department is yelling 
from his seat. I’ll say one of the reasons you went from 60 per 
cent in Regina North East to 20 per cent is because of the action 
of your ministers. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order, order. Order! We are so 
far from estimates here right now and I would ask  

the member from Shaunavon to please refrain and get on to the 
subject of the debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the people who 
pay the taxes wanted us to ask these questions. The questions that 
I am putting forward to the minister were questions that were 
proposed to us last night by the chiropractors. They wanted these 
answers. But if the committee and the chairman are saying that 
they refuse to answer the questions that the people of the 
province who pay the taxes are telling us to ask, that’s fine. But 
I’ll tell you that the onus of ministers to answer questions that the 
public ask us to put forward is an important part of the principle 
that is involved in the committee of finance. 
 
And the member from Maple Creek can call liar and all of that. 
But I’ll tell you that one of the main issues here is getting answers 
to questions, is getting answers to questions. These questions 
were put forward by the people affected . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Put forward what? You can go and talk to the 
chiropractors. I’m sure they’re willing to talk to you because 
they’re saying that you won’t meet with them. They say that they 
won’t meet with them. And they also were interested to know 
how many Conservative governments across Canada followed 
the same route as the minister did. I don’t know what he’s afraid 
of answering that question. But obviously he is. I would like to 
go on and ask another question. He has given a commitment that 
he would provide the answer. I don’t know how long it will take, 
but hopefully in the near future he will give the answer that he’s 
given a commitment to us to provide. 
 
But the other question that they wanted us to ask — and here 
again, Mr. Chairman, you may rule this out of order — but they 
wanted to know on the fee schedules, what the increases have 
been for the last four years for chiropractors in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And here I ask for the Chairman’s guidance. It 
gets a little unclear here what we can ask and what we can’t ask, 
but they wanted to know what the fee schedule changes have 
been in the past four years for chiropractors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have the last two years here, for right 
now. You asked for four years; we’ll get the other two years for 
you as quick as we can. 
 
In April the 1st of ’85 they had an increase of 1.2 per cent; in 
April the 1st of ’84, 5.3 per cent. And as I said previously, 
negotiations are presently going on. And as far as meeting with 
the chiropractors, I go back to my statement of a few minutes ago 
that my officials will be meeting with the chiropractors tonight. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I was watching part of the 
proceedings on television while I was making a telephone call, 
so I am partially but not wholly informed about what has gone 
on for the last few minutes. 
 
I was interested in the question of the member from Shaunavon, 
who asked what was being done by other provinces with respect 
to chiropractors. So I’m going to ask you, Mr. Minister, for the 
answer. And if I missed it when I was out, I would apologize for 
that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s already been ruled on. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

501 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Well the attendance of your members of 
caucus hasn’t been sterling either. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to 
give us that. You must know it, and I ask you to give us that 
answer, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, it would seem only logical 
to me that we’re here, as your ruling said, to defend the estimates 
of the province of Saskatchewan. The people opposite have a 
research staff paid for by the legislature of Saskatchewan. And I 
would think to find that information is more the duty of their 
caucus research than the estimates of the health department of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you are stonewalling. Since 
time immemorial, ministers have been asked to compare their 
policies and performance and records with that of other 
provinces. These questions, Mr. Minister, have been asked for 
the full 11 years that I have been a member of this Assembly. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . If you’ll tell us why you’re 
ashamed of the answer, we’ll probably settle for that. But if 
you’re not prepared to defend your stonewalling, then I suggest 
you get on with it and give us the answer, Mr. Minister. I simply 
don’t believe that you haven’t got it, and I know that you did not 
tell the member from Shaunavon you didn’t have it. You just 
weren’t going to answer the question. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to answer the question, give us the facts, 
and let us get on, and stop trying to make a mockery of this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, as I said at the beginning of 
these estimates, I’m quite willing to answer any question 
pertaining to health care in Saskatchewan. That’s what the 
purpose of estimates are for, and we will continue to do that. But 
I believe that a party that has a research fund paid for by the 
people of this province, that to find out what other political 
parties are doing in other sections of Canada is the prerogative of 
their research staff, and is not the subject of debate on the 
estimates of the Department of Health in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it is a subject of debate. The minister 
has never finished a question in under five minutes in his life. 
Mr. Minister, it is a proper subject for discussion. I am asking 
you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you know of any other 
provinces which are duplicating your shameful treatment of 
chiropractors — if you know of any other provinces which are 
doing what you have done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I know that in 
Saskatchewan we decided to eliminate extra-billing. We felt that 
extra-billing was a burden upon the people of Saskatchewan. I 
have heard the members opposite give lip-service to this. They 
were the government of this province for 11 years. They talked 
about it. They never had the moral courage or the fibre to do it. 
We sat down with the medical profession and arrived at 
Saskatoon Agreement II in consultation and co-operation. When 
we started those negotiations of the medical profession, my 
deputy minister when to the health professions and told them that 
extra-billing in Saskatchewan for all health  

professions was going to end. That has happened. It has happened 
for the medical profession and it has happened for the 
chiropractors. 
 
We are presently negotiating with the chiropractors on a new 
agreement. I said a few minutes ago, I am optimistic, Mr. 
Chairman, that that agreement will be to the satisfaction of the 
Saskatchewan people, to the betterment of health care in this 
province, and it will be something that the chiropractors of this 
province will accept. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s patently obvious 
that you are not providing the information because it doesn’t 
buttress your position. Indeed, no other province I think has made 
the mess that you have made. I do not know, Mr. Minister, why 
or how you could have made such a mess of this particular area, 
but it’s clear that you have. 
 
(1615) 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, you’re not giving us the answer, although 
you know it, because the evidence, Mr. Minister, suggests that 
for all their limitations, no other Conservative government in 
Canada is as incompetent as this one. And this is yet another 
illustration of what is happening to medicare. 
 
Mr. Minister, I rest my case. You haven’t been able to defend the 
refusal to give us the information. I therefore take it as admitted 
that the answer to those questions would not support your case. 
Don’t believe for a moment if you had it you wouldn’t give it. 
Well the minister is shaking his head. I’ll give him a chance to 
respond to that, then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I abide by your ruling. I 
heard you a few minutes ago say that you did not think that this 
type of questioning was in the rulings according to Beauchesne’s, 
and I’m quite willing to go on with the estimates of the province 
of Saskatchewan. So I will go with the chairman’s ruling, and 
let’s get on with the talk of health care. I want to hear from 
members opposite. I know that probably the member from 
Athabasca has some concerns he wants to ask me, and I’ve dealt 
with . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The conclusion that I would 
reach here is that the minister may or may not answer your 
question. He has chosen to do otherwise, so perhaps we can get 
on with the next item. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I agree, Mr. Vice-Chairman, that the 
minister may not answer a question. There is no way we can 
make him answer a question. There is no way . . . I can tell you, 
Mr. Chairman, and I’ll tell ministers opposite that if the ministers 
want to stonewall, then these estimates are going to take awhile. 
There is no way I or my colleagues intend to deal with the serious 
problems facing this province by accepting non-answers from the 
government. That may eventually be the case, but I’ll tell you, 
there’s going to be some warm winds pass inside and outside this 
Assembly if ministers are going to behave as this minister has. 
 
Information, which is readily available which I believe he  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

502 
 

has, and I challenge him to say he doesn’t; he has not, when I 
have been listening ever said he doesn’t have the information. 
The information which he has he refuses to give us. He doesn’t 
attempt to justify it. He just does not answer the question. He 
goes merrily on talking about something that might have 
happened 10 years ago. 
 
The same thing happened on Monday when we asked him about 
some issues which everybody in Saskatchewan who has any 
interest in health care, is talking about, and that’s staffing levels. 
We asked them a series of straightforward questions, information 
which I believe his staff has, and he wouldn’t give it to us. He 
wouldn’t give it to us, Mr. Chairman, because it puts lie to the 
bombast which he has subjected this Assembly to. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, I accept your ruling, but if the ministers 
are going to stonewall, then this process is going to take a lot 
longer than it need and it’s going to be a lot more expensive than 
it need. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll give you one more chance to give us the 
information which you patently have. You’ve never denied you 
don’t. I’ll give you one more opportunity to give us the 
information with respect to what other provinces are doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, if the members opposite 
want to ask me questions about health care in Saskatchewan, let’s 
get on with it. As far as the question of what other Tory 
governments do in Canada, has no place as a question in here. I 
have no responsibility for any other government in Canada. 
 
I am responsible for the health of the province of Saskatchewan. 
I am willing to answer those questions. But I say again, the 
activities of other political parties in other provinces is the 
prerogative of the research of the caucus staff. That’s what 
they’re paid that money for. And estimates in the Chamber are to 
deal with issues here on health care in Saskatchewan, and I stand 
willing to answer the questions they would ask. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when we 
met with the chiropractors and they were telling us about the 
problems they were having as far as their fees and the work-load 
they’re under and what’s happened because of actions you’ve 
taken, did you take those actions — dealing with the pay scale 
that Saskatchewan chiropractors are subjected to — did you take 
those actions in consideration of what was happening across 
Canada, like you likely did with the medical doctors? When you 
determine the fee that medical doctors are getting, do you look at 
a fee structure across Canada, or did you pull some numbers out 
of your hat and decide that this is the fee we’re going to freeze 
them in under the terms that they’re working in? 
 
Now when you decided . . . And I’m not talking now about the 
medical doctors’ fees. I’m talking about the complaints we’re 
getting from chiropractors serving people. And I can tell you 
here, I’m standing here on both feet, square on the ground, 
because chiropractors have kept me going. I’ve had back trouble 
in my life like you wouldn’t believe. My family’s been involved 
in it. And so we like what chiropractors are doing. I like what  

chiropractors are doing. The thing that I don’t like is when a 
chiropractor is under the gun and under pressure because of the 
$10 fee thing they’re really locked into. 
 
Did you decide to do that because of what other chiropractors are 
getting across Canada? Or how did you determine that number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I can’t go into what’s 
happening at negotiations. As I say, negotiations are going on at 
this time. And I’m sure the member opposite, somewhere in his 
career, may have been involved in negotiations. I don’t know if 
you have or not, but probably you have. I certainly have in my 
past career. 
 
And when you’re at the negotiating table, many factors are 
brought into discussion from both sides — cost of living, cost of 
overhead, comparative salaries, a multiplicity of factors. So 
therefore in any year, when we were government, when you were 
government, in other governments, certainly there’s a lot of 
factors that come into play to arrive at a decision as to what 
constitutes a fair and equitable settlement. 
 
Mr. Engel: — When you made that decision in relationship to 
what other provinces are getting and they were locked in under 
your freeze as far as extra-billing is concerned, how many other 
provinces followed suit and locked in their chiropractors? That’s 
all we’re talking about. 
 
We’re not saying anything about the negotiations that are 
happening now or if you’re talking about different settlements or 
not. We’re saying that the chiropractors in Saskatchewan, 
without any debate with you, sir, without any discussion, without 
any consultation, all of a sudden one day they were doing their 
little thing. Some people were working under the plan, some 
weren’t. And at one movement you put them all under the same 
umbrella, took away that freedom to extra bill. 
 
I’m not arguing, sir, with you that’s good or bad. I’m arguing 
with you when you decided that, and there was no pressure from 
Ottawa, no financial pressure on you to include or not to include 
the chiropractors. All I was asking is what is happening in the 
other provinces than Saskatchewan? What is it doing to the 
profession as far as other provinces of Canada are concerned? 
What is it doing to the profession in Saskatchewan? What 
enticement is that placing on our chiropractors to stay here or to 
get more to come here or to settle here or to come here from when 
they graduate from school? What is the structure across Canada, 
and under what terms are they working here in comparison to the 
other provinces? 
 
I think it’s a simple, straightforward question. It’s something that 
affects the lives of the chiropractors that are working in this 
province and I for one can’t understand why you can’t share that 
equipment and tell us why you implemented that under these 
terms here and what arguments you used as far as what was 
happening in the other provinces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, as I said previously, when 
we made the decision as a government to eliminate extra-billing 
in this province at all levels, the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

503 
 

chiropractors, as well as all other medical professions, were 
notified by my deputy minister that this would take place, that 
we were going to do this. 
 
I want to say here, and it’s very important, that we achieved the 
elimination of extra-billing without any financial deals with 
anyone. This government wasn’t held up to ransom by anyone. 
We worked with them and we said to the professions, we are 
eliminating extra-billing. We will work with you in consultation. 
We’ve met with the chiropractors 10 times. We’re meeting with 
them tonight. I feel very optimistic that we will work out a 
settlement that the chiropractors in this province will be satisfied 
with and will be to the benefit to health care in the province. 
 
I agree with you that the chiropractors provide a very, very good 
service to many people. And I’m sure, sir, as being a farmer of 
many years and a cat operator, you may have had a bad back and 
they may have helped you. And you are just one of many people. 
And I understand that and I appreciate the work of chiropractors. 
 
I can say that I haven’t seen a mass exodus of chiropractors from 
Saskatchewan, and I feel very confidence that there will be an 
agreement very shortly that will certainly be acceptable to the 
chiropractors and for the betterment of health care in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, Mr. Minister, when your 
Minister of Finance stood up in this House, he formally made a 
comparison with all the other provinces in his budget debate. He 
took great pride and bragged about how Saskatchewan stands in 
comparison with various levels of taxes and so on, and took great 
delight in that. 
 
What are you trying to hide? Why will you not give us the 
comparison with Saskatchewan in relationship to how they’re 
dealing with their chiropractors and what are your Tory cousins 
doing in the other provinces? What are you trying to hide? Why 
will you not . . . why will you continue now . . . We’ve been on 
this topic for an hour. You’ve wasted the time of this House for 
a whole hour. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, you may even know the answers. 
Maybe you’d like to give us that answer, because I know my 
good friend from Rosthern knows that number and knows those 
answers. 
 
But we think, for the record, that is some information we need 
here to finish off this topic in this deal, and the heavy-handed 
way in which you dealt with the chiropractors. You talked about 
10 meetings. How many times did you meet? How many times 
did you meet with the chiropractors, personally, any 
representation of the chiropractors, on this issue? Have you met 
with them, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, I have met with 
the chiropractors on numerous occasions. Our caucus will be 
meeting with them in another week or so, the whole caucus. I’m 
sure this issue will be discussed. I think we may have a settlement 
that they’ll be very happy with by that time. 
 

Secondly, Mr. Chairman, I have met with Mr. Milne, head of the 
chiropractors, in my office, and other ones: Mr. Chadwick from 
Regina, I’ve met with him; I’ve met with Mr. Johnstone from 
Regina when he was head of the chiropractors; Mr. Greenman. I 
know many of these people personally. And furthermore, my 
officials have met at least 10 times with them, and I have officials 
meeting tonight with the chiropractors, and we have negotiations 
going on at this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Take it as read that 
you are ashamed of the facts and you’re not going to answer the 
question. 
 
Let’s deal with another issue that you were less than forthcoming 
with on Monday evening when we left off. It had to do with the 
waiting lists at various hospitals. You undertook to get the 
information, if possible, in other communities. I gather your 
deputy has the information. I would ask if you would give us that 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Before I’d provide that information, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Shaunavon had asked for the 
four-year increases to the chiropractors in Saskatchewan. At that 
time I could only provide two years. I do have the information 
now for over the four years. I would give these figures to the 
members opposite. 
 
Two of them you have, but in case you didn’t take them down, 
I’ll repeat them. In April 1st of ’85, the chiropractors got a 1.2 
per cent raise. In April 1st of ’84, the chiropractors got a 5.3 per 
cent raise. In April 1st of ’83, the chiropractors got a 7 per cent 
raise. And in April — I assume it’s April 1st — of 1982-83, a 
12.5 per cent raise. Those are the raises over the last four years 
for the chiropractors. And as I have said previously, negotiations 
are on at this time under the current contracts. 
 
(1630) 
 
For the summary of surgical waiting lists that was asked for by 
the member from Regina Centre, I would give you this 
information, as of February 28, 1986. That’s the most recent I 
have. I hope that’s satisfactory to you. In Regina we had 572 
waiting at the Pasqua, 464 at the Plains, 1,475 at the General; in 
Saskatoon, 2,070 at the University, 3,036 at City, 2,902 at St. 
Paul’s. In the regional hospitals — you asked for that also — 
Moose Jaw at Providence, 18, at the Union, 168; Battlefords 
Union, 337; Prince Albert, Holy Family, 338, Vic Union, 305; 
Yorkton Union, 258; and in Swift Current there was no waiting 
list. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you give us a copy of 
those documents. They were read too fast to copy down. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you as well for the waiting lists in nursing 
homes throughout the province, and you undertook to give us that 
information by this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have been phoning around regarding 
the nursing homes, and I think what you determine as a waiting 
list really isn’t existing. They don’t have chronological lists of 
people wanting to get into their nursing homes. And the fact is, 
as I explained to you  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

504 
 

on Monday night, they go through the DCCs, the district 
co-ordinating committees, and there are various functions or 
services that they can access, so there may be . . . 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Chairman. A DCC may have 
had 100 people come to it. Am I right? That 100 people could be 
designated for various types of services. Some of them may have 
to go for home care, some may go into a hospital for a short 
period of time and back out, some may go into a nursing home 
for a short period of time and then back out with the support of 
home care. So as to say there is a chronological list with Mrs. 
Brown and Mrs. Jones and so on, that the DCCs are listing, that 
is no longer the case. 
 
I know this was the case when the members opposite were in 
government, because they did not have district co-ordinating 
committees in place. What happened at that time, members of the 
family would say, I need to get my senior citizen into a nursing 
home. So they would go, say, in your area — they may go to 
Rosthern, and they may go to Dalmeny, and various areas in that 
part of the country — and register that person on a list at each of 
those towns. Therefore on a chronological list, Mr. Chairman, 
you would see, for example, Mrs. Brown in Dalmeny, Mrs. 
Brown in some of your other towns up there where you live, and 
they would be on all of those. That was the situation. And that is 
what they refer to as a waiting list. Thank goodness, Mr. 
Chairman, with the formation of DCCs, and practically every 
home care district in Saskatchewan has a DCC, and the people 
go to those and then they’re slotted into their proper modalities 
of service. 
 
So if to say that the homes have alphabetical and chronological 
lists of people waiting to get in, may have been the situation in 
the days of the NDP — was the situation, rather a drastic situation 
— but today we have district co-ordinating committees that 
address this situation. And I don’t think you can compare those 
because it would be comparing apples and oranges. 
 
The system today is probably the leading system of assessing 
need of senior citizens and younger disabled people across the 
Dominion of Canada. People are looked at on not how long 
they’ve been on a list, they’re looked at on their needs, and they 
are also looked on on the support services that exits within their 
community. 
 
It may well be, as I explained the other night, Mr. Chairman, that 
a person who has support services, has a family he can live with, 
can access adult day care, could go into a respite bed, accesses 
those services, services that have come into place in the last four 
years, Mr. Chairman, and therefore that person who not show on 
a waiting list because they have services. Do you understand? 
 
But if those things are not there, if you did it in the old way, in 
the old way of the NDP where you lined up at the door here and 
you lined up at the door there, and maybe if you knew someone 
influential, maybe if you had your uncle on the board, you might 
get a little bit of privilege to get into that nursing home. That isn’t 
the way we operate today. That isn’t the way we operate. 
 

They go to a DCC, and the DCC looks at the needs of that 
individual person, and then they place that person into the type 
of system that best satisfies the needs of the person rather than 
having long chronological waiting lists as we did in the past. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Shaunavon 
earlier this afternoon clearly made the point which is now being 
reinforced by the minister. And that is that when he gets asked a 
question which he does not want to answer, or a question which 
he feels may be embarrassing to the government, he goes into a 
tirade and makes a speech of irrelevancies going back in history 
20 and 16 years and 25 years rather than addressing the question. 
 
Surely to simply answer the question the way he did, in saying 
that that information is not available because nursing homes 
don’t have it, would not have taken up the five minutes 
consulting his staff, which he did prior to answering that 
question, so he could just simply say that. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister — a very straightforward question. 
I’ll wait till I get his attention; he’s busy. Mr. Minister, my 
question to you is: are you saying that the central registry 
mechanism that exists in the city of Regina, for example, does 
not have a list of people who are waiting for a level 3 bed? Does 
it not have a list of people that are waiting for a level 4 bed?Are 
you saying that they don’t have that kind of information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, I am saying to you that there are 
lists of applications, all right? A person applies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well if you’d wait for a minute, you would 
find out what that is. 
 
A person applies. He is then assessed, and that assessment will 
direct him into a number of service modalities. That I know you 
don’t like to hear about, five years ago when they didn’t exist. I 
know that; I know that very well. Because you were the minister 
of Health and you and you were the minister of Finance, and I 
know it’s embarrassing to you. But I think it’s only fair to lay out 
the scenario. Those services are here today. 
 
Now when a person puts in an application, there are certainly 
some limitations that can affect that. In some cases there may 
have been no professional assessment of the need has been 
conducted, so we have to do that. And where assessments have 
been made, there was no formal distinction between the need and 
the unmet need. There may have been duplication of applications 
in communities, and the criteria may have been different. 
 
So what I’m saying to you, we do have applications. But an 
application is a person saying, a family saying, I have a senior or 
I have a disabled young person who needs some type of care. 
That type of care may well be assessed to be a number of things: 
home care, adult day care, respite care, acute care hospital, 
special care home. And as I say, and thank goodness, and I’m 
proud to see this, that it isn’t  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

505 
 

an end of the line. There are people who go into special care 
homes and come back out of special care homes and live in their 
communities. I think that is a very forward step. That is a step 
that has only started to happen in the last few years, and is 
something we’re very proud of. 
 
So certainly there are applications, but to say that there are 
waiting lists here and waiting lists there, alphabetical 
chronological waiting lists, I say that was the old way of doing 
it. It isn’t the way that it is addressed now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I know 
that there are applications that people make, very fundamental. I 
know that assessments are made. I know that they were made 
before 1982. I mean, you’re not telling this House or the public 
anything that they don’t already know. 
 
My simple question to you is this: of the people, Mr. Minister, 
who have been assessed, how many are waiting and on waiting 
lists to get into a nursing home because they need to be in a 
nursing home bed — of the people who have been assessed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I beg to differ with you. There may have 
been assessments before ’82. I’m not denying that. But there 
were not district co-ordinating committees, not the type of 
assessments that are done now. They certainly did not exist 
before ’82, not one of them. There were no district co-ordinating 
committees. 
 
I say they’re in almost every area of the province today, and I’m 
not going to go back through the explanation. I think you 
understand the explanation of them and how they work. And I 
would ask you — or challenge you — to go to communities 
where they’re in place. Ask members of home care boards, ask 
members of hospital boards, special care home boards, ask them 
if they don’t support this, if this isn’t one of the best ways of 
addressing those people who are in greatest need as to how they 
will enter the system of long-term care, the continuing system, 
the continuation of it. They can fit into the slot that most 
appropriately will give them the service that they need. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I indeed 
have been to communities where they are in place, and I’ve 
spoken to the people running the system in Regina on a number 
of occasions. I feel that’s part of my responsibility to 
communicate with these people, unlike the minister who does not 
like to meet with a lot of these groups, such a nurses. 
 
Now, let me say that also the co-ordinating systems that are in 
place are a good idea. I mean, nobody would deny that and I’m 
not suggesting otherwise. In fact, they’re so good, Mr. Minister, 
that they provide ready access to information about people who 
need to get certain services so that they can place them. That 
information is right there. 
 
So I ask you again the question which you didn’t answer after 
your speech. It simply is: of people who have been assessed, how 
many are on waiting lists to get into nursing home beds? 
 
(1645) 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — To the member for Regina East, I’ll give 
you the figures here. I’d like to explain the three categories . . . 
No, I would like to explain it to you because you may understand 
it, but some of your colleagues will be sure to miss it. And that is 
that in Regina there’s three categories. I’d like the member for 
Regina Centre to pay attention, and I’d like to explain these 
because these are the categories used by the district co-ordinating 
committees. 
 
First of all, there’s those who are priority. That is people in the 
community or in private care homes or hospitals, who, in their 
feeling, should be in a special care home. So those are your 
priorities. 
 
Secondly, they have a grouping called urgent — urgent. Those 
are people who are coping but would become priority if there was 
a significant deterioration in their health or support system. So 
there are people who are getting by, but if their health 
deteriorated or if, say, a family member left that was helping 
support them, they would become a priority. 
 
And then the third category is others. They deal with basically 
level 3’s and 4’s, not including level 1 and 2, who, as you know 
with home care and so on, basically remain in their community 
with a few exceptions. You will always find the odd elderly 
gentleman or something who is a level 2, but he has no support 
services, so therefore he ends up in a nursing home. That exists, 
but basically it’s level 3 and 4. 
 
Under the priorities for Regina: level 3, there are 81; and level 4, 
there are two; so this would be 83. And the priority list for Regina 
at this time: under the urgent list in level 3 for Regina, 75; level 
4, 72; for 147. And under the others: level 3 for Regina, 221; and 
level 4, 16; so 237 in that category. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have a great many figures. 
The other day you gave us figures of 1,070. Now somehow or 
other in the light of what’s obviously an insufficient nursing 
home program, you’ve managed to scale that down to about 450 
to 500. What happened to the other 500? Did you suddenly find 
nursing homes for them, or did you decide the other 500 could 
well afford to stay in their own homes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I indicated to the member from Regina 
East, the level 1’s and 2’s were not included in this. I gave you 
those figures the other night, how many level 1’s and 2’s there 
were: 262 level 1’s, 305 level 2’s. So those are not included. I 
should indicate to you that these are the figures that we have 
requested, and come right across from the DCC here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And, Mr. Minister, you were going to get 
me the figures for the other communities as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we will give you those as they are 
available. I will get those for you. I just want to indicate, when 
we look at Regina . . . And you’ll recall this from the other night, 
and I think it’s only fair when we look at this in its context, with 
those numbers that I have just read out and provided to the 
members of the  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

506 
 

opposition, and those are the figures as of the end of February for 
Regina, coming from the DCC, who are an independent group. 
They are certainly not under my jurisdiction. They’re an 
independent group here in Regina. 
 
But I think the thing, Mr. Chairman, we should remember is that 
of those priority people, the average time to get a placement in a 
nursing home in Regina is two months — two months — and I 
think two months is a pretty respectable figure for someone 
waiting to get into a nursing home. 
 
I have nothing but the heartiest congratulations for the DCCs. 
They’re doing a fantastic job out there in helping us cope with 
what is a very difficult problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, we’ve essentially had those 
figures two days ago. I ask you for the figures for other 
communities, and I ask you for that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We are going to provide those for the 
member. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t believe that comment. I do not 
believe you’re making any effort. I do not believe you are making 
any effort. I do not believe you are making any effort to give us 
that information. I don’t think you’re making any effort at all. I 
just don’t believe it, Mr. Minister. I just do not believe that 
statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, a friend who is not on the caucus staff at all, a friend 
called the Regina nursing homes and the Regina assessment 
committee and arrived at approximately the same fitters as what 
you gave me. So we’re back up to 1,070 as you defined them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe that you don’t have that information 
for Saskatoon. It is so readily available. I would hope, in the 
name of Heavens, that you wouldn’t plan or estimate the number 
of nursing homes you’re going to provide to a community until 
you know what the waiting list is. 
 
Mr. Minister, you spent a good 10 minutes telling us how you’d 
improved upon the old method of assessing patients and 
applicants. That may be or it may not be. But, Mr. Minister, at 
least give us your own figures for Saskatoon. At least give us 
your own figures for Saskatoon. Give them to us as you have 
cooked them and as you have defined them and as you have 
narrowed them. Give us your figures for Saskatoon. And then 
I’m going to go around, Mr. Minister, and get the figures for 
every other community. I do not believe that your department 
entered into a five-year plan for nursing homes throughout this 
province and didn’t have the faintest notion in the world as to 
what the needs were in those communities. I don’t think even you 
people, as well as you have demonstrated your incompetence on 
virtually every issue you’ve been faced with — including the 
Minister of Energy today, who made a jackass out of himself and 
the Premier and the government on the issue of energy . . . So I 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What kind of a vocabulary have you got? 
Come on! 
 

Mr. Shillington: — A jackass. I may be being unfair to 
jackasses, to describe the member from Weyburn as sharing the 
qualities of that animal. I may be being unfair to jackasses to 
suggest the member from . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I think that the use of that kind 
of language against a member of this Assembly is detrimental 
and unbecoming of keeping decorum. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’ll use the word “donkey” if you’d 
prefer. But both are found, Mr. Chairman, in every dictionary, 
and both mean exactly the same thing. But if the chairman would 
prefer that I’d use donkey instead of jackass, I’d be happy to call 
them donkeys. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe that even this government is as 
incompetent to build and to announce a five-year plan for nursing 
homes without knowing what the needs of the community are. 
We are told, Mr. Minister, that those needs are severe, that the 
waiting list is severe, and that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You’ve got 10 minutes before you can go for supper, so I’d ask 
you to listen to the question and stop looking at the clock, Mr. 
Minister. For the next 10 minutes, Mr. Minister, I’m going to 
insist you give us those figures, which I know you have. I don’t 
believe for a moment that you haven’t got them. If you are, then 
you really have set a new high-water mark in terms of 
incompetence. 
 
You obviously know what the needs of the communities are. I 
tell you that I think the needs are unacceptably high. I made that 
comment the other day about a community which I am familiar 
with, the city of Regina. And your comment was, but the city of 
Regina is awash with nursing homes. They’ve been pampered 
with a flood of nursing homes. Well if Regina has received such 
special treatment then, Mr. Minister, I am very curious to know 
what the waiting lists in other communities are. 
 
So I ask you to give me the information which you have, and save 
all the inane speeches about what happened in 1977 or ’78 — 
save those silly, inane speeches for wherever you may find some 
use for them. But they’re not of much use to you in this 
Assembly. Give me the facts which I know you have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he makes reference of 
looking at the clock. I was just wondering how long he would 
babble on before he got to the meat of his question. 
 
Certainly I listened with interest, Mr. Chairman, listened with 
interest to this gentleman. I mean, it’s very hard sometimes to 
wonder just what he’s talking about. But I listened with interest. 
And he is saying, and he talks about 1,000. I talked about the 
urgent and the priority people in Regina. I gave him the exact 
figures coming from the DCC, He is saying, there’s 1,000. That’s 
what he’s saying. There’s 1,000 people waiting to get into 
nursing homes. If you analyse what that member is saying, he is 
saying that every level 1 and 2 person in Regina should be in a 
nursing home. That’s what he’s saying — exactly. 
 
I don’t believe that. I don’t think level 1 and 2 people want to be 
in a nursing home. Level 1 and 2 people tell me, I  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

507 
 

want to remain in my community. I want to remain in my 
community with the type of services that are provided, with home 
care, with special adult day care, and with respite. Don’t put me 
as a level 1 and 2 in a nursing home and lock me up and say, stay 
there. That’s the kind of philosophy that he has. He won’t believe 
the priority; he won’t believe the urgent. He wants to group all of 
the elderly. That’s his respect. 
 
I saw the Leader of the Opposition Monday night, when I talked 
about the need of elderly people in this province, chortle and 
laugh in his seat. He laughed about elderly people in this 
province. That’s shameful. 
 
We want to keep elderly people in their communities, out at their 
activity centres, having fun, going to their bingos, going to their 
dances, doing the things that they deserve to do because they built 
this province. And for a member to sit here and try and say that 
there should be all these thousand people in Regina in nursing 
homes, I would love his constituents to know that. That’s where 
he would like to put them. 
 
We want to have nursing homes for those level 3 and 4 people 
who have been categorized, who have been evaluated by 
professionals who say this person is a priority and needs to go 
into a nursing home. There are those people — I gave him the 
figures — they wait just two months to get in in Regina. So for 
his complete lack of understanding, I understand very, very 
plainly. 
 
I think the only thing the Leader of the Opposition did in his years 
that was extremely credible was to dump him from cabinet. I tell 
you, I wouldn’t put a man of his capability in any cabinet in a 
government in Saskatchewan — a person that, when he was a 
minister of Crown in here . . . 
 
Do you want to know the kind of report that he authored and 
presented in this legislature? I recall it. I was in opposition. I was 
appalled. His recommendation in the report that he paid for when 
he was flubbing around in culture and youth was to equip the 
snowmobiles in northern Saskatchewan with television sets. 
 
That was the report that he brought in, and he stood and tried to 
defend that. That man was the laughing-stock of this province. 
The premier of the time realized this, and he took him and he 
turfed him right out where he deserved to belong. 
 
I remember him. I remember defending his estimates. I 
remember his speech for cutting a ribbon at some little cultural 
recreation centre where you can go, Mr. Chairman, You’ve been 
there many times on my behalf and have done a tremendous job. 
You go down to a senior citizens’ centre. You open their activity 
centre. They’re lovely people. They want to meet with you and 
dialogue with you. You give them a few words of kindness and 
appreciation. 
 
When he was a minister of the Crown, he had bills for $500 for 
speech-writing to go and talk to senior citizens at an activity 
centre. That was you. That was the kind of minister of Crown you 
were. And it’s no reason . . . I can understand perfectly why the 
premier of the day  

would say to you, look, the chaff goes and whatever grain is here 
will stay. Well there wasn’t much grain because they all blew 
away in ’82 also. 
 
You were lucky. I don’t know how you were but you were lucky. 
But the day that you ever operate in that position and in Executive 
Council in Saskatchewan again, lo and behold, that would be a 
disaster for this province, because you are completely 
incompetent, and I believe you got your law degree at an auction 
sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now, Mr. Chairman, he says we don’t have 
the figures for Saskatoon. He questions the authenticity of the 
DCCs in Regina and Saskatoon. His colleague, who at least has 
a greater grasp of the situation than he does, indicated . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, don’t side with him, my friend 
. . . indicated that he believes DCCs are a good thing. I think 
they’re a good thing. My colleagues think they’re a good thing. 
The people of Saskatchewan think they’re a good thing. But the 
member from Regina Centre doesn’t believe them. He says 
they’re crooked figures. He said these people don’t know how to 
assess who needs to get into the homes. That’s the kind of thing. 
He said, you can’t take their priority list; it isn’t correct. Take all 
of them — all 1,000 — put all 1,000 people into the nursing home 
and solve the problem. That’s his logic 
 
Well let me give you the figures for Saskatoon because it’s a bit 
interesting. It’s a bit interesting, Mr. Chairman. Here we are. 
Saskatoon, same categories, priority preference. And another 
category: by-pass. By-pass are for people who were phoned and 
asked: do you want to come into the nursing home? And they 
said, no, at this point in time we’re not ready to come in. 
 
He would take all those poor 1,000 people that lined up and said, 
I would some day like to go into a nursing home; please assess 
my need. He would take them all, as soon as they had signed the 
application form, and shove them in a nursing home and hope 
they stay there for the rest of their life. I say to you: is that 
humane; is that compassionate; is that kind treatment for the 
senior citizens of this province? Obviously not. 
 
For Saskatoon, we have on the priority list: level 3’s, two of 
them; level 4, 14. On the preference list: level 3, 130; level 4, 
211. And those on the by-pass, people who were phoned by the 
DCC and said, do you want to come into a nursing home: 35 level 
3’s said no, and 93 level 4’s said no, I prefer to stay home in my 
family with the support services that are there available in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I just met with the Saskatoon home care people two days ago. 
The Saskatoon home care are doing tremendous work helping 
many people stay in their homes. And they said to me, we want 
to stay there; we don’t want to go into a nursing home; we want 
to remain with our family — and thank the Devine government 
for putting the new initiative of adult day care . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — . . . of respite beds, and DCCs into  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

 

508 
 

place, so that we’re dealt with as individuals, not just numbers on 
a waiting list, as the insensitive, uncompassionate, 
un-understanding viewpoint of the NDP in their days in 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock, this House is now 
recessed till 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Price Drop in Initial Grain Payments to Farmers
	Oil Prices
	ORDERS OF THE DAY

