


















































April 21, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 21, 1986 
 

729 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Pickering: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure for me today to introduce to you, and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, 48 senior citizens from the 
towns of Milestone and Lang. This tour was organized, 
apparently, by the Sunshine senior citizen club at Lang. 
They’ve had a tour of the legislature prior to question period, 
and I will be meeting with them afterwards for pictures and 
refreshments. 
 
I hope they find the proceedings informational and, perhaps, 
entertaining, and I would make note, Mr. Speaker, that my 
mother-in-law is in this group. Just about a week ago she 
celebrated her 31st, 39th birthday. 
 
On behalf of the Assembly, I wish all members would bring 
them greetings and wish them a safe stay here and journey back 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Police Investigation of Cabinet Minister 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a 
question, in the absence of the Premier, to the Minister of 
Justice. A week ago, Mr. Minister, the Premier confirmed that 
the Deputy Premier, the member for Souris-Cannington, was 
the subject of an investigation by the Regina city police and the 
provincial Justice department with respect to unspecified 
allegations. At that time the Premier indicated that a full 
statement to this Assembly would be made, and I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, in your position in charge of Justice: can you provide 
this Assembly today with a statement in respect to the Deputy 
Premier and the allegations of charges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further question, Mr. Speaker. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister of Justice: could you indicate whether it is an intention 
of your department to provide to the citizens of this province 
some clarification in respect to the allegations which the 
Premier, indeed, indicated were being alleged as against the 
Deputy Premier? Are you in a position to make a statement? Is 
the investigation complete? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, Mr. Speaker, I won’t make a 
comment on that at this time; however, the member knows that 
when it’s appropriate to make the comment, it will be made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Justice. The Minister of Justice was, I believe, in the 
House when the Premier advised us that his department — that 
is, the Department of Justice — had advised the Premier that 
the allegations which were the subject of the previous questions 
would not impair the  

ability of the Deputy Premier to perform his public duties; and 
the Minister of Justice will recall that statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, the member under discussion is the House 
Leader. This will be the sixth consecutive day that he has not 
discharged his duties as House leader. Is it still the position of 
your government that the investigation is not in any way 
impairing the ability of this particular member and member of 
cabinet to perform his public duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the 
Leader of the Opposition was simply not present doing his 
duties. But the House Leader, or the Deputy Premier, in my 
understanding, was in the House on Friday and is continuing in 
his position as indicated by the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and will 
continue to be in that position, and information will be provided 
in due course. And the Leader of the Opposition knows that if 
there is an investigation being conducted, it would be highly 
improper for me to discuss that in this Assembly; and in fact the 
Leader of the Opposition should know better. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister has obviously misconstrued my question. My question 
did not deal with the subject of the investigation, but whether or 
not the investigation — the fact of the investigation — should 
have produced a different response from the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier: that is, whether there should have been a 
stepping down while the investigation was in progress. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you again: is it the position of your government 
that the investigation is not impairing the ability of the member 
to perform his public duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition asked that question last week. The Premier 
answered it, and the same answer applies today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. And in 
your judgement, the fact that the member has not performed any 
of the duties of being House Leader since that time in no way 
changes the response of last Monday? You’re saying that that in 
no way changes the response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has 
functions which he has been carrying out. The operation of the 
House has not been impaired, in our view, and the answer 
which the Premier gave the Leader of the Opposition applies 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again, the fact that all of the duties performed by the member 
for Souris-Cannington are now being performed by the member 
for Meadow Lake, does that not suggest to you that the 
investigation is impairing the ability of the member to carry on 
his public functions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has 
duties, which he is fulfilling. The House is functioning, Mr. 
Speaker. The answers that the Premier gave the Leader of the 
Opposition apply today, as they did last week. And I really have 
nothing further to add. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it your 
position that the onerous duties of being Provincial  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

730 
 

Secretary, or the duties in respect of certain Crown 
corporations, are taking all of the time of the Deputy Premier so 
that he is not having any time to devote to this House, and that 
is the reason why he’s not here — and not the investigation? Is 
that the position you’re taking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the answers we provided 
last week, and the answer I provided today, still stand. And I 
find it highly unusual that the opposition leader is concerned 
about the functioning of this House, considering all the time his 
members have been wasting dealing with the Health estimates, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, you indicated 
in your response to a question put to you by the member for 
Quill Lakes, I believe, that you would be making a statement 
when appropriate. Mr. Minister, would you tell us when it’s 
going to be appropriate, and under what circumstances it’s 
going to be appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the statements will 
be made when appropriate, in the proper course, is the 
procedure as is set out in our system of justice in Saskatchewan. 
And I can tell you that our system of justice will never be 
affected or guided by the political aspirations of the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
to do nothing and say nothing is probably the worst possible 
course of action under the circumstances. If the investigation 
has been completed and the allegations found to be 
unsubstantiated, why not make that clear? If the investigation 
has been completed and the allegations have been found serious 
enough to pursue further, why not make that clear? If the 
investigation is still under way and will not be completed for a 
number of days, why not make that clear and take the dignified 
course of action and ask the Deputy Premier to step aside until 
the investigation is complete and the matter resolved? Do you 
no think, Mr. Speaker, that your government owes to the public 
of Saskatchewan one of those three options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, the public in 
Saskatchewan have a high respect for our system of justice in 
this province — a system of justice that applies to everyone 
equally. And I think the people of Saskatchewan know perfectly 
well that it would be highly improper for me to discuss the issue 
with the members opposite at this time until justice has taken its 
course and until we’re able to do so in a proper, procedural 
way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, a question to the Minister of Justice. I 
want to ask a simple question, Mr. Minister. Would you advise 
us whether their investigation is still under way in respect to the 
Deputy Premier, the member from Souris-Cannington? Is there 
an investigation still continuing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, it would be highly 
improper of me to comment any further in regards to details. I 
have provided basic details, and the members opposite should 
know that, and I won’t divulge anything further in terms of any 
investigation or alleged investigation as indicated by the 
members opposite. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
Minister of Justice indicate to the people of Saskatchewan and 
this Assembly why it is improper for him to indicate whether or 
not a very important member of the cabinet, the Deputy 
Premier, is in fact continuing to be under investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, Mr. Speaker, I won’t comment 
further on that. And in due course the public will be able to see 
whether the members opposite have made sense in the past 
week involving the issue and the allegations brought into this 
House by the members opposite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I just want to be clear on what the 
minister is telling us. He is telling us that, in his judgement, if a 
minister of the Crown is under investigation, it is improper for 
him to reveal that fact; improper for him to confirm or deny that 
fact. I may say that the Premier did confirm or deny it, and I 
take it then that you’re taking the position that the Premier acted 
improperly in confirming the fact that the Deputy Premier was 
under investigation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is getting silly again. We’re involved here in an 
allegation, Mr. Speaker, and an indication that there is an 
investigation. If there is an investigation of any type, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe, as Minister of Justice, it’s highly improper 
of me to discuss the terms and details of any investigation in 
this Assembly. And the Leader of the Opposition should know 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister will know that nobody asked him the terms and the 
details. He will know that he was asked whether or not he can 
confirm that an investigation is now under way; that he refused 
to confirm or deny. I ask you again, Mr. Minister: are you 
prepared to confirm or deny that an investigation involving the 
Deputy Premier is under way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Dispute with Saskatchewan Doctors 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with a dispute that is presently 
going on between himself and the doctors of the province. And 
the minister will be aware that on May 22nd of ’85 you signed 
the Saskatoon Agreement II, an agreement between your 
government and the medical association, to end extra-billing. At 
that time you told the people of Saskatchewan, and I quote from 
— I believe it was — a news release: 
 

The spirit of co-operation and consultation with which this 
agreement was reached is consistent with the government’s 
approach throughout the health care system. 

 
Now just 12 months later the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association is saying that you “double-crossed” them, and they 
are demanding your resignation. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister: what has happened to that spirit of 
co-operation and consultation you bragged about when the 
agreement was signed just 11 months ago? 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

731 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that is true that the 
achievement of Saskatoon Agreement II, I think was arrived at 
in a very good method. There were a number of meetings which 
I was at personally myself and which we arrived at this 
agreement to eliminate extra-billing in the province. Since that 
period of time we have had about 13 negotiating meetings 
dealing with a settlement under the Saskatoon Agreement II. 
 
It seems that the medical profession are not wanting to 
negotiate at this time. Certainly, there has been no double-cross 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. In fact, we’re willing to 
negotiate at any time. As the members opposite know, the 
deputy minister of Health is the chief negotiator on our team. 
He presently is here with me in the estimates of the department, 
but as soon as I can free him up for negotiations, we will 
continue those negotiations. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question to 
the minister, and it’s interesting how, when there are meetings 
to be held in Estevan, he’s busy in the House; and when there 
are meetings to be held with the doctors, he’s busy in the 
House, and he just has not time to do the business of being 
minister. And when we’re dealing with him in the House, he 
says he doesn’t want to be here. 
 
I would ask the minister, if he doesn’t want to meet with nurses, 
and he doesn’t want to meet with doctors, and he doesn’t want 
to be here in the House doing his estimates, if he would talk to 
the Premier and hand in his resignation at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I won’t be doing that. That’s rather a 
silly comment, I would say, Mr. Speaker. As far as not meeting, 
I met — along with my colleague, the Minister of Finance — 
met with the SMA on Thursday afternoon. I was in contact with 
the president of the SMA, Dr. Barry Maber, on Friday. I urged 
the doctors of this province to get back to the negotiating table. 
 
I believe the stance of 12 per cent is certainly out of line. When 
we see wheat prices going down, oil prices going down across 
North America and across Canada, I think for doctors to be 
sitting on a figure of 12 per cent is totally unrealistic. When 
other health professions are settling with my department in the 
neighbourhood of 4, 4.5 per cent, then I believe that the doctors 
of this province should get back to the negotiating table. We’re 
willing to do that. 
 
I indicated that my chief negotiator is my deputy minister who, 
tradition indicates, is with you during the defence of your 
estimates. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I tell the members of the 
opposition and my colleagues in this Assembly, immediately 
upon the conclusion of that we will be negotiating in good faith. 
And I believe that if the doctors bring their demands down to a 
realistic point of view, we will have a settlement very quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am willing to ask the 
minister, if he is willing to go to meet with the doctors today, 
we will forego our questions in estimates and we  

can bring forth Urban Affairs. I wonder, on that agreement, 
whether we will cancel the Health estimates this afternoon so 
you can go and meet with the doctors, and we’ll get on with 
Urban Affairs today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think this is rather a strange 
proposal. I’m sure that if any type of negotiation . . . if the 
member opposite would realize that one of the negotiating team 
is Dr. Twanow from Melfort. I doubt if he could be here this 
afternoon. He’s probably home in his own practice. 
 
I will indicate to you again, as I will to this Assembly, that we 
are willing to negotiate; we will negotiate. I want to see 
movement; I want to see movement down from 12 per cent. I 
can’t agree with a 12 per cent raise in these economic times. 
When I see other jurisdictions such as Manitoba, offering 1.6 
per cent to its doctors; Ontario in the neighbourhood of 2 per 
cent; Alberta settled under 4 per cent, I can’t see the need for a 
12 per cent raise. 
 
But we are willing — let me tell you once again — we are 
willing to negotiate and negotiate in good faith in accordance 
with Saskatoon Agreement II, just as soon as we can be freed 
up from the estimates and get on with the job. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, in the 11 months since the signing of 
Saskatoon Agreement II, how many times have you personally 
met with the Saskatchewan Medical Association to discuss 
negotiations on a new fee schedule? How many times have you 
personally met with the Saskatchewan Medical Association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
doesn’t realize, I suppose, how negotiations take place in the 
health care system. I have negotiations with the 
physiotherapists, with the optometrists, with the nurses, with the 
pharmacists — the list goes on and on. I think there are about 
30 collective agreements within the Department of Health. 
 
I do not take part in any of those negotiations, and rightly I 
shouldn’t. I have negotiating teams that work with the various 
sectors. From time to time I meet with professional bodies. I 
met with the SMA, as I said, when we worked out Saskatoon 
Agreement II. I believe I was at every meeting, maybe with the 
exception of one. And that was about 12 meetings or so. I have 
met with the chairman of the SMA prior to the negotiating 
round here. I spoke at their convention, outlined to them exactly 
our government’s interpretation of Saskatoon Agreement II. 
And as late as Friday of last week my colleague, the Minister of 
Finance, and I met with three of the representatives — the 
president and the incoming president and another one of the 
executive of the SMA. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. 
And it deals with a clause in Saskatoon Agreement II where 
disputes of this nature can — and obviously it’s an opening for 
you to take it to a third-party arbitration. Now, Mr. Minister, if 
you believe your position is reasonable and fair, why are you 
afraid of having an independent third party review the dispute 
and decide? Why don’t you look at the option of going to  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

732 
 

arbitration which the doctors are now suggesting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a different 
suggestion than the doctors had when they met in my office on 
Thursday. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I would ask a new question 
of you. How in the world can you say that this is a different 
position than the doctors are taking when today, any number of 
times, the president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
has said that they are demanding your resignation because you 
won’t deal with them fairly, and you won’t allow the dispute to 
go to arbitration? This is what they’re saying publicly. 
 
And the question is, Mr. Minister, is your credibility or the 
credibility of the Saskatchewan Medical Association? Now 
having dealt with you, there are many people who will say the 
credibility of the Saskatchewan Medical Association will stand 
up to yours at any time. I will ask you at this point whether or 
not there is a proposal to take this dispute to arbitration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting of the 
negotiations there was no discussion of arbitration. Certainly 
that is an option, as found under the medical compensation 
review committee. If the doctors want to go to arbitration, I ask 
them to get back to the negotiating table and put that proposal 
forward to my negotiators. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is a strange position for the minister 
to be taking when he’s been telling the world that he can’t get 
involved. But I want to be clear. If the doctors put forward the 
proposal this afternoon of going to arbitration, you are then, and 
your department, are in agreement with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, if the doctors want to get 
back to the negotiating table, where the negotiations should take 
place, then we will entertain whatever suggestions they have. I 
want the doctors to get back to the table and get off the 
unrealistic 12 per cent figure. 
 
Maybe the member opposite believes that they should get 12 
per cent. So be it. But I believe, in these times, it is not within 
the realms of possibility to give a 12 per cent raise to the 
doctors of this province when I see other people having 
financial difficulties, I see the price of wheat going down, I see 
the price of oil going down. 
 
I’m willing to sit down and negotiate and explore all 
possibilities. My committee are. My people are willing to do 
that. I say, let’s get on with it, and I urge the doctors of the 
province to contact the chairman of my negotiating committee, 
the deputy minister of Health, to set up a meeting. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan doctors, as my 
colleague has indicated, have been asking for your resignation 
because you’ve failed to consult with them, and because you 
have failed to live up to the terms of the Saskatoon II 
Agreement. Saskatchewan nurses have complained that you 
refused to consult with them. And I remind you that you refused 
to meet with them, and all of your colleagues refused to meet 
with them, before your  

estimates ever began. I might also remind you that you can 
suspend your estimates and go to another department any time 
you choose, if you thought that the health care and the 
negotiations were important enough to do so. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: why are you afraid to meet with 
those in the health care system, and have consistently been 
refusing to do so, who want to talk to you about their ideas and 
their concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s complete, 
utter nonsense. The member opposite sat not two seats from me 
in the Regina Inn where we had a two-hour discussion with the 
nurses. He was there. So to sit up and say that we didn’t meet 
with the nurses is wrong, and I ask you to withdraw that 
remark. 
 
And to say that we haven’t met with the doctors — I met with 
the chairman of the SMA Thursday afternoon in my office. My 
colleague and I had a meeting for about an hour and a half with 
them. I was in telephone conversation with them on Friday. 
And I am also willing to have my negotiating team negotiate 
with them as soon as we possibly can arrange. it. 
 
So for the member to stand here and say that we won’t meet 
with them, when he was sitting not more than two seats from 
me at the same forum for two hours in the Regina Inn . . . I ask 
you to withdraw that statement. 
 

Staffing of Existing Hospital Facilities 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I might 
remind the minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I might remind the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, that at that nurses’ forum he refused to answer 
questions in the same way as he’s refused to answer questions 
during his estimates in this House. That’s the difference, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I want to ask the minister about another aspect of the health care 
policy which Saskatchewan doctors have criticized as recently 
as this weekend, and that is your failure to provide operating 
funds to existing hospitals and nursing homes, a well-known 
fact. The Saskatchewan Medical Association has noted that 
while you’re busy expanding facilities like St. Paul’s, that very 
same hospital has been forced to close beds for two of the last 
six months because they do not have the operating funds 
necessary to keep those beds operating. Those doctors are 
wondering why some of your attention has not gone to 
providing adequate staff and equipment and supplies to existing 
hospitals and nursing homes as well as the construction of new 
facilities. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, why have you not provided 
adequate staff and equipment to keep existing beds and 
facilities open while you’re busily trying to build new ones or 
announcing new ones strictly for political purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again the member 
attempts to mislead, indicating that I did not  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

733 
 

answer questions with the nurses. The other night on Cable 3 I 
saw the television reproduction of that, and if the member wants 
to look over it, you will see that, of the questions, I must have 
answered five to 10 times as many as the member opposite. So I 
don’t accept that kind of stuff coming from you, sir. 
 
Secondly, he questions about the money going into health care 
and the operating of hospitals and nursing homes. Let me 
indicate to you, Mr. Chairman, 11.6 per cent increase in the 
health care budget — and we know that about half of that 
budget goes to the operating of acute care hospitals in this 
province — and he has the gall to stand in this Assembly and 
say that there isn’t money going to the operation of hospitals. 
That’s complete balderdash! That’s all that is, complete 
nonsense and balderdash! 
 
And to hear him stand and say: should you be building new 
facilities? Should you be building onto St. Paul’s Hospital? 
Should you be building nursing homes? indicates to me that the 
member opposite is against the building of hospitals, is against 
the construction of nursing homes, is against the new cancer 
clinic, is against the new Wascana rehab centre, and is against 
new facilities in health care. That’s what he’s saying, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Decade of Disabled Persons 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to 
announce officially the proclamation of the Decade of Disabled 
Persons on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. The 
decade, which runs from 1983 to 1992, is being proclaimed in 
co-operation with the United Nations and other Canadian 
governments. The federal Canadian government proclaimed the 
decade late last year, and it is now appropriate for our 
government to follow. 
 
The 11 guiding principles associated with the decade will serve 
as a framework in meeting our ongoing responsibilities in 
providing rehabilitative and developmental resources and 
promoting independent living for persons who are physically or 
mentally disabled. 
 
Since 1982 we have made some major advances on behalf of 
the disabled, Mr. Speaker. A special division known as 
rehabilitation services was formed in the Department of Social 
Services to provide a focal point within government for dealing 
with the needs of disabled persons. In the last four years there’s 
been a 54 per cent increase in grants to the handicapped. 
 
New sheltered workshops, activity centres, or group homes 
were started in Cudworth, Preeceville, Kronau, Swift Current, 
Outlook, Langenburg, Porcupine Plain, Nipawin, Moosomin, 
and Weyburn. Programs were expanded in Rosthern, 
Waldheim, Melfort, Kindersley, Lloydminster, Redvers, 
Melville, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 

Accessibility legislation has been passed to ensure that 
handicapped people have ready access to buildings. We recently 
introduced an intervener program for deaf-blind persons. 
 
And here in Regina we established Canada’s first-ever group 
home for severely multi-handicapped children, the Chip and 
Dale Home. 
 
Last year there was a dramatic increase in the number of early 
childhood intervention spaces, and we introduced Canada’s first 
ever, province-wide telewriter communications program for the 
hard of hearing. 
 
A new one-year agreement will be signed with the federal 
government under the terms of the Vocational Rehabilitation of 
Disabled Persons Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our past commitment to the Decade of the 
Disabled has been impressive, but we recognize there is much 
more to be done. And so this year we are budgeting more than a 
5 per cent increase for grants and allowances for the 
handicapped. Mr. Speaker, new or expanded shelter workshop, 
activity centre, or group home programs will be offered in 
North Battleford, Maple Creek, Gravelbourg, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proclamation of the decade is evidence of our 
continuing commitment that the concerns of persons who are 
disabled will be of paramount importance to this government in 
the years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments 
on the minister’s statement on the decade of the disabled 
persons. At the onset, I would just simply want to say that it is 
time that ministers of this government, including the Minister of 
Social Services, took some of the things that face Saskatchewan 
people seriously and spent some time doing something about 
that, rather than simply spending all of their time doing paper 
press releases, which accomplish very little. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what the minister has done here today with his statement. 
 
If he would stand up . . . If he had stood up in his statement 
before this House and made some reference to the problems 
which the Ombudsman has brought to his attention, which 
involved disabled persons, Mr. Speaker, and responded to that 
in a concrete and positive way and indicated how he was going 
to do something to remedy the problems, then I think he would 
have done something worthwhile. 
 
Among the disabled persons, Mr. Speaker, includes many 
different kinds of people. And one of the disadvantaged are 
people who are finding themselves on the welfare rolls who are 
between the age of 55 and 65. Many of them are widows. They 
are unable to find jobs. The government has proposed nothing 
in the way of providing assistance to them in immediate 
pension release. As a matter of fact, there have been cuts of 
something like 4 per cent . . . 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

734 
 

An Hon. Member: — Forty per cent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Forty per cent in the funding. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the minister’s statement, although it may be 
laudable, and he touches some issues here that are sensitive and 
important, fails to make the point and fails to hit the mark that 
the government and he and his department, under his 
leadership, have failed to address the real needs faced by not 
only disabled people, but people who are disadvantaged in 
many kinds of ways in our society. 
 
And I think because of that, Mr. Speaker, that it is time, rather 
than just simply standing up in the House making statements 
and bragging about things they have nothing to brag about, the 
minister would be far better off if he would lean to the Premier, 
who maybe someday will show up back in this House again, 
and simply tell him to stand up . . . 
 

Organ Donor Awareness Week 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform 
members that the Hon. Jake Epp, federal minister responsible 
for Health and Welfare, has announced this week that it’s organ 
donor awareness week. I wish to join with him in supporting a 
commitment to greater public awareness of the benefits of 
organ donation. 
 
The decision to become an organ donor is one of the most 
generous and compassionate decisions we can make. Organ 
donation offers the gift of a healthy life to people who 
otherwise would not have this chance. Last year in Canada I 
understand that there were almost 2,000 organ transplant 
operations performed. But there are not enough donors to help 
all those that need it. 
 
If organ donation awareness week results in more people 
receiving this special kind of help, the week will have been a 
success. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 28  An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to spend some  

time with the minister going over the issue that we dealt with in 
question period in which the doctors are expressing a great deal 
of concern about, and that is what they see to be, I suppose you 
could call it, a double-cross, and they have suggested that of the 
minister, on Saskatoon Agreement II. 
 
Now obviously there is a great discrepancy on what the minister 
is saying about the agreement, what has been proposed, and 
what the doctors are publicly stating. I noted in coming into 
Regina today — I had an opportunity of listening to a number 
of programs and a number of newscasts on the way in, where I 
know over the weekend the past president and the new 
president are quoted as saying that because of a lack of 
consultation and a lack of progress in the negotiations on a new 
fee schedule, that the Saskatchewan Medical Association has 
taken what many people will see it to be the drastic step of 
calling for the minister’s resignation. 
 
And I suppose to start with, I will just ask you that 
straightforward question, because I don’t think it has been dealt 
with in the public: as a result of this call by the doctors for your 
resignation, has the Premier talked to you about this issue and 
asked for your resignation from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, the Premier has not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, he’s made a mistake. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of the 
fact that the doctors have obviously lost confidence in your 
ability to administer the department; the nurses, while not being 
as strident, are obviously indicating that they have a great deal 
of difficulty with your ability to administer the department. In 
talking to chiropractors and other people, they are indicating 
that they have difficulty getting meetings with you and 
consulting with you, and I know that the 8,000 people who are 
on the waiting list to get into Saskatoon for surgery have a great 
deal of difficulty believing that you have the best interest of the 
Health department in your grasp and are doing as much as you 
could. I would ask you: in light of that, have you personally 
considered over the weekend whether or not you would intend 
at this time to hand in your resignation and let someone who is 
more interested in going to meetings with nurses and more 
interested in meeting with doctors and more interested in doing 
estimates, I might add, to let someone else step in and do the 
job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I will not. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would only indicate to the minister 
that in light of the fact that you intend to carry on, I guess the 
opposition then will intend to continue to get answers out of 
you on some of these important issues. The first one I want to 
deal with is, in fact, the negotiations that are going on at the 
present time. One of the questions which I didn’t get a 
satisfactory answer to during question period: have you been 
involved personally in the negotiations to get a new fee 
schedule? Have you personally got involved in this dispute in 
terms of meeting with the doctors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

735 
 

member doesn’t listen very well. I answered the question five 
minutes ago, but I’ll do it again. He knows very well that 
minister of the Crown do not actively negotiate. I have about 30 
different agreements that I negotiate with a number of health 
professionals that are negotiated on behalf of my department. I 
have negotiating teams. With the nurses, the member knows 
that it is with the Saskatchewan Health Care Association. So I 
do not get directly involved in any of the negotiations. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the minister would imply 
that it’s never the case that ministers become involved in 
negotiations. And I would beg to disagree with you that from 
time to time, when negotiations between working people or 
between professionals break down, that ministers do get 
involved — in fact, even to the extent, in some cases, of the 
Premier of the province getting involved in the negotiations. 
And I would ask you whether or not approaches have been 
made to your office, by the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
for you to become involved in the negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman. Again I 
answered the same question 10 minutes ago, and I’ll answer it 
again, that I do not become actively involved with the 
negotiations with any of the health professions. From time to 
time I do meet with groups. I met with the SMA as late as 
Thursday last and was in telephone conversation with them on 
Friday. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The question to the minister: have you 
been approached to get involved in the negotiations by the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I think the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association know that I don’t become actively 
involved. So whether they think I do or not, I guess that’s up to 
them, but I do not become actively involved at the negotiating 
table, and I will not be becoming involved at the negotiating 
table. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, we have your answer to a question 
that wasn’t asked — you don’t get involved; but I want to go 
back to the question that I put to you: have they approached you 
to become involved in the negotiating process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, they haven’t asked me to become 
involved. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And have they approached your 
department — negotiators for you to become involved? For 
example, the deputy minister or anyone negotiating, have they 
approached through your team to become involved in the 
negotiations? 
 
You’ve indicated they haven’t approached you directly. But 
have they, through negotiators, asked you to become involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, they’ve never asked for me to come 
and sit at a negotiating table at all. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister is, as usual, very  

vague and beating around the bush, and the members laugh. 
The member from P.A.-Duck Lake thinks it’s very humorous. 
And they seem to think that this role of dealing with a billion 
dollar budget is unimportant. And the member from P.A.-Duck 
Lake laughs and giggles and obviously has a great deal of 
difficulty understanding what his role in the Assembly is as 
well. 
 
But if you want to get involved and defend the minister or ask 
questions, you have every right to do that. But if you’re going 
to sit in your seat and yell and holler as you’re doing right now, 
then we’ve got problems because we have a difficult time 
functioning if the chairman allows that kind of yelling by the 
member from P.A.-Duck Lake, because it’s difficult to ask and 
get answers. And I’m sure the minister has a difficult time with 
you hooting and hollering as well. And if the member from 
P.A.-Duck Lake, the Minister of Justice, if that’s all you’ve got 
to do with your time, then continue on. But we have important 
questions to ask, and we’ll be keeping at it. 
 
I would want to go back to the negotiating between the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and your department and 
ask you whether, at the present time, any meetings are planned 
for today or in the near future? Have you got meeting set up, or 
where are negotiations at, if you could bring us up to speed on 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There are no meetings set at this time. 
Under my last consultation and discussion with the chairman, 
the outgoing chairman and the new chairman, I’ve told them 
that we are able to, and ready to negotiate as soon as possible. I 
guess the one impediment is that the chief negotiator is the 
deputy minister who is seated beside me, and he’s also needed 
in the estimates. So when the estimates are not taking place, 
we’ll be willing to negotiate. The SMA realize that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’ve heard this boloney from the minister 
for too long, and I want to tell you that the doctors and the 
nurses and the people who are waiting are getting tired of this, 
that you never have time because you’re too busy. Well you’re 
supposed to go to Estevan to meet with the nurses; you 
announce to the nurses you can’t go because we’re sitting in the 
House — the House didn’t even sit that night. The House didn’t 
even sit. 
 
Now whether it was you or your staff who informed the nurses 
down there that you couldn’t go, I don’t know, but that game is 
getting a little tiring. Now today you say you can’t meet with 
the doctors because we’re in estimates. Now I want to tell you 
that we have given you the opportunity to postpone these 
estimates, and we’ll deal with Urban Affairs. And to that end, 
Mr. Chairman, I move we rise and report progress and ask for 
leave to sit again, in a different department, and allow the 
minister to go and negotiate with the doctors, because I’m tired 
of that phoney-boloney that he’s putting out to us. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member from Shaunavon can ask to 
rise and report progress, but he may not put conditions on it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise and 
report progress. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

736 
 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Blakeney Lusney 
Tchorzewski  Shillington 
Lingenfelter  Yew  
Koskie   
 

Nays — 24 
 
Birkbeck Dutchak 
McLeod  Dirks 
Andrew  Sandberg 
Lane  Klein 
Taylor  Currie 
Schoenhals  Maxwell 
Duncan  Morin 
Pickering  Parker 
Schmidt  Young 
Folk  Weiman 
Smith (Swift Current) Rybchuk 
Myers  Baker 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we now see that the 
argument about wanting to be out of here to deal with the 
doctors, and having to be here to deal with the estimates, is one 
that is used as an excuse more than a reason. Because 
obviously, the people from Urban Affairs were in the building; 
they are on stand-by by the government House Leader . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if they’re not, they should be, 
because the government House Leader has indicated they were 
on stand-by. And we could have moved very quickly into 
another department and done all the other estimates if they had 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. We are on the Department of 
Health. If you have a question for the minister in the 
Department of Health . . . We’re not on any other subject at the 
moment, so let’s proceed. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, talking about the 
Department of Health estimates, we are saying that we’re here 
in Health — could be in any other estimates — but we’re here 
because the minister wants to be here rather than dealing with 
the doctors. 
 
But I would indicate to the Assembly that, if estimates go on for 
the balance of today . . . Tomorrow’s a private members’ day. 
We will not be dealing with Health estimates. And at that time 
you will be freed up, Mr. Minister, to set up meetings and go 
deal with the doctors, because ministers of the Crown don’t 
usually get involved on private members’ day. 
 
So at that juncture, when we finish up tonight, if we’re still on 
Health estimates, you could have your staff today, right now, 
one of them go set up a meeting to try to solve the problem, if 
your problem is that you haven’t got time. Because tomorrow 
we won’t be dealing with estimates. 
 

And I wonder if you can tell the Assembly whether at this time 
you will have one of your staff go and solve that excuse you’ve 
been using of not having time because of Health estimates, 
because tomorrow you won’t be in Health estimates at any rate. 
The Assembly will be dealing with private members’ business. 
And the excuse you’re using of not having time, whether or not 
if you want a meeting you’ll have your staff set it up now for 
tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll certainly be looking at negotiating 
with the doctors, and we will make the arrangements when 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to follow that up. I heard your 
comments over the weekend that you were too involved with 
Health estimates to negotiate, or you were using that excuse. I 
wonder now whether you will tell the House clearly, or explain 
to us clearly, for tomorrow, if the doctors approach you for a 
meeting tomorrow, whether you’ll be available to meet with 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, again let me 
indicate to the member for the fourth time that I do not 
negotiate at the table. I told the chairman of the SMA, the 
incoming chairman, Dr. Hubbard, at my meeting on Thursday, 
if he wants to meet with me and consult about various things, 
certainly that can be arranged. 
 
As far as negotiations, I’ve made it very, very clear at the 
meeting with the doctors that as soon as possible we will be 
willing to negotiate. It may well be that we can do it tomorrow, 
but they have to come from distant parts of the province, and 
certainly we will be exploring whatever avenues are possible to 
try and bring about a settlement to this negotiation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated again that he’s 
not going to get involved in the negotiations, and clearly the 
question was whether he would meet with the medical 
association if they requested a meeting tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I told the incoming 
chairman on Thursday that I would meet with him at any time. 
The Minister of Finance and I indicated that to him in my 
office. So I don’t know what more I have to do. I’m sure he’s 
aware of it. Dr. Hubbard is very aware of that, and if he wants 
to have a meeting with me, I’m sure he will give me a call. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, over the 
last four years you have continuously said that it’s so important 
to you and your government to have appropriate consultations 
with all sectors of the health system in order for you to make 
your decisions. I think what we have seen happening in the last 
week and, indeed, weeks previous to this is that your so-called 
consultation has not really been consultation. One of the things 
that your government and you, as the Minister of Health, have 
said to hospitals and nursing home boards is yes, we will 
consult with you, and then we will consult with the medical 
profession because that’s sort of the pillar of our consultation 
process. That’s the position you have been taking. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

737 
 

Now we see this so-called pillar of your consultation process 
has fallen apart. It’s collapsed around you. It’s collapsed around 
your government — because I submit, Mr. Minister, you cannot 
continue to fudge your way along as a government and not do 
anything and simply meet with people and pretend you will do 
something, and keep on a friendly basis with them for ever. And 
here we are, in the fourth year of your government — actually 
going into the fifth year of your government. There have been 
no results come forward, and so you shouldn’t be surprised that 
it’s all falling around you now, because all of those people to 
whom you have been pretending that there is a great deal of 
consultation have realized that that’s all it is. It’s a nice little 
dialogue without anything coming out of it at the other end. 
 
The Saskatoon II Agreement which you signed — and maybe 
you should not have signed some provisions in it. I don’t know. 
That’s a judgement you and your government have to make — 
clearly said that there is a mechanism available to refer disputes 
between the negotiations between the government and the 
medical association. And it seems to me, if I am reading the 
news reports correctly and listening to the television reports 
correctly, what the Saskatchewan Medical Association is saying 
is that you’re not living up to that agreement, Mr. Minister. 
Why are you not living up to that agreement, and why are you 
therefore not prepared to go the third party route? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well first of all, on the topic of 
consultation, I just want to inform you that it was brought to my 
attention by the hospitals in Saskatoon that within the first year 
and a half of becoming Minister of Health that I had met more 
times with the Saskatoon hospitals than the previous Health 
minister who lived in the city of Saskatoon. That’s fact. you can 
check the record. You’ll see that. 
 
Secondly, in connection to consultation, I don’t think ever 
before has there been as massive consultation as there has been 
through the long-term care workshops — over 2,500 people. 
Certainly working out Saskatoon Agreement II— as I indicated 
to you, I was present at virtually every meeting. 
 
So I don’t think it’s very fair for you to stand here and say there 
has been a lack of consultation when there has been far more 
consultation than previously. For you to indicate that we are not 
following Saskatoon Agreement II, and for the doctors to 
indicate that, simply is just not correct. We have been following 
Saskatoon Agreement II to the letter. 
 
As far as arbitration or referral to a third party, both mediation 
or arbitration, they are part and parcel of the consultation 
process. The doctors, if they want to go that route, let them 
come and meet with my negotiators and so indicate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am sure from what I hear the doctors 
saying, or the president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association saying, they would love to be able to meet, but you 
have been unprepared to meet. We gave you an opportunity 
here this afternoon to arrange a time to meet. We offered to get 
off the Department of Health estimates because we have a lot of 
questions to ask yet. 
 

And we offered to go to another department, which has been on 
standby now for over a week, and you refuse. So really, your 
sincerity about offering to meet has got to be somewhat 
questioned. 
 
You see, Mr. Minister, the point isn’t the consultation. That’s 
fine and good, and there should be some, and other ministers 
before you have had those kind of processes. The difference 
between now and the past is that in the past, after those 
consultations there were results. At the present and in the last 
four years, after those consultations there have been no results. 
 
One of the things that consultation does is solves ongoing 
problems of administration. There are a number of problems 
that are not being solved. And I want to ask you this question 
very straightforwardly: if this consultation has been working so 
well, Mr. Minister, why do physicians in many cases have to 
wait as long as three months to get their payments on their fee 
schedule for services rendered? That’s one of the problems that 
is faced by the Medical Care Insurance Commission. Why is it 
taking up to three months for some of those payments to be 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I believe the consultation 
has been working, and I think there has been results of the 
consultation. The member can have his interpretation of that, 
but certainly I feel that it has worked very, very well. 
 
In the present round of negotiations there is a bit of an impasse 
which I am optimistic can be overcome, and I think the only 
way that will happen is for the doctors to get back to the table. 
As I said in question period, get back to the table and get into 
the realistic ballpark of demands. And I urge them to do that. 
And if they want to go to arbitration, then that’s an avenue that 
either party can suggest. But the only way that can happen is if 
they get back to the negotiating table. So I would like to see that 
take place. 
 
As far as the condemnation of the consultation procedure that’s 
taken place in the Department of Health, the member can have 
his point of view if he so wishes. But I tell him it’s wrong— 
that there’s been more consultation in the last four years than 
there was previously, and that consultation has provided results. 
That consultation has come up with the $100 staff enrichment 
program. That consultation has come up with the $300 million 
health capital fund. That consultation has come up with the 
chiropody program. 
 
I could go on and on and on and indicate to you the new 
initiatives and the improvements in health care that has come 
about by the consultation. And if you deny that, I ask you to go 
to the senior citizens of this province. And you go back to ask 
them the first time that my colleague, the Hon. Pat Smith, who 
was the minister of Social Services at the time . . . We’d been 
ministers for about two weeks. We went to Yorkton to the 
Saskatchewan Senior Citizens Association rally. 
 
There must have been 5 or 600 seniors there. They had a 
number of resolutions. I remember the two of us saying, what is 
your main priority? They said, well one thing that  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

738 
 

we have talked about over the past six or seven years is a 
chiropody program. Well, after an explanation of what on earth 
a chiropody program was, we came back, and it’s been 
implemented, and it’s totally in place in this province. 
 
So for that member to stand up and say that consultation has not 
brought about results is simply not correct. And I could go on 
all afternoon and cite you example after example after example 
where the consultation process has worked to the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
True enough, at this time there seems to be some road-block in 
negotiations with the medical profession. But I’m optimistic 
that we will over come those. The way we’ll overcome it is for 
the doctors to come back with a realistic proposal and get to the 
table. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me just ask my question again, Mr. 
Minister, because in your dissertation you forgot to answer it. 
The question is: why is it taking up to three months for the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission to pay the bills, or pay the 
fees to physicians for services that they render from time to 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well this must be a very rare incident that 
the member is alluding to, because the average payment is well 
in less than 30 days. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I submit to you, if the average 
payment is less than 20 days, then there’s an awful lot of 
payments that are taking a long, long time, to get you average to 
that level, Mr. Minister. It seems to me that three months in 
almost any case, unless you have a dispute, is an inordinate, 
long period of time. 
 
There is something wrong. Either the money from the 
Department of Finance isn’t being made available quickly 
enough, which, with the kind of mismanagement we’ve seen 
with this government, I wouldn’t be a bit surprised; or there is 
something else wrong that’s causing . . . And it’s not the rare 
occasion, because I happen to know from conversations I have 
had that it happens quite often; that there is a delay of up to 
three months. 
 
Now why would there be — even in your terms, the rate 
occasion — up to a three-month delay in the payment of a bill 
for services rendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t know what incident, and it 
has to be a single incident, because the officials were telling me 
that at the 13 meetings, in the 13 negotiating meetings, this has 
never been raised as an issue once. There’s been no concern 
about late payment, that pretty well all the payments are made 
well in excess of 30 days. 
 
Now you may know of an isolated incident, and if you do I 
would ask you to relate that to me. If it’s an individual, you 
don’t have to bring his name forward in this House; you can 
have the option of sending the issue to me with a page. I will 
look into it and have my officials look into it. And if there is 
some area where there has been a mess-up, we would address it 
with the individual. But I can assure you, in the main that 
certainly isn’t the way the commission operates. 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister 
about the news report over the weekend and in today’s Regina 
Leader-Post, that the headline, “Hospital expansions criticized.” 
And I know we’ve touched on this before, about the waiting list 
in Saskatoon, for example, being 8,000 waiting for surgery, and 
then the irony of having beds closed — 77 of them — for some 
time at St. Paul’s Hospital. 
 
Can you tell me at this time whether any beds are closed in the 
city of Saskatoon due to the lack of funding or staffing, or for 
any other reason? Are any of those beds still closed? I believe 
there were some in pediatrics at the University Hospital, as 
reported by one of the officials of the hospital in the press in 
Saskatoon about, oh, three or four months ago, and also 77 beds 
at St. Paul’s. Are any of those beds still closed? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They indicate that the only ones that are 
closed are the pediatric beds, and we have initiatives in this 
budget to have those re-opened. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could the minister explain how many 
beds are closed in the pediatric ward at the University Hospital 
and how long they’ve been closed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There are six beds, and they’ve been 
closed since May of ’85. And, as I repeat, there are initiatives in 
this budget to have them opened. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well can the minister explain why these 
beds are closed and if . . . They’ve been closed for a year now. 
And it seems to me, when you’re putting large amounts of 
money into hospital construction . . . On two floors above the 
pediatric ward you can hear people hammering and building, 
and I don’t think anyone’s arguing that they shouldn’t be 
building. That’s not the question. 
 
But the irony for the staff and the patients in the hospital is to 
see the empty beds on one floor, and they’re told that they can’t 
have them open because there is no money, and at the same 
time they’re building more beds up above. And I’m sure you, 
Mr. Minister, will realize the public and the people who work in 
the hospital simply don’t understand that. 
 
And I wonder if you can explain why these beds have been 
closed for that length of time — almost a year — and the need 
is there. The unemployment is high. Certainly there are many 
people around looking for jobs and can work in the health field. 
What is the reason for having those beds closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly. The reason is there was a 
decision by the University Hospital board to reassign funding 
from pediatrics to other resources. In fact, pediatrics, thank 
goodness, with the preventive and inoculations and vaccinations 
we have, not as many children are in the hospitals as they were 
previously. So the consensus in the pediatrics was such that 
reduced capacity could accommodate the expected demand. 
 
The number of pediatric beds were reduced from 53 to  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

739 
 

47. There have been no emergency admissions. No emergency 
admissions have been or will be turned away, and in looking at 
the Saskatoon scene, there were unused pediatric beds at other 
Saskatoon hospitals. So if you look at the total service to 
pediatrics in Saskatoon, there have been none turned away at 
the University Hospital, and some of the ones at the other 
hospitals that were not being used are taking up the slack. 
 
So it was a decision of the board to best deploy their resources 
where they best felt they were meeting the needs of University 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — During the past year then, at the 
University Hospital, we’ve seen these beds closed for almost a 
full year. Are there any other beds at that hospital that have 
been closed during the last year; and if you’ll indicate which 
area they are in of the hospital, and the number in each of those 
areas, and the number of days they were closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — From time to time through the year, due 
to holidays by doctors and staff, there are beds closed from time 
to time in hospitals. That has taken place at University. They 
tell me at the present time that isn’t taking place. There are no 
beds closed other than the pediatric ones that we have 
discussed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
minister has indicated that there have been in pediatrics a 
number of beds that were closed since last May, but over the 
last year can you indicate how many other beds were closed in 
different areas, and I’m quite sure that . . . In fact, I know that 
there have been other beds at hospitals in Saskatoon closed over 
the past year, and what I’m looking for is the number of beds 
that were closed, and I would like the area and the number of 
days each of them was closed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As you know, for the past ten years there 
has been the custom of, at certain holiday times, Christmas for 
example, that beds are closed down because of: number one, 
doctors taking holidays; because of staff taking holidays; 
thirdly, because of some individuals choosing to stay at home 
Christmas rather than going to a hospital. 
 
He’s asked for the number of beds, the wards, and the number 
of days. I will provide that to you. I don’t have it at my finger 
tips at this time, but we’ll provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I want to get those numbers 
because you had the number for the pediatric ward, and I’m 
sure that in somebody’s book they will have them there at the 
present time. And while you’re at it, if you get for St. Paul’s 
Hospital the number of beds that are now closed at the present 
time. If you’ll give me that right now, and then I’ve got some 
other questions on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll get that as quickly as we can for 
you. If another member of the opposition has questions that we 
can go on and discuss, we will do that. As quickly as I have the 
figures for St. Paul’s, I will give them to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the minister could just explain the 
process here. Has someone in the room got the numbers  

of the number of beds closed in St. Paul’s right now at the 
present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t have them in the room at this 
time. We’ll have to contact the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it seems interesting, Mr. Minister, 
that you would have some of them, namely the University 
Hospital, the pediatrics, but you don’t have St. Paul’s. Have you 
instructed one of your people to go get them? I haven’t seen 
anyone leave the room. Have you instructed someone to go get 
those numbers, because we’re wanting them here so we can 
continue on our debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’re going to get them as quickly as 
possible for you. You mentioned why we had the pediatrics. I 
had requested that those be brought forward because I 
remember you raising that specifically earlier, so I asked for 
that information. As quickly as we can get the information, 
we’ll provide you with it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We had also raised St. Paul’s Hospital — 
the closures there. If you’re talking about the reason that you 
had the pediatrics of the University Hospital, if that’s the logic 
you’re using, then I would assume that you would have had for 
St. Paul’s. Can you give an estimate? I’m sure the people who 
are sitting around you would have an estimate of how many 
beds are closed at the present time. And over what time period 
was the announced 77-bed closure . . . How long did that stay in 
force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We will try and get that as quickly as we 
can. As you know, the pediatric ones have been closed for some 
time, and we have that information. These other ones, there may 
be one or two closed today. I don’t know. I’ve sent someone to 
find out as quickly as he possibly can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Does the minister have the information 
on City Hospital in Saskatoon? We know that we have 8,000 
people waiting to get into those hospitals, and the irony that we 
would have any beds closed when the waiting lists are 8,000 . . . 
It simply isn’t understood by the public, nor do I think it should 
be understood by the public, how you can be closing beds in 
Saskatoon at a time when we have 8,000 people, Saskatchewan 
residents, paying taxes and waiting to get in — and building 
hospitals at the same time. 
 
Now you have stood up and explained how, because of holidays 
and because of this and that, you’re closing beds in Saskatoon 
at the same time as you have 8,000 people waiting on waiting 
lists for surgery. Then in the next breath you say, but I didn’t 
think it was important enough to bring the numbers to the 
Assembly, that’s how well I’m prepared. 
 
And after two weeks of trying to get answers out of you, for 
you to come here without those kinds of important numbers, I 
think it’s obviously why we’re having to spend such a long time 
in trying to get answers. Because these are perfectly reasonable 
and very simple questions that are being asked by members of 
the opposition, and ones that should be anticipated by the 
minister. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

740 
 

Obviously we’ve been concerned about waiting lists in 
Saskatoon. We’ve raised it in question period a number of 
times. And I would think that a minister who is in tune with the 
issues in his department would come to the Assembly briefed to 
the hilt, and his staff would come here with all the information 
in briefing books, and I think they do come here. 
 
But I think that way you’re doing is attempting to avoid the 
embarrassment by not giving the information, because I don’t 
believe that your staff don’t have those numbers with them. I 
don’t believe that your good staff doesn’t know on a day-to-day 
basis how many hospital beds are closed in Saskatoon — in a 
sensitive area where the hospital waiting lists are a big issue. 
 
To tell me that none of your staff know how many beds are 
closed, or which ones were closed in the last year, and that they 
wouldn’t have brought it in their briefing book, and that of the 
10 or 15 or 20 people that you have here with you today, not 
one of them has a briefing book that indicates which beds were 
closed in Saskatoon, I just want to ask you the question: do you 
expect the public and the opposition to believe that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve indicated to the 
member I have no reason to want to mislead you or the member 
or anyone else, that I want the most up-to-date information. He 
wants to know how many beds are closed in Saskatoon. My 
officials are looking into that. It’s just as soon as we have the 
accurate information of what it is today, we will provide it to 
him. I think that’s being fair, and I don’t think he can ask for 
anything more. I mean, he wants to know what the situation is 
today. I have officials contacting the hospitals right at this time 
to find out what it is at this present time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if what you’re hanging you hat on is 
the fine term of today, then we’ll go back and . . . The estimates 
started two weeks ago. Let’s use a date two weeks ago. Let’s 
say April 1st, and at the time is when the briefing books 
Saskatchewan would have been put together and everyone 
would have had time to prepare and come . . . because we were 
all expecting estimates. On April 1st, from April 1 of 1986 back 
to April 1 of 1985, do you have the numbers for that time 
period for those three hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate there has been no 
designed closing or deliberate closing of any beds other than 
those six pediatrics that I explained. Now there can be a 
temporary close for various administrative reasons within a 
hospital for a day or two here to move something around. Do 
you want that information? Please be very explicit in what 
information you want, so that we can provide you with the 
exact information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I would like is the list of beds that 
were closed in that time period, from April 1st of 1985 to April 
1st of 1986, for each of the hospitals in Saskatoon: University, 
St. Paul’s, and City Hospital; and a number of beds that were 
closed in each time period, and the area of the hospital that they 
were in for whatever reason. And I’m not questioning here the 
reason whether they were planned or otherwise or staff holidays 
were planned around the closures. What I want you to, if you  

could, is just stand up and say at University Hospital, in this 
area this many beds were closed between June 8th and June 
10th, and if you want to give the reason you can; that’s not 
important to me, but I want to be very clear. 
 
The question that I want to ask is: how many beds were closed, 
for what period, in each of the three hospitals, and for what time 
period for whatever reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’re getting that information for you. If 
there were deliberate closures for periods of time in the three 
hospitals in Saskatoon over the last year, we’ll have that 
information for you. 
 
Now I’m still not clear. If, say, there may be a bed closed today 
for X number of reasons — you know, there may be repairs to a 
room or something of this nature. The oxygen may have broke 
or something like that, and there’s no one in that bed, do you 
want to know all of those things too, because that would take 
considerable more time. If you need just deliberate bed closures 
or things of this nature, we have phoned for those. But if you 
want to know every one, we will have to go back and get that 
information. 
 
I would like you to indicate if that’s what you’re wanting, too. 
Let’s take the example of, say the oxygen isn’t working in a 
room and that bed for that day is vacated, and then it’s repaired 
that day and the next day someone is in that bed. Do you want 
that information also? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I would like is the beds that were 
closed, and I’ll use the example of St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon, as you were indicating, for staff holidays. Now 
you’re the one who referred to those 77 beds being closed for 
that reason. I’m not putting words in your mouth, but let’s start 
there. 
 
You continually try to get things thrown in that are irrelevant to 
the debate. But let’s take the 77 beds and go at this very slowly 
because you’re having a difficult time getting the questions 
down. But let’s say the 77 beds at St. Paul’s: which beds were 
closed, in what area of the hospital, and for what time period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll get that information for you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, here again I want to 
get it clear: do you have the information in the Assembly on 
that issue, or is that, too, not in anyone’s briefing books? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have to get the information from the 
hospitals. As I’ve pointed out many times, the hospitals are 
autonomous boards. They make decisions. Sometimes they 
decide to make a close over a holiday period of time. But if the 
member wants to know exactly what beds were closed during 
that period of time, we’ll be only too glad to get that 
information from the hospitals. We’re trying to get it as quickly 
as we can. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the issue here is that we’re not 
getting any information. I mean, obviously, I’ve asked a 
number of questions about hospital closures in Saskatoon and I 
referred to the 77 that we asked questions about in  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

741 
 

question period, and you have no answers to it. And obviously 
the reason that we have been here two weeks and may be here 
another week is because every time we ask a question about an 
area in your department, you don’t know anything. 
 
And what I really have a difficult time believing is . . . and the 
difficult position you’re putting your staff in, because obviously 
they know the answers to these questions, otherwise you 
wouldn’t have them around you. Obviously they would know 
that, because at any time press people will walk up to you and 
you’ll have to answer these kinds of questions, and you would 
know. 
 
I think it’s obvious that what is happening here is that a minister 
who is trying to keep the lid on a boiling kettle in the Health 
department is simply trying to avoid the questions, and then two 
weeks later or a month later he will then take an opportunity to 
quietly send the information, as he has done in the past, so that 
no one will know about it. 
 
Well the estimates are important so that the public know what is 
going on in the department. It isn’t a matter of trying to hide 
information and then quietly putting it out later so the public 
don’t know. That isn’t what estimates are about. The estimates 
obviously are the issue of taxpayers’ money. We’re spending 
over a billion dollars here in this department, and what we’re 
trying to get to the bottom of is where the money is being spent 
and where it isn’t. And obviously you may be saving some 
money by closing these hospital beds. But it’s difficult for us to 
know when you don’t have any answers. 
 
And this process is going to take us for ever unless we can start 
getting some answers. And what I would like to do is, we’ll 
continue on in a number of other questions, but would you, Mr. 
Minister over supper, take the opportunity, and can you give us 
the commitment that you’ll bring these numbers back on 
hospital bed closures when we come back after supper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the pattern hasn’t changed much 
over the years. In fact it was better in the last couple of years at 
St. Paul’s. They operated at a higher ADC (approved daily 
census) than they ever had done before. But I will give the 
commitment, just as soon as I have the information, that I will 
give it to the member opposite. I have people trying to get the 
hospitals to put it together at this point in time so it’s the most 
up to date and the most accurate. As soon as I have that I’ll be 
pleased to provide it to the opposition. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just ask the minister again, and I 
just want to get clear on this: will you be bringing those 
numbers back tonight? Can you give us that commitment that 
somebody will go do that now over the next hour before offices 
close and make a phone call and bring those numbers to us 
tonight for the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have people working on it right now, 
and there’s an hour or so before work quits, I suppose, at the 
hospitals. If they can bring it together, I will certainly bring it. 
But as soon as I have it, I will deliver it to him. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well this is an important issue because 
we want to get the answer to this before we leave estimates. 
And it will have something to do with the timing of the end of 
these estimates — this and other questions. And if those 
numbers are here tonight, that will help us decide whether or 
not we get through estimates today or go on to Wednesday. But 
I will want those answers. 
 
And I’ll tell you again right now, what I need is for the three 
base hospitals in Saskatoon — University, St. Paul, and City; 
and for the three base hospitals in Regina — the Plains, the 
Pasqua, and the General. If you’ll get me the same numbers of 
the beds that were closed, what time period, and we will expect 
those tonight. And if they’re not here tonight, then we’ll have to 
come back Wednesday and wait for them, because it gets very, 
very tiresome and tedious for the members of the opposition to 
be asking questions and to be stonewalled by the minister. And 
it makes it tough for the people who are listening and watching 
to try to find out what the answers are, to try to get any 
information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well the Minister of Urban Affairs says that nobody’s listening 
or watching. Well he lives in a different world than I do, 
because the million taxpayers in this province who see a billion 
dollar deficit are interested — 2 billion — are very interested in 
what goes on in the spending priorities. And I know that 
members of the government benches say that all of this is 
unimportant, and we can just spend this money the way we 
want, and no problem. But what kind of arrogance from a 
massive majority government, I think is one of the reasons that 
this government has a few problems, because the arrogance of 
these people to come here to this Assembly and treat with 
disdain the billions of dollars of taxes that have to be paid each 
year simply doesn’t go unnoticed. And here again, I want you to 
. . . If you could give me a commitment now that we will be 
getting those numbers tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it would make it a 
lot easier if the member would get his homework together. We 
started this line of questioning about 20 minutes ago. It started 
with University Hospital; it went to St. Paul’s Hospital; now 
City; then the member gets up and said how about the three 
Regina hospitals. If he would have asked me about that 20 
minutes ago, I could have had my people looking for all of 
those. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You should have this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now the minister who likes to yell from 
his seat says you should have had this. Let me indicate to you 
that the decisions within the hospitals are made by the hospitals 
— they’re made by the hospitals. They’re made on a day-to-day 
basis, on a week-to-week basis. Now for me to come with a 
bunch of statistics at the beginning of estimates, which do not 
reflect the situation as to today, would not be giving the exact 
information. I have no intention to not give the exact 
information. That is why, on matters pertaining to the hospitals 
and so on, we are in contact with them now, and we will be in 
. . . we’re in contact with the Regina and Saskatoon ones; now 
we’ll be in contact with Regina. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

742 
 

But if they really want to speed things up, if they would have 
stood up and said, look, we’re concerned — and they have 
every right to be concerned, I don’t question that — we’re 
concerned about bed closures. There are six base hospitals in 
the province of Saskatchewan; we want to see what the bed 
closures were. Mr. Minister, would you attempt to give us as 
soon as possible the bed closures of this, this, this, this, the six 
hospitals — if they’d done that half an hour ago, we might have 
the information by now, but to drag them out and just keep 
adding on just makes it more difficult for my staff to get the 
information. 
 
But I give the commitment to the member that as soon as I have 
that information, the minute I have it, I will give it to the 
opposition to continue on with their line of question and 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister will want to set out 
how he would like the questions phrased and asked and the tone 
of voice that he would like them asked in, but obviously that 
isn’t his job. The job of the chairman is to monitor the 
arguments between the members, and I will ask questions as I 
see fit, and I will live with the way I ask my questions and you, 
sir, will deal with the answers you give, because they aren’t 
adequate. The answers you give have fallen short in every area, 
and you’ve weasled your way out of giving answers time after 
time again, and this is a very important issue of bed closures. 
 
Now you can say that the boards make up their minds which 
beds they’re going to close, and everyone knows that, but you 
may be surprised to know that their decisions are based on 
funding that comes from the government. You may be of the 
opinion that it has nothing to do with your department when 
hospitals decide to close beds, but that shows the stupidity of 
your argument in saying that. It shows how ridiculous you are 
when you say that the hospital boards will decide which beds to 
open and close. 
 
Obviously it’s based on the funding that comes from your 
department. And what they’re saying is that we have to close 
pediatric beds at the University Hospital in Saskatoon. We have 
to make that decision because the government is starving us for 
funds. But at the same time they have money for new 
construction because the press releases the minister wants to 
make. And they have a great deal of difficulty understanding 
how you’re getting away with not answering these questions of 
why you’re not funding properly existing beds, at the same time 
as you’re building new ones. 
 
And obviously what should be happening is every bed should 
be open every day with the exception, as you mention, of 
remodelling and that sort of thing. But there’s no way that 
pediatric beds at the University Hospital should be closed for a 
year because of lack of funding from the provincial 
government, and lack of funding from the federal government 
because they’re cutting back as well. 
 
I just say to you that these kinds of answers should have been 
anticipated by yourself. I feel they were, by your department 
people who are with you. I think what is  

happening is you’re stonewalling and putting your people in a 
very difficult position. And the time period that we’re talking 
about is not today. The question was framed very clearly: the 
beds that were closed from April 1 of 1985 to April 1 of 1986? 
 
Now you may want to make up your mind that you want to 
exclude the answer by extending it to today because you don’t 
have that information, but the public knows what you’re doing. 
Obviously you’re doing the same thing here as you did with the 
nurses; the same thing you did with the doctors; and I say it’s 
unfair to play this kind of politics with people who are waiting 
to get into hospitals. And it’s unfair to treat the committee this 
way as well, to come so ill-prepared, or in such a closed nature 
that you won’t give the answers. 
 
Now what I would like to know is whether or not after supper 
you will have that information for the committee? It doesn’t 
take a great deal of personal fortitude for you to stand up and 
say yes, I will have that information tonight, because everyone 
knows you can get it; it will be in the department. 
 
Obviously, in knowing that it’s in the department doesn’t mean 
that I believe that you run the hospital. But you do have that 
information. Obviously you do. We’ve been in government 
before. We know full well that you were aware and brought up 
to par on what beds were closed and when, and the department 
keeps those records. Obviously you fund each of those beds, so 
you would know which ones were closed for what time period. 
That would also be in your computer. You don’t have to check 
with the hospitals to find out which beds were closed; you know 
full well. It would take two minutes for someone, if they 
haven’t got the information with them — and I believe they do 
have — two minutes for you to send someone to your office, 
tell them to get the information, and be back. 
 
And what you’re doing here is stonewalling. And call it what it 
is, it’s simply a minister who’s not doing his job. And this is 
why doctors are demanding your resignation, and nurses are 
saying you aren’t doing your job. And more importantly, the 
8,000 people who are waiting to get into surgery in Saskatoon 
are wishing that you would go somewhere else, get a different 
job, because they don’t believe you’re doing a good job of 
carrying on your department. 
 
And I say to you that these kinds of very simple answers should 
be at your fingertips and at the fingertips of your staff. They’re 
in your department. obviously each closed bed wouldn’t get 
funding, and you would have that in your computer. And so to 
try to pretend that you have to now go and canvass each 
hospital and find out that information, simply isn’t accurate, and 
the public knows that. 
 
I would say to you that this avoidance of the answers in trying 
to hide and keep your political skin, at a time when you’re in 
trouble and under heat from the press and from the public, 
simply isn’t good enough. 
 
In fact, you should be doing the opposite. Instead of acting 
arrogant and carrying on this big government  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

743 
 

image of hiding things from the public, you should be saying 
look, the public is mad at me; they’re on the verge of turfing us 
out of office as a result of our arrogance; the doctors are mad; 
the nurses are mad; and come here in the Assembly and say, 
look, I’m going to change — I’m going to start giving answers. 
And instead we see even worse response from the minister 
when it comes to try to get some very, very simple answers to 
some questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, for the member opposite 
to indicate that the only factor in keeping beds open is operating 
expenses shows his complete lack of understanding of the 
administration of a hospital. 
 
There are many factors that come into priorities set by hospital 
boards, and boards have that right to set those priorities. There 
may be the mix of patients. That could be one thing that he 
would not allude to or give any credence to that being a factor 
that may indicate what beds are open or closed. There is the fact 
of holidays for staff. There’s the medical component, the 
availability of medical manpower. There are a number of 
complicating factors. To try and boil it down to some simplistic 
issue — of saying, just funding — simply shows the complete 
lack of understanding of the operation of an acute care hospital. 
 
And furthermore to that, Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to bring it 
to the attention of the committee that the operating costs for 
hospitals has gone up $156 million since 1981-82, or 45 per 
cent over that period of time. So to indicate that it is funding, 
when there’s been a 45 per cent increase over the last four 
years, simply is not credible. 
 
I’ve told the member we will get that information from the 
hospitals. I have people working on it now. I will give the 
commitment again. As soon as it is here, I will provide it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister could inform the 
Assembly and the people of the province when we will get the 
answer? Can you give us a commitment that we’ll get it tonight, 
or on Wednesday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think as we look at it, as 
I said there’s probably . . . I don’t know the quitting times at the 
hospital, but let’s say it’s 5 o’clock. They’re looking at that 
information, bringing it together. I’m sure the hospitals want to 
give the most accurate information as quick as it comes in. I 
can’t give a guarantee that they’ll have it all in by 5 o’clock, but 
as quickly as they can get it in — there’s people contacting 
them now — we will provide it. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not impressed, to 
say the least, with your inability to answer questions about 
hospital closures in a very important area, in Saskatoon — as all 
of the hospitals are. And I know full well that you would 
monitor closures in hospitals, and your department would keep 
a record of it, and that these numbers would be in someone’s 
briefing book. Obviously that is the case. But if you want to use 
the excuse of going to the hospitals to save some political face 
now, I will allow you that corner to get into, but not  

for very long. 
 
And I will move off of this area and allow my colleagues to 
become involved on some other issues. But after supper I will 
come back, and we will ask the questions again. And after 
supper you can come back and say, we did a survey of the 
hospitals — when in fact you’re going to go to somebody’s 
briefing book and take out the information. But if you want to 
save face in that way, we’ll give you the three hours to do it and 
allow my colleagues to get in. And then after supper I intend to 
be back here asking those same questions again, and we’ll see 
whether you’ve had an opportunity to get them together for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that that 
information that the member is asking for, the up-to-date 
information, has never been brought to estimates by the 
department. It is in the hospitals. That’s the way it has always 
been. 
 
We’re contacting the hospitals to try and get the most accurate 
and up-to-date information. I say to you again, the moment that 
I have it I will provide it to the opposition. Until that happens I 
cannot give a time when I will provide it. I hope we have it this 
evening for you, sir, but I can’t give you a guarantee, because 
the hospitals are pulling it together. And I just want to assure 
you, Mr. Chairman, members of the Assembly, members of the 
opposition, that that is no different than it has ever been in 
estimates. That kind of information, if asked, is brought from 
the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just ask a further question to the 
minister on the base hospitals. Does your department monitor 
the closures of hospital beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Hospital boards don’t require our 
permission in advance to close beds. If beds have been closed, 
usually there’s some consultation or discussion, but they don’t 
need our prior approval to close beds. So therefore, as they’re 
closed, we do have discussions. We’re looking at that 
information now, making sure that it’s absolutely correct, 
getting it from the hospitals where those records are kept. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well no one asked you whether you had 
any input into the closures. The question was: do you monitor 
the closures? For example, in Saskatoon do you monitor which 
beds are closed, and when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Not which beds. You know, if there’s a 
bed closure, we will be in discussion with the hospital, see what 
brought about that closure. I’ve indicated there are many factors 
that could bring about the closure of beds, but we do not know 
exactly which beds are closed and when they are closed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is obviously on some tricky 
ground here when he says that his department doesn’t know 
which beds are closed. I mean, no one would believe that the 
Minister of Health and his department and his officials don’t 
know when beds are closed in Saskatoon, why they’re closed, 
for how long, and for what reasons. 
 
If you expect the people of the province to believe that  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

744 
 

you and your officials don’t know when beds are closed, then 
you shouldn’t be there — then you shouldn’t be there. And the 
docs are right, that you don’t know what you’re doing and you 
should leave. Because I’ll tell you that if you don’t know when 
beds are closed in Saskatoon, and keep a record of it, you’re not 
doing your job. 
 
And I’ll say again, we’ll allow you to save your face for the 
evening. But if those answers aren’t back tonight, then we’ll 
know what you’re up to, and the public will be allowed to 
continue on making the judgement that you’re not able to 
continue on as Minister of Health because these are very, very 
simple, straightforward questions that we’re not getting answers 
to, and they’re based on reports coming out of Saskatoon. 
 
You would have us believe that the Star-Phoenix in Saskatoon 
knows more about your department than you do. Now I don’t 
believe that. I think the people in your department know when 
beds are closed, they know for how long, and they know what 
reasons. I’m not arguing with whether they agree with the 
reasons or not, but they know how many beds are closed, and 
when. 
 
And the reason you’re not giving it to us is because you’re 
politically embarrassed, and you don’t want to do it. It’s got 
nothing to do with not having the facts. We’ll allow an hour or 
so to go by, and then we’ll ask the question again and see if you 
have the report back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, we’re certainly not 
politically embarrassed about an input of $156 million into the 
operation of the hospitals. I’m not politically embarrassed about 
that at all. I think that is something that all of us in this 
Chamber are very, very proud of on this side of the House. 
 
I have told this gentleman at least eight times that I will get him 
the most accurate and up-to-date information from the hospitals. 
I have told him sincerely, as soon as I have that information, I 
will provide it to him. It doesn’t seem to him that that is a 
satisfactory answer. I don’t know what else he could expect a 
person to do other than to go to the hospitals that keep the 
records, and we’re on the phones now to provide that 
information. And I say once again, we will do it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to direct 
a question to the Minister of Health. Last week I raised the issue 
about health and medical services in northern Saskatchewan. 
And in particular I raised the question about an item that was 
published in the paper, referred to as the Sun, where the local 
funeral home would not be providing any further services 
because this government’s policy has been to cut back on its 
many essential services and programs for the North. 
 
And today I read in the headlines that this very same person, 
Mr. Jim Thomas of the Thomas Funeral Home in Meadow 
Lake, has refused . . . It says here in today’s headlines, 
“Mortician refuses to pick up the deceased people,” Mr. 
Minister. I happen to know the one person very well, and I 
know that there’s some extreme anxiety and hardships in a 
family. When the family wanted to have this deceased relative 
of theirs taken care of and there was no one to turn to, Mr. 
Minister, you know, it was  

extremely difficult for the family. 
 
I keep hearing you and the government opposite, the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, 
reiterate time and time again of how good your programs are — 
how good the services and programs, and how well you’re 
listening to the people of this province. I tend to disagree, Mr. 
Minister, and I know a good majority of the people in this 
province disagree. That is basically why you’re backing down, 
why your Premier and your government is backing down from 
calling a provincial election — because you’re afraid; you’re 
scared. 
 
Now I’m getting a little off the topic, but basically getting back 
to the subject, the point of my question to you, Mr. Minister, is 
this. You have definitely cut back on services for medical and 
health programs in the North. The program I’m referring to, Mr. 
Minister, happens to fall partially under your jurisdiction and 
partially under the Attorney General’s department. But Mr. 
Minister, I want to ask you: has the situation been looked into? 
Are there any plans to look into the matter and provide for an 
adequate service and program of this nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think you have to address those 
questions to the Attorney General. I think that falls under his 
jurisdiction. I couldn’t say what changes he has made, or if the 
services are adequate or inadequate. When you come to his 
estimates, please raise it. But we have nothing to do with that 
aspect. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Did I hear correctly that the minister will take 
notice of the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, you did not hear that. What you 
heard me say is that it is under the jurisdiction of the Minister of 
Justice, and when the Minister of Justice’s estimates come up, I 
urge you to address the situation to him. 
 
Mr. Yew: — There again, Mr. Minister, you’re confusing the 
whole nature of your department’s policy for northern 
Saskatchewan and the province as a whole. I noted with interest 
certain portions of the estimates before us. You have a 
tremendous boost in terms of funding for your communications 
ads for health. I noticed that with interest you’ve got under last 
year’s estimates $1,030,000 for communications and health 
education. This year, as well, you’ve got an increase, Mr. 
Minister, of $1.1 million. 
 
You know, what we’re seeing here, and I look at other estimates 
as well, Mr. Minister, like under Tourism, you’ve got a 
tremendous amount of . . . you’ve got a 26 per cent increase in 
terms of communications expenditures. We are looking at 
nothing but major government ads at this point in time, Mr. 
Minister — big government ads to boost the very unsteady 
future you have politically; that your party seems to be 
floundering around back there. You haven’t got a concrete 
specific plan or policy for delivering government services, 
essential services, for this province. 
 
You know, when you slap together a policy, a budget such as 
you have before us, a plan, a program that’s put together out of 
desperation, you have nothing, Mr.  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

745 
 

Minister. That is why we’ve been sitting here for, what — 23, 
24 consecutive days now, under the estimates of Health. And 
we’ve had nothing but protests — protests by the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, protests by the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, protests by the people, as well, in terms of 
correspondence. We’ve got correspondence — correspondence 
even made . . . given to the media. 
 
About the performance of your government, Mr. Minister, I 
want to read out to you an item dealing specifically with 
estimates that we are presently under, dealing with presently. 
And it says here in his public letter regarding Health estimates, 
Mr. Minister, “Demand better health care,” written by a mother 
who had spent some time at the University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. And she goes on to say: 
 

During my stay in University Hospital for my son’s birth, I 
was impressed by the understanding of the nurses. But, I 
was appalled at the lack of staff. 

 
Appalled at the lack of staff, Mr. Minister. 
 

By the third day of my stay, my son was spending all day 
with me and twice it was requested that I keep him 
overnight because there were not enough nurses to handle 
all the babies in the nursery. I resented the assumption that 
I would be willing to comply, as I was in the hospital to 
recuperate from my caesarean operation (section). 
 
I felt obliged to accept the almost full-time care of my son 
as, on more than one occasion, I witnessed (she goes on to 
say I witnessed) the nurses literally running from room to 
room to provide care for other patients. Also, one evening I 
was compelled to comfort and coach the other patient in 
my room as she went into labor and no nurse was 
available. 

 
(1615) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, she goes on to ask you and the people of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

What has happened to our health system? What I 
experienced was not adequate health care. 

 
This is what she’s saying. 
 

I strongly urge the people of Saskatchewan to stand up for 
their rights and demand adequate care in their hospitals. 

 
And this is signed, Patricia A. Livingston, from Saskatoon. 
 
There’s a good number of people in this province, Mr. Minister, 
that are concerned about health care, nursing, staffing, facilities. 
The type of policies that your government has been trying to 
slap together out of desperation . . . That is basically the 
conclusion that a lot of people in this province have arrived at. 
You had no program. You were all hyped up for an election 
when you came out with that throne speech on the 17th of 
March. But all of a sudden on the 26th, when you came down  

with the budget, a budget that was put together out of 
desperation . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, order, order. We are not 
discussing the budget at the present time. I would ask the 
member to please get back on the estimates. 
 
Mr. Yew: — What I am saying, the point of my preamble here, 
Mr. Minister, is that you have no health and medical program 
for the province. Absolutely none. You’re throwing deliberate 
smoke-screens in the estimates. In the Estimates I look on page 
48, or pardon me page . . . In terms of capital, in terms of health 
capital projects you have 100 million designated, not under that 
specific item, Mr. Minister, but under property . . . way back, 
under the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — 
$100 million. What are you, Mr. Minister . . . What is the sense 
of that, you know. What is the sense of putting together a 
budget that has no logic at all? Who is responsible for that 
particular branch or department, Mr. Minister? I’d like to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I wonder if you could repeat the question. 
I kind of lost track of what you were asking. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in the last session of the 
legislature, I raised with Mr. Minister the issue of the ads of 
escort agencies in the Saskatchewan telephone book. You 
undertook at that time, Mr. Minister, to look into that matter 
and get back to me. I wonder what your investigation of those 
ads and those agencies has disclosed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It is some time since those estimates were 
here and I can’t really recall giving you that commitment. But 
certainly it was not the commitment of the NDP youth group, 
who were looking at a resolution which was passed calling for 
the legalization of prostitution through the formation of 
worker-owned co-ops. That is certainly not the stance that we 
would be taking — the worker-owned co-ops for prostitution. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well if that’s the kind of response you’re 
getting from the Minister of Justice, I think you need a new 
adviser. 
 
Mr. Minister, do I take it from the fact that you quoted that 
resolution that your government is in favour of legalizing 
prostitution, and that’s why there are advertisements for escort 
agencies in the Saskatchewan telephone book? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, your memory is 
obviously failing you. I raised the issue last week — last year, 
rather, Mr. Minister. You, I think in a rather sheepish fashion, 
undertook to look into it. And again I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
whether or not you did look into it, and if not, would you then 
give us your comment on whether or not you think it’s in the 
best interests of the health of Saskatchewan people to have 
escort agencies advertising in the telephone book? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I don’t think that’s the best for health 
of Saskatchewan people, but I fail to see where this has 
anything to do with the estimated figures in the blue  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

746 
 

book under Health. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the health, Mr. Minister, the overall 
health of the Saskatchewan people, is your responsibility. I 
know members opposite think this to be a riotously funny 
subject. I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that it’s not a humorous 
subject if the problem happens to be in your riding. I agree with 
what the mayor of Vancouver said, that anyone who believes 
. . . any federal member who would vote in favour of legalizing 
prostitution deserves to have the problem moved to his riding. 
And that, I think is an apt comment. 
 
Quite apart from the victimization of women . . . Well I see 
members vigorously defending a resolution. Mr. Minister, quite 
apart from the victimization of women, it destroys . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member from Maple 
Creek will have an opportunity to express her views in a 
moment. I am expressing mine. I am saying it is not in the best 
interest of Saskatchewan people for escort agencies to be 
advertising in the Saskatchewan telephone book. I want to 
know, Mr. Minister, whether or not you think that’s in the best 
interests of the health of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think those questions 
should be asked of SaskTel in Crown corporations. I think 
really they’re responsible for what’s in the yellow pages of the 
telephone book, and certainly not the Minister of Health. 
 
I don’t think we need to advertise these. Certainly I would be 
against that. They’re certainly not the kind of things that people 
on this side of the House are interested in looking at. It may be 
some of his reading; I’m not sure. But I can tell you this, that 
our stance is far different . . . And let me repeat again, because I 
think the member opposite missed it, it says here, a “lively 
debate.” 
 

Some of the liveliest debate involved the economic 
development resolutions. 

 
Economic development — listen to this. “NDP youth gearing 
up.” For what, I don’t know.” One resolution was passed . . . 
Under economic development. Listen to this. 
 

One resolution was passed calling for the legalization of 
prostitution through the formation of worker-owned co-ops 
(worker-owned prostitute co-ops). 

 
And he stands here to try and make an issue out of an ad in the 
yellow pages of the phone book when his own party, his own 
youth wing of his party, want a worker-owned prostitute co-op. 
Now what kind of gall do you have to stand here and talk about 
that issue? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well all I can say, Mr. Minister, is that 
your responses have reached a new low when you’d duck a 
subject . . . when you duck a subject by referring to a resolution 
passed by the SYND (Saskatchewan Young New Democrats.). I 
was not aware that at any time the resolutions passed by the 
SYND, or the young Conservatives, are policy of the senior 
parties. They are not. 
 

Mr. Minister, someone may have passed a resolution urging the 
legalization of prostitution but, Mr. Minister, the government of 
which you’re a part has allowed them to further their activities 
through the use of the yellow pages. I ask you, Mr. Minister, if 
you are opposed to these advertisements, which is what I 
understood you to say, have you taken the time to communicate 
those views to the minister in charge of SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, he seems to think I’m 
quoting from some strange source. I’ll admit it’s a strange 
source, but it is The Commonwealth magazine, the magazine of 
the NDP party. It’s on March 12, 1986 and it says here: “The 
NDP youth are gearing up.” And it says this: 
 

The youth in the party is where the new ideas come from. 
 
That’s what it says. Then it goes on to say, and I’m going to 
quote it once more so it sinks in. “There was a lively debate.” 
This is in their own party. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I think I’ve allowed quite a bit 
of latitude on both sides here and I think it would be best if we 
got off of this subject and got back on to the estimates of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, let me be clear. If you are 
saying that what the Minister of Health . . . if you are saying 
that the position of the Minister of Health on government policy 
is not a proper subject for debates in estimates, then I . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I have asked that we get back 
on to the estimates of Health. I don’t think that is the proper 
place for it, so let’s get on with the job. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask you again: have you as 
Minister of Health, communicated your views to the minister of 
SaskTel . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. I have ruled on that, 
and that is final. Let’s get back on to the Health estimates with 
the minister. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I say you’re 
ploughing new ground. The position of the ministers with 
respect to government policy has always been a proper subject. 
And I suggest that you are ploughing new ground with this 
ruling that you just finished giving us. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to clarify that. Are you saying 
that the position of the minister on issues of the day is not a 
proper subject for debate . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — As it pertains to Health, yes, but let us stick 
to Health. And those items that belong to other departments, 
then bring them up with them in their proper place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, all right. Let me phrase a brand-new 
question then to you, Mr. Minister. There are within your 
estimates, within the expenditures of the Department of Health, 
moneys devoted to venereal disease and the curing of venereal 
disease. Does the  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

747 
 

minister think that the advertisements in SaskTel might not be 
counter-productive to the work you’re trying to do elsewhere? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have no idea if the advertisements in 
SaskTel have anything to do with venereal disease. I haven’t 
read one that advertises venereal disease. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know members opposite think this is a 
riotous subject. I can tell you that . . . I invite members 
opposite, who think this is such a humorous subject, to try 
doing some canvassing in some areas of town where this 
problem exists. Try doing some canvassing on the east side of 
my riding if you think it’s a funny subject. It is not funny. It is 
destructive of neighbourhoods and destructive of women. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to, since the question has been ruled out of 
order, I want to raise with you a comment which appears in the 
covering letter . . . It is not the covering letter. It is the 
chairman’s statement in an annual report of the Saskatchewan 
Health Research Board tabled by you, Mr. Minister. The 
sentence which I want to quote to you is as follows: 
 

It would be encouraging . . . 
 
This is written by D.D. Johnson. I believe him to be a medical 
doctor. 
 

It would be encouraging to report that Saskatchewan 
increased its share of health research funding and activities 
over the past year relative to other provinces, but such is 
not the case. 

 
Mr. Minister, you not only have the nurses criticizing you; not 
only have the doctors criticizing you; now we have a chairman 
appointed by you, in the annual report, criticizing your 
government for its spending on health care in a report which 
you filed. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: do you agree with the statement? If you 
do, what are you going to do about it? If you don’t agree with it, 
how on earth did you come to table a report containing 
comments with which you disagree? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to go back 
onto the topic that he was preoccupied with, on the whole thing 
of venereal disease, and it affecting neighbourhoods of the city. 
I’ll just say, I wonder which neighbourhood his colleague, 
Harry Van Mulligen, wants to establish the red light district in 
Regina. 
 
But being that as it may, just for the statistics and for the 
information of the committee here, I have a table here under the 
annual report of Saskatchewan Health, page 13, and it’s a 
“Crude Incidence Rate For Sexually Transmitted Disease,” 
Saskatchewan population, ’75 to ’84, both male and female, and 
I indicate to you that the total . . . The number of contacts of 
venereal disease has been going down every year since 1981. 
The trend for both males and females has been decreasing. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I gather, Mr. Minister, that you don’t care 
to deal with the chairman’s statement in the annual report which 
I brought to your attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the funding for the Health 
Research Board has been maintained at approximately $1 
million a year. And last year we even instituted a new initiative 
of money for research into the situation of the elderly — which 
I think certainly indicates one of the needs here in 
Saskatchewan. So the funding is maintained, and we have 
enlarged upon it with designated certain fundings for research 
into the elderly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that’s not what your annual 
report says. You tabled it. If, Mr. Minister, you have done such 
an outstanding job of health research, why is your chairman 
unable to appreciate your genius? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, as I say, last year we put 
$100,000 in and added money into research for the elderly. I 
think the chairman of the Health Research Board is saying, if 
they had more money, they could probably do more things — 
and that’s understandable on any kind of research. I’m sure if 
you go to any research foundation or any research institute 
across this country, they would certainly indicate, if they had 
more money, they could do more research. 
 
But I think we are continuing the funding that we have been 
providing over the years, and last year we put in $100,000 extra 
for research on the elderly. But I do not deny that any research 
association — be it the Saskatchewan Health Research Board, 
be it research at the University Hospital, be it research at 
McGill, be it the research council of Canada — if you have 
more money, it’s probably . . . You’re capable of doing more 
research. And I think that’s what the chairman was referring to. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that may have been what he 
meant to say, but that’s certainly not what he said; nor will the 
language of his statement bear that interpretation. 
 

It would be encouraging to report that Saskatchewan has 
increased its share of health research funding and activities 
over the past year relative to other provinces, but such is not 
the case. 

 
And then what follows is a full page of criticism of health 
research funding in this province. And, Mr. Minister, I will read 
it in its entirety for you if you like. But if I had been you, I 
would have either done something about health research 
funding or I wouldn’t have tabled this annual report. Because I 
assume, Mr. Minister, that when you table the annual report, 
you put your stamp of approval on it. It is your report, Mr. 
Minister, not your chairman’s. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to refer to the comments and 
address yourself to the issue and not some other issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you’d understand what you were 
reading you would see that the chairman is indicating funding 
from all sources. And as you realize, there is funding from 
national agencies and so on. But certainly  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

748 
 

our funding, our proportion from the Saskatchewan 
government, has been maintained and in fact increased with the 
addition of funding for the elderly research. 
 
So what he’s talking about is the global picture of funding. And 
as I told you before, when you’re running a research 
organization you will look for sources of funding from 
whatever source you can get it: there are many areas; there’s 
bequeaths; there’s all kinds of things that can go into research 
funding. 
 
And I think that’s what he’s indicating, that certainly we could 
stand more in Saskatchewan. And I’d be glad to see more of 
that money coming in, into this province, and that’s what the 
chairman, who is a pharmacologist, is indicating. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What portion of the board’s moneys come 
from sources outside the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you look into this and read it correctly, 
you’ll see that the chairman is indicating . . . And you asked: 
how much? Their sources come from us, but they would like to 
see more sources coming from other things, such as the MRC 
(medical research council) and other agencies, as he says at the 
bottom of the paragraph, if you take the time to read down to 
that point in time. And I support him. 
 
And I think, if we in Saskatchewan could get research money 
from foundations, philanthropists, various sources, from 
companies, that certainly that could be put to good use in health 
research and in other research, in agriculture research or 
whatever kind of research that would benefit this province. And 
that’s what Dr. Johnson is talking about. 
 
But to go back to your initial questions and statements, we have 
maintained our payments to the health research board, increased 
them. And the man is just simply saying it would be wonderful 
if we could tap other sources, and I agree. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might 
address your attention to the financial statements in the annual 
report. I think they bear out the chairman. I want to say as well, 
that nothing . . . that the chairman’s comments simply won’t 
bear the interpretation you put on them. He is talking about 
money from the government, for the very good reason, Mr. 
Minister, as you point out, that’s the only money they get. That 
is the only money they get, Mr. Minister. 
 
I ask you to look at the financial statements to see why he’s 
complaining as he is. In 1984 and previous years they got a 
grant from the Department of Health at $750,000. In 1985 that 
grant was not continued. In 1985 they had to exist simply on the 
interest. So I say, Mr. Minister, that the chairman has good 
cause for his complaint. You have failed . . . You have not 
given the board a grant. The only money that they have had to 
spend is interest. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to address yourself to the question of 
funding of health research and to cease giving us  

dissertations on whether or not the board ought to be getting 
outside funding. I would think that would be extremely 
difficult, for a government agency to pick up donations from 
outside government. A private research fund might be able to 
do that. I would think it would be extremely difficult for a 
government agency to get donations outside the government. As 
the statements point out, Mr. Minister, the board has not 
received any outside funding. All their money comes from the 
government, and you haven’t continued it. You discontinued 
the grant of $750,000. It is to that matter and to the chairman’s 
clear statement about the inadequacy of government funding 
that I wish you’d address yourself to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly their level of funding has been 
maintained. We’ve put in $500,000 each of the last two years, 
as I said, with the addition of 100,000 for geriatric research. 
And for you to indicate that a public research corporation 
doesn’t get outside funding shows your total lack of 
understanding. I think if you would look at the universities you 
would see that there is outside funding in many indications, in 
many indications. And right within my own department the 
psychiatric research branch attracts over $500,000 in outside 
funding. 
 
So to make that foolish statement that a public corporation or a 
public body will not get outside funding just illustrates your 
naivety and your complete understanding of how research 
moneys come about. Surely you must understand that 
universities throughout this country, universities both public 
and private, get outside sources of funding. Research councils 
get outside sources of funding. It’s what happens and goes on. 
 
You many not understand, because I realize your mind-set is 
that everything should be centrally controlled and come from 
the government. That’s where your blinkers hold you. You 
can’t see the possibility of any other type of venture, any other 
type of way of addressing a problem. You have no new ideas. 
You come with the same old work ideas year after year after 
year — of centralist control, government to manage and do 
everything possible, and don’t ever, ever let anybody else have 
any impact into the operation of anything that the government 
has, because you lose your control; you lose your socialist 
ideology of control and manipulation. You can see it in your 
arguments and your mind-set. Every time you stand up you just 
telegraph right across Saskatchewan that centralist, old, 
worn-out ideas of yours — every time you come on your feet. 
 
And when you stand here and say that you can’t get outside 
funding, that just shows the socialist blinkers that you wear 
towards every problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don’t believe the comment 
you just made. I do not believe the health research fund has 
done anything to attract outside donations. I don’t believe that’s 
part of their mandate. Mr. Minister, I don’t believe you asked 
them. I think you are misrepresenting the situation to this 
House, and I think that you must know it. I think you must 
know you are misrepresenting the situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a fund set up by the government  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

749 
 

through which the government might do its share of funding of 
health research. This is not intended to be a private agency. This 
is the government’s share of health research. Of course there are 
other sources for health research; of course moneys come from 
universities; of course moneys come from private companies. 
But this fund, Mr. Minister, is the government’s share. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know if outside funding has ever been 
sought by the board. I want to know, Mr. Minister, whether or 
not the fund has ever sought outside funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well most certainly my deputy minister 
has met with the Health Research Board and has encouraged 
them to see if they could access outside funding. Now whether 
they’ve been successful to this date or not is questionable. But 
they have been encouraged to do that. 
 
And again you show your complete lack of understanding of the 
purpose of the Health Research Board. The purpose of the 
health . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if you’d listen. If you 
want to shout from your seat, go ahead. If you want to listen to 
my answers then please be quiet, because I’d be pleased to give 
them to you. Now which do you want to do? Shout . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will. I will certainly answer the 
question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There he’s shouting 
again. 
 
I want to tell you that the purpose of the Health Research Board 
in Saskatchewan is to get young researchers started, to give 
them a chance to look into topics of their interests, to establish 
their credibility, to help them do research that will raise their 
profile on the national scene. That will help these young people 
in Saskatchewan get that recognition as a researcher so that they 
can attract money from the national level, from national 
companies, from foundations such as the Terry Fox foundation 
for cancer. That’s the purpose of the Health Research Board. 
One of the purposes is to establish that degree of expertise in 
health research here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would be more than happy if we could give a grant to a 
young doctor, a young scientist at the University of 
Saskatchewan who could receive money from the Health 
Research Board, do their research — be it on social aspects or 
be it on biological aspects or what it may be — that acclaims, 
that is nationally acclaimed. 
 
And then we will see these Saskatchewan people, and if they 
stay at our university or in our intellectual community in 
Saskatchewan, that they will be able to attract this national 
money, this foundation money. So that’s the purpose of it. 
 
And I think the member opposite, from his querulous questions 
and statements, shows a complete, utter misunderstanding of 
the purpose of the Health Research Board in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it is patently obvious that 
you are either misleading this Legislative Assembly or you 
don’t know what the fund is. Let me assist you, Mr. Minister, 
with some more information put out in this  

annual report, for which I wish you would address yourself to. 
 
If I were to ask this minister the time of day, I swear you would 
respond something along the following line: well now that’s an 
interesting subject and I am so proud that Saskatchewan people 
can tell time. And you are saying, they can’t tell time. I swear 
that’s the way you would answer a question of that sort. 
 
Every single question you are asked becomes an opportunity, 
Mr. Minister, to extol the virtues of Saskatchewan and to 
suggest that somehow or other we believe those virtues are sins. 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, when this silly cat and mouse game is 
going to come to an end, when you’re going to start answering 
some questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me read from page 3 of this report: 
 

The Saskatchewan Health Research Board (SHRB) was 
established as a corporate body under The Health Research 
Act . . . to administer the Saskatchewan Health Research 
Fund. 

 
Question: what is the fund? 
 

With the proclamation of the Act, the Saskatchewan Health 
Research Fund came into being for the purposes of 
assisting and stimulating research in the healing arts and 
health sciences. 

 
You will note, Mr. Minister, that the board does not of itself do 
research; it makes grants to others to do research. It goes on to 
point out where the moneys have come from — all from 
government, as the Act anticipated. 
 
Mr. Minister, the board administers the fund; the Act provides 
that the fund comes from the provincial treasurer, from the 
Minister of Finance. This is not, and cannot be a research 
agency to which people make contributions. There is no such 
provision, because the only thing this board does is to make 
grants. Why would any private agency make a donation to the 
fund so that the fund could make a grant? Why would someone 
who wanted to invest in health research not make the grant 
directly? 
 
The suggestion by the Minister of Health that the board ought to 
be soliciting donations makes no sense because they don’t do 
any research, they only make grants. Anybody who is going to 
make a donation would want to make it to the donor and not to 
the provincial government. The minister’s answer makes no 
sense at all. You answer the questions, Mr. Minister, as if you 
thought this board was doing research. It isn’t. All it does is 
make grants. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again to address yourself to the question 
of this government’s responsibility for health research, the 
funding for which fell dramatically in 1984 to ’85. and I don’t 
believe— although I would ask you to correct me if I’m wrong 
— I don’t believe that the situation has changed since 1985. It’s 
my understanding that the grant from the Department of Health 
has not been reinstated. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with 
this  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

750 
 

government’s responsibility for health research and not deal 
with everybody else’s. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll close by saying the language of the chairman 
simply doesn’t bear your interpretation. I ask you to listen to it: 
 

It would be encouraging to report that Saskatchewan . . . 
 
He has referred to Saskatchewan throughout to mean the 
Government of Saskatchewan. He’s used it several times in a 
context which can only be taken to mean that Saskatchewan 
means the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

It would be encouraging to report that Saskatchewan has 
increased its share (that’s my point) of health research 
funding. 

 
Please, Mr. Minister, address yourself to what this government 
is doing for health research funding and save us these silly 
speeches about what everybody else is or isn’t doing. Address 
yourself to your responsibility, not to someone else’s. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think the member 
opposite, and I’d ask him, I don’t think he’s ever visited the 
Health Research Board. From his comments it’s very obvious. I 
have met with the Health Research Board at least four or five 
times in the past four years. I understand very well how the 
research board operates. And for him to try and stand up here 
and to think that I thought the board did the research, it just 
shows again his complete lack, complete lack of understanding 
of issues. 
 
You know, to get up and read a bitten line here and so on, and 
then to go on and not . . . I don’t think he’s ever set foot . . . I’d 
ask him: have you ever set foot in the Health Research Board? 
I’m sure the answer to that is no. I’m sure the answer to that is 
no. 
 
Certainly the foundation is laid for our people to get money 
from other sources. And I believe this is only right. I believe 
this is only right. I remember being quite active in the Steve 
Fonyo run and where Saskatchewan put up more money per 
capita than any other place in Canada And it seems only right to 
me that Saskatchewan researchers should have the capability to 
access some of that Saskatchewan money that went into there. 
That seems reasonable to me. That’s what we’re trying to do. 
That’s what the deputy was talking to them about. 
 
As far as any reduction in the funding, he’s simply all wet. We 
put $500,000 in ’85-86, and the same in ’86-87. and they’ve 
drawn down on their reserves. And there’s been $1 million to 
spend each year, as well as the $100,000 for seniors’ initiatives. 
So certainly I believe the Health Research Board has been 
adequately funded. I think you’re going to see that there’s some 
good research coming out of projects that the Health Research 
Board sponsors. 
 
I can tell you how it happened. People put in proposals to the 
Health Research Board. They’re looked at. They’re sent out to 
peers all across this country to look at them — to professional 
people — evaluate them. And the ones  

that are on a certain point average, come up to the standard or 
the criteria, are then funded by the research board. I’ve talked to 
the research board and I said there were probably some areas — 
I would like to see some local kind of funding for areas in 
Saskatchewan where we have questions asked about — are 
there a greater amount of MS in this part of the country than in 
another? Is this part of Saskatchewan more prone to cancer? 
Those are the kind of research that I think people would like to 
see answers to — they’re not easy to come by — as well as the 
new initiatives that come in biological research at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
If they can attract money from outside sources, well be it, good. 
Maybe they could joint venture something. The Health 
Research Board could put up some money, and an outside 
foundation put up some more money, and we could have a 
major research here in Saskatchewan on some health related 
topic. That’s what it’s for. Those are the kinds of initiatives that 
we want to explore. 
 
So I believe that the Health Research Board is working, and is 
working well, in the interests of Saskatchewan people. And I 
just want to reassure you that they’ve had $1 million to spend 
each year. In fact, in the last year they had more than that with 
the extra $100,000. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, do you admit that all the 
board does is administer grants? And if you admit that patently 
obvious fact, since that appears to be the case from your 
financial statements, would you tell this House why anyone 
would want to make a grant to the board for research, rather 
than make the grant directly to the agency or institution which 
is doing the research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, a major portion of its work is issuing 
grants. As I said, people apply to the Health Research Board, 
many propositions come in, many pieces of scholarly work, 
suggested researches. They look at these, they evaluate them, 
they send them out to professionals across Canada to research 
these or to further evaluate them. On those bases, a selection is 
made. Not all the projects are funded. Quite a number are. 
 
So that is the major portion of their work at this time. But they 
have been in discussions with people of my department, 
following the initiative suggested to them by the Deputy 
Minister of Health, that they would look at some joint funding. 
We’re very interested in doing that — especially in the field of 
gerontology — very, very interested in working with 
foundations, in working with philanthropies, things of this 
nature, to joint venture research that will benefit Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask you to address yourself 
to the question and stop ducking into an irrelevancy. The 
specific question you were asked was: why would anyone want 
to make a donation to the fund rather than directly to the 
institution making the research? Why on earth would the board 
go out and solicit donations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I can see why a group may want to 
go with a donation to the board, because the board has that 
credibility that they could assure that person who  
  



 
April 21, 1986 

 

751 
 

was giving that donation or that foundation who was giving that 
donation or that business, that through the peer review selection 
criteria, where they look at all these — the top professionals in 
the field look at them — that you would be sure that the person 
who received that funding, as put out by the research board, 
would be probably the tops in that field in Canada . . . or in 
Saskatchewan, I should say. So they would have that assurance 
that that money was going to a very, very credible researcher. 
 
So I think on that basis alone, if someone was donating money 
you would want that, shall we say, clearing house — clearing 
house of ideas — where the ideas come in, the tops in the field 
evaluate them and they say, this, this, this, and this, look like 
very meritorious types of research and we recommend that they 
be funded. I think if I were a person donating a large amount of 
money to health research, I’d want to have that assurance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your comments are 
unmitigated nonsense. Mr. Minister, the board has only been in 
existence for six years. If they had the people, and they may 
well have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It may be eight years 
but it’s less than 10. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the board had excellent people, and it may, it 
has not been in existence long enough to have developed this 
sterling reputation to which you attribute it of making excellent 
grants. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your comments are nonsense from another 
point of view. I wonder if the minister can think of a single 
incident where anyone has made a donation to a government. 
That’s what you’re asking people to do, is to make a donation to 
the Government of Saskatchewan to supplement its funding, the 
job that you’re not doing. Mr. Minister, can you think of a 
single incident where people have made a voluntary donation to 
the Government of Saskatchewan? — because that’s what 
you’re asking them to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, you know, I mentioned 
universities some time ago. Universities get grant after grant 
from foundations, because they like to have somebody that will 
administer that grant. I mentioned to him a while ago — but 
again, when you’re shouting from your seat, you don’t hear all 
the answers. I said very, very distinctly to him, that the psych 
research unit — psych research unit, a sub-department of the 
Department of Health — did over $500,000 per year from 
outside sources. You missed hearing that because of the 
shouting, but there is an example for you where that money 
comes in — $500,000 a year into psych research development 
from outside sources. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that is just . . . it is 
completely unrealistic. The fund was set up so that a body of 
medical people would make the key decisions with respect to 
the government’s funding of health research. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was enthralled to learn that the fund might go in 
with joint ventures. Mr. Minister, that’s always been the case. 
The board has always been prepared to fund part of a project 
and let them get some additional funding elsewhere. That has 
been the case since the board came  

into existence, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the fund is the government’s contribution to 
health research funding. As these statements make clear, your 
funding was reduced from ’84 to ’85 by $750,000. That fact 
appears in the financial statement on page . . . The financial 
pages are not consecutively numbered. It’s statement number 2, 
Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the funding which the department 
put into health research went down by $750,000, and what the 
chairman’s statement says that they were told to do, was live off 
the capital. 
 
Mr. Minister, the level of funding has gone down because the 
board I think is reluctant to use its capital up quite that quickly. 
But what you’re telling the board to do is to in effect sell the 
farm, quarter by quarter. As the chairman points out, that, Mr. 
Minister, is inimical to health research in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, time doesn’t permit it because I would run past 5 
o’clock if I did, but Mr. Minister, I could read the entire 
statement of the chairman for you. His statement which you 
tabled in this Legislative Assembly, his statement is, Mr. 
Minister, a damning indictment of health research by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things I’d be delighted to learn, but I 
know you won’t tell me, is whether or not you read this before 
you filed this annual report. I’d be interested in knowing 
whether or not anybody on your behalf read this statement, or 
did this come directly from the chairman, who obviously feels 
very deeply about health research funding. If the chairman 
didn’t feel strongly about the issue, he wouldn’t place his 
position as chairman on the line with this statement. 
 
His statement is critical of the government’s funding. No 
amount of blether by you can avoid the fact that your chairman 
is critical of this government'’ funding. He obviously felt fairly 
strongly about it. I don’t think he took the decision to criticize 
the government who had appointed him, lightly. I think he did it 
because he felt there were serious problems with health research 
funding and important opportunities were being lost by 
investigators and researchers in this province. He obviously felt 
strongly about it; he took a grave risk to his own position. He 
felt strongly about it, Mr. Minister. 
 
It’s apparent that neither you nor anyone else in the government 
had enough interest in research funding to even read the report. 
Because if you would have read the report, I don’t believe that 
this government would have filed it. It puts upon you an 
obligation to either correct the situation, which you haven’t 
done, or, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being near 5 o’clock, this House 
does now stand recessed until 7 o’clock tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


