


















































July 2, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 2, 1986 
 
 

2403 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-off of Saskoil Employees 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Energy and Mines, and it has to do with Saskoil’s decision to 
lay off a number of employees, effective June 30th of this year. I 
wonder, can the minister give the Assembly a status report on 
those terminations? For example, how many people were 
terminated, and what percentage of the total Saskoil staff were laid 
off as of June 30th? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well what, Mr. Speaker, Saskoil was 
facing was the realities of a company that was structured for 
$30-a-barrel oil prices and ended up having to live in a world of 
$15-a-barrel oil prices. As a part of dealing with that new reality, 
they were faced with downsizing the corporation. That’s never a 
pleasant task. It was something they agonized over a great deal, I 
can tell you and the people of Saskatchewan, because for anybody 
who’s today losing their job, it’s not a very bright prospect. I think 
they undertook a very wise, responsible, and compassionate 
approach to this downsizing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They initiated two programs: one was an early retirement, and the 
second was an also voluntary program wherein, for those for 
example who might want to pursue further education, they had a 
proposal or a concept wherein they would pay them X numbers of 
months, depending on the year’s work, if they wanted to pursue 
something like educational leave. After they did the total 
assessment and how many were going to take those programs up, 
obviously then they had to fill in the gaps with lay-offs. 
 
As I recall, and this was something that we discussed some several 
weeks ago now, that they were looking to reduce their 
employment by 60 people, and I’m not sure how many took up the 
voluntary programs, but I think it was something in the order of 40 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. So I think, all in all, although it’s not a 
pleasant situation, I think they undertook it in a very 
compassionate, humane sort of way. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Speaker, after that lengthy speech the 
minister failed or refused to answer the question that was put to 
him: how many employees of Saskoil were laid off as of June 
30th? And maybe in your response to the next question, you could 
answer the first one as well. 
 
But I have here a letter from Saskoil which outlines, in part, the 
deal that was made with the employees, and I want to quote from 
it. It says: 
 

Due to the extremely unfavourable economic conditions 
existing in the oil and gas industry, we have found it 
necessary to terminate your employment with the 
corporation, effective June 24, 1986. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can inform the Assembly how 
many of these people who were laid off were executives in 
Saskoil, and can you tell us whether the remaining senior 
executives have been told to take a cut in pay in order to help the 
corporation out, which you’re trying to explain is the reason for 
letting go a great number of family bread-winners in the province 
who used to work with Saskoil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the hon. member 
didn’t hear the answer to the first question, it was probably 
because of the shouting that was coming from his colleagues. And 
what I indicated was my understanding it was something in the 
order of 40 per cent of their target number, in the order of 60, 
came through the early retirement and voluntary programs. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if we’re interested in the employees in that 
corporation, which I can assure you this government is, as we are 
all those who work in the oil industry, I can tell you, as did the 
chief executive officer of that corporation, that there would have 
been more lay-offs had we not introduced our service and supply 
enhancement package out there, and that is a fact. Similarly, if 
we’re interested in this company being viable down the road and, 
in fact, existing down the road so that anybody has a job there, that 
kind of short-term pain for long-term gain is in fact necessary. 
 
To answer his final question more fully, Mr. Speaker, my 
understanding was the restructuring and the downsizing that they 
went through was part of an overall corporate rearrangement, and 
hence I would conclude from that that it was focused, not at any 
given sector, but in fact would include all sectors in the company 
structure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Supplementary to the minister. Once again 
you’ve failed to inform the Assembly whether any executives of 
the corporation were laid off and if any of the executives were 
asked to take a cut in pay. That was the question. I wondered if 
you’d deal with it and give us an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, how 
many executives, so to speak, have lost their jobs to the 
downsizing. I don’t know what his definition of executive would 
be, but I can take notice of that and consult with the chief 
executive officer, and bring back those numbers for the hon. 
member. 
 
I would also remind the hon. member that this was not an easy 
decision for Saskoil. They have to also bear in mind the fact that 
they’re responsible to several thousands of Saskatchewan citizens 
out there who are shareholders of that company. There’s lots of 
grandmas and grandpas that bought those shares for their children, 
and hence they have some responsibility to their shareholders as 
well, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest to you that despite what’s 
happened in the oil industry — it’s been faced with a 60 per cent 
cut-back — they’ve done very well in so far as maintaining the 
operation of that company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2404 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Question to the Minister of Energy, and it 
concerns Saskoil. Mr. Minister, you have been confirmed by 
indirection that there’s been no pay cut or no cut in fringe benefits 
of Saskoil senior executives. And I ask you, Mr. Minister: if there 
has been a massive cut in staff, as you confirm, why has there not 
been some suggestion that the senior officers of that corporation 
accept some reduction in their total package of remuneration in 
order that fewer people need to be laid off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well just so the record is entirely 
straight, Mr. Speaker, the first fact is that these programs and the 
approach they took were not just coming out with massive 
lay-offs, as the hon. member used the word. They took a very 
humane approach to a very serious problem, and that is: how do 
you downsize a $30-a-barrel oil company to a $15-a-barrel oil 
company? 
 
And they offered up a couple of voluntary programs which were 
very, very compassionate in my mind, Mr. speaker, and it was not 
targeted or focused at any one sector — top of the management, 
the bottom, wherever. It was a total reorganization (a); and (b), 
obviously voluntary, is open to everybody. So it could be from the 
top to the bottom. 
 
So any suggestion that there was massive lay-offs is absolutely 
incorrect and, in so far as where the voluntary retirements came 
from and where any other lay-offs occurred, I would have to get 
that specific information, Mr. Speaker, from the chief executive 
officer of the Crown corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. When 
you’re obtaining information, will you obtain information to 
confirm the fact that the chief executive officer did not receive any 
cut, but in fact has received an increase in his total remuneration 
package over the last few months? And would you advise whether 
or not that was voluntarily open to other employees to increase 
their compensation package, or whether it was restricted to the 
chief executive officer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll take notice relative to what the 
CEO’s salary or salary increases may have been; and secondly I 
will pass along your comments and suggestions relative to who 
should take pay cuts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would you, 
in the course of finding these facts, ascertain whether or not a 
number of perks which the chief executive officer enjoys — a 
leased car, Roughrider tickets, private club memberships — have 
all been renewed for 1986, and would you express a view on 
whether or not you believe it would appropriate to cut back on 
some of those extra perks in order to preserve a few jobs for the 
ordinary employees of that corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is 
trying to suggest that the management at Saskoil is something less 
than fair, something less than first-class. That, I think, would be 
absolutely fallacious to leave that impression. In fact, it’s just in 
the past week or  

so that we saw a rather flattering article in, I think it was the 
Financial Post about Saskoil’s good management, even in these 
tough times. 
 
I will take notice of his specific questions, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would also remind this House that this is the first time since the 
price of oil went down by 60 per cent that they’ve shown any 
regard for the oil patch workers in this province. This is the same 
party that accused me of being the minister of welfare for the oil 
patch when we tried to keep the oil field patch alive and maintain 
employment out there, Mr. speaker. 
 
There would have been more jobs lost by the ordinary people at 
Saskoil had it not been for our service and supply enhancement 
programs. We have the interests of the oil patch and the oil patch 
workers at heart, Mr. Speaker, and let nobody deny that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-of-Province Travel by the Premier 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier and it deals with the expenditure of money that is paid by 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, I remind you that 
you have yet to table return no. 699 which was a question dealing 
with the cost of out-of-province travel for a certain period of time. 
 
Material which you provided during your estimates some days ago 
shows that between January 1, 1984 and June 12, 1985, which is 
only a 17-month period, you went on 16 out-of-province trips at a 
total cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer of $111,000. That’s an 
average of nearly $7,000 a trip. Each time you travelled beyond 
the borders of Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, it cost the taxpayer 
almost as much as the person on minimum wage earns in the 
whole year. I ask you, sir, at a time when you are preaching 
restraint for hard-pressed taxpayers, can you explain why your 
out-of-province trips are costing Saskatchewan taxpayers $7,000 a 
trip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have an interesting 
argument raised by the member from Regina North East. He 
bought a pulp company that’s losing $91,000 a day, and he’s 
concerned about me spending $111,000 in 17 months. Mr. 
Speaker, you can hardly imagine this. It doesn’t even come up in 
question period, $91,000 a day that he bought and the taxpayer is 
losing, and he asks me about $111,000 over 17 months — 17 
months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’m sure that the Leader of the Opposition when he was here, 
I believe he went to Russia, he went to China, he went all over the 
world, and I didn’t hear complaints by the minister of Finance 
that, my gosh, that he was going to be spending money outside. I 
mean, even if he was in the Soviet Union figuring out how he was 
going to nationalize pulp-mills, it didn’t work that well because 
we ended up losing $91,000 a day and you won’t even have the 
courage to ask about it. You ask about me spending 111,000 over 
17 months. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have been promoting — and I know the 
NDP is against it — we have been promoting  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2405 
 
 

Saskatchewan. We have Saskatchewan at Expo ’86 doing a fine 
job in promoting our province for tourism and so forth. The NDP 
here are against it; the NDP in Manitoba don’t even like it. 
 
Yes, we are selling Saskatchewan, marketing Saskatchewan. We 
had another million dollars today brought into the city of Regina 
for the MacKenzie Art Gallery, a new expansion, and the museum 
for a package of $12 million to promote Saskatchewan, promote 
tourism. It’s about time somebody started to promote 
Saskatchewan rather than just buy potash mines, buy pulp-mills, 
be against bacon plants, be against this, be against development, 
be against business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am glad we are promoting Saskatchewan, 
and it’s about time somebody did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation would say that the Premier isn’t selling Saskatchewan, 
he’s giving it away. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I tell you that on one trip alone, which was on 
a junket you took to Europe in January of 1985, you spent more 
than $38,000 or $3,200 a day. And so far you have provided the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan with just the total cost of the trip. 
 
I ask you, will you now give us a breakdown of that trip which 
you took at $3,200 a day, to give us the cost of the hotels and the 
food and the entertainment expenses in the same way as the Prime 
Minister of Canada does, who comes forward and gives those 
answers — answers which you refuse to provide? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you undertake to do that? And will you instruct 
your officials so that we can have those answers today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member questions 
whether I should spend $38,000 on a trip that I went to speak in 
Europe and in South America, both related to potash, and as a 
result we come back here and delivered potash sales and the 
expanded market for potash in both of those, which is extremely 
important. And he questions $38,000. I believe the Leader of the 
Opposition trucked off to Tito’s funeral in Yugoslavia. What did 
he sell over there? 
 
Well at government expense. Not at government expense. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that if we can look at members opposite 
buying a pulp-mill costing us $91,000 a day, and the former 
minister of Finance have difficulty even raising the question here 
in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
Premier. As you know, Mr. Premier, Canadian taxpayers were 
certainly shocked and disappointed with the Prime Minister, Brian 
Mulroney, when he ran up huge travel bills at their expense, 
including some $1,200 a night for a hotel suite in New York City. 
 
In light of these developments, and the extravagance that  

has been demonstrated by Tories throughout in government, in 
light of these developments, do you not feel that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers have a right to know how much they are shelling out for 
your hotels, for your food, for your entertainment, and for any 
other miscellaneous items. What are you trying to hide? Why 
won’t you break them down, if in fact Premier Lougheed would, 
and in fact Brian Mulroney will? Why won’t you break down the 
expenses and give it to the people of Saskatchewan? After all, 
they’re paying for them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, the member 
from Quill Lakes was in cabinet, and he knows there’s absolutely 
no change in policy at all. We provide the same summary, the 
same information, only we are much more productive, Mr. 
speaker. 
 
We’re much more productive, and he’s a little envious of the fact 
that we can actually get some benefit from the travel, not just 
going to the Soviet Union and not just going to China for a trip. I 
mean, we have been there in terms of twinning arrangements, 
potash arrangements in South American, the conference with 
respect to western Canadian potash and North American potash in 
Europe, and the impact on a major potash convention in Vienna 
— exactly the kinds of things that we should be looking at. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Chairman, that if we want to dig up all the travel, 
we could dig up all the cabinet ministers’ travel that were in the 
NDP administration. We can go on the ski trips, the Phoenix trips, 
and all the rest of them. We can stack them up here this high. Well 
I’m not sure the member of Quills wants me to do that. He knows 
that we’re playing by exactly the same rules as he did, and we will 
continue to provide the information. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, any time you want 
to compare our management of the finances of this province with 
you, go ahead and do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The noise in the 
Assembly is reaching a point where we cannot continue to do 
business, and I’d ask the members to come to order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Well I believe you must have heard what I said in 
the opening comment, Mr. Speaker: — any time that you want to 
compare your fiscal management with the former premier, I say 
go ahead and do it. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, during your European trip in January of 
last year, you and your entourage stayed in a number of major 
cities including Geneva, Frankfurt, Bonn, Paris, to name only a 
few. Are you saying that you refuse to tell the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers how much of their money you spent on the individual 
items like hotels and food and entertainment expenses during 
those trips? I ask you: what in fact are you hiding? If in fact your 
success is so great, why won’t you detail the cost of the items? 
What are you hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member likes to 
play with the word “hiding”. He knows very well I’m not hiding 
anything. We have brought forward the information year after 
year, and we’ve brought forward it now. In fact, his colleague 
from Regina North East just  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2406 
 
 

says, it’s 111,000 over 17 months and 16 trips. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s quite, quite clear it’s the same operations and the 
same rules that he applied, and he put it out there. 
 
Only when we come back, Mr. Speaker, we deliver. We ran a 
brand-new Hoechst expansion because I was in Germany, come 
back here, and Hoechst chemicals expanded here and now puts 
together and assembles chemicals for people in Saskatchewan to 
export all over North America, and that wasn’t here before. 
Hoechst chemicals, he hasn’t even heard of it, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it’s in down-town Regina in case the hon. member wants to look 
at it. 
 
Secondly, the potash sales, both with respect to my discussions in 
Europe and in South America, have made a significant different. 
 
Third, with respect to China, we have finally twinned with a 
province in China for the exchange of goods. Our largest potash 
customer is the Chinese, with tremendous potential, and that’s 
precisely why we’re there and putting together an arrangement so 
that we can have close affiliation. 
 
And the hon. member says, well my gosh, you made 17 trips and 
you spent $100,000. I just point out, because he bought a 
pulp-mill, we’re losing $91,000 a day, and they’re ashamed to 
even raise it in question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Travel for the Member for Wilkie 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, this has to do with some of 
the strange or rather strange travelling habits of the former 
minister of Highways, the member for Wilkie. The information 
tabled in this legislature, Mr. Minister, shows that the year prior to 
the minister’s resignation from cabinet, he had made some trips, 
some 14 trips out of province at the taxpayers’ expense I might 
add, Mr. Minister, at taxpayers’ expense. One trip in particular 
caught my eye. Well I say — maybe not one, about five did — but 
one in particular, Mr. Minister, caught my eye, and that had to do 
with the trip that the minister made to Lethbridge, Alberta, and this 
was at a cost of some $2,000 to the taxpayer and, Mr. Minister, I 
quote, the reason for this trip . . . and this was to view construction 
equipment — to view construction equipment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Since your department, Mr. Minister, auctioned off most of the 
highways equipment and fired a lot of the employees of that 
department, Mr. Minister, why was the former minister travelling 
out of province to view this construction equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not prepared 
to comment on some of the individual trips made. I do know that 
we provided you with the information that you had requested and, 
indeed, there were a number of trips, and all cabinet ministers are 
obligated to travel on a number of trips throughout their tenure. 
 
And the members opposite, when they were in  

government, were absolutely no exception. And I find it very, very 
strange that here today in the legislature they try and make such a 
big political issue out of flying an aircraft, and you know full well 
that during your term of government many of the cabinet ministers 
flew far more than the cabinet ministers in this administration. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister, Mr. Minister, 
maybe we make a big issue of flying, but would you not agree that 
the taxpayers of this province are somewhat concerned as to the 
extravagance of this government and the amount of money they 
spend on flying around, rather than building roads like they should 
be. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell the taxpayers, in your opinion, did 
you or the former minister purchase any of that equipment that he 
went out there to view, and if he did, what was that equipment to 
be used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Highways and 
Transportation, you would know full well that when a minister 
travels throughout his term of office he may look at literally 
hundreds and hundreds of pieces of equipment. There are 
numerous equipment deals in this province, in Alberta and 
elsewhere, where we go to view very specialized equipment — 
some of it is not available in this province. Sometimes a minister 
may have to travel out of province to have a look at specialized 
equipment. I think that that is only fair and reasonable that a 
cabinet minister in charge of purchasing a goodly number of 
dollars’ worth of equipment in a year, go and investigate the 
equipment himself. 
 
I remember the member opposite talking about buses that we 
bought. He said, well why didn’t the minister in charge go down 
and have a look at the buses. Well here’s a prime example where 
the minister took the interest to go and look at a piece of 
equipment, and here you have a problem with that. Quite frankly, I 
do not have a problem with that, and I do not believe that the 
taxpayers in this province have any problem with it whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Justice, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Queen’s Bench 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. When I’m on my feet, I 
don’t want talking from either side of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting Personal Care Homes 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Personal Care Homes. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2407 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:31 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 
the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 
Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Act 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 
Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 
Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Ambulance 
Act 
Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Highway 
Traffic Act, The Vehicle Administration Act, and The Motor 
Carrier Act 
Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Licensing and Inspection of 
Amusement Rides 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act 
Bill No. 60 — An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits to or on 
behalf of Certain Senior Citizens 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax 
Act 
Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax 
Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 57 — An Act respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in 
Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting the Provision of Home Care 
Services 
Bill No. 48 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and govern its activities and to provide for 
an appeal board with respect to certain assessment matters 
Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Assessment 
Management Agency Act 
Bill No. 52 — An Act respecting Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations 
Bill No. 59 — An Act respecting the Establishment of Ambulance 
Districts and Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance Operators and 
Emergency Medical Personnel and the Provision of Ambulance 
Services in Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on 
Saskatchewan Highways 
Bill No. 63 — An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles and 
Licensing of Drivers 
Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 (No. 2) 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:35 p.m. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as you will know, and as 
members of the House will know, that this week, beginning 
tomorrow, the Prime Minister of Canada and the planning and 
priorities committee of the federal cabinet will be in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe they’re meeting in Saskatchewan for the first time in the 
history of this country, and it’s extremely important that members 
of the Government of Saskatchewan meet with them and lay out 
our priorities as it deals with a whole range of things. And with 
that in mind, Mr. Speaker . . . And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan as well very much appreciate the fact that the 
federal planning and priorities committee is meeting in our 
province as they bring their meeting to western Canada. And so 
with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the 
Hon. Mr. Berntson, the member for Souris-Cannington: 
 
That when this Assembly adjourns on Wednesday, July 2, 1986 it 
do stand adjourned until Monday, July 7, 1986. 
 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address a few 
remarks to this motion. I know we all welcome the federal 
cabinet’s committee coming to our province. I know that we are 
anxious to have the cabinet focus its attention on western Canada. 
We certainly welcome any attention they will give. 
 
I think it’s clear that most of the meetings will be in secret and 
they will be cabinet committee meetings and will not involve 
many of the front bench opposite, and I suspect will involve none 
of the back bench opposite. There’s no real prospect of the 
planning and priorities committee of the federal cabinet meeting 
with 25 or 30 back-benchers of a provincial legislature. If so, they 
will be simply going through an exercise in public relations and 
will not be deciding on the issues with respect to the planning and 
priorities of the federal government. 
 
I think this is not the first time the planning and priorities 
committee of the federal cabinet has met outside Ottawa, and we 
know pretty well what their practice is. Any suggestion that all or 
most of the members of this legislature need to be involved in the 
meetings, I think, is not well-founded. And accordingly, while we 
certainly welcome the meeting of the cabinet committee here in 
Saskatchewan, I’m unable to see why we should set aside the 
sittings of the House. 
 
The House has sat a long time. We are wanting very much I think 
to wind up this session. It’s already at day 72. It got a late start 
because, unlike the previous practice, the session did not start in 
the fall. The throne speech was not in the fall but was in the 
spring, and we had both the throne speech debate and the budget 
debate before we had any opportunity to address the estimates or 
any legislation of any significance. Indeed, most of the legislation 
of significance was put before us in the month of June, and as a 
result we find ourselves sitting in July, I suspect for the first time 
in many, many, many years that a  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2408 
 
 

spring session commencing in March carried over through April, 
May, June, and July — into July. 
 
Accordingly, I think that all of us, I think, wish to bring this 
session to a speedy conclusion, having dealt with the business 
before us. And I would therefore suggest to all Hon. Members 
that we carry on with our work today and tomorrow and Friday 
and as many days as it takes to finish it off, and then we conclude 
the session and look forward to the next session if, as, and when it 
comes under the administration which is opposite. 
 
This session has the distinction really of being somewhat of a 
makeshift session. I think none of us, when the session 
commenced, felt that the legislature would be in session today. We 
didn’t feel, in fact, that it would be in existence today in its present 
form. All of us anticipated, and I think with a good deal of sound 
evidence to back up that anticipation, that there would have been 
an election in late April or early May, or, failing that, an election 
in June, and we would have had a new legislature now which 
would have an opportunity to meet as a new legislature if it so 
wished. 
 
However, that was not to be. The government opposite decided 
not to call an election, decided to have a session continuing into 
day 72, and decided to have a legislature longer than any since 
World War II. They, having made that decision, it seems to me 
they have an obligation to get on with the business of the 
government and complete this session, deal with the issues before 
us, and then conclude the session. 
 
And I regret very much that the government is now deciding, or at 
least seeking to decide, that it doesn’t wish to carry on with the 
business but wishes to take some days off, particularly since we’ve 
just had four days off — four very welcome days off — but, 
nonetheless, four days off, which should have brought us all back 
here refreshed and ready to deal with the business of the House. 
 
And why, I ask, are they wishing to go to Saskatoon? Why are 
they indeed, in the words of the minister, wishing to meet with the 
federal cabinet committee on planning and priorities in order to 
impress upon that committee the needs of Saskatchewan and the 
needs of western Canada? And I think that the reason for that, we 
don’t have far to seek. It is that the cabinet has been shuffled. And 
in the cabinet shuffle, western Canada has been sorely, sorely 
underrepresented in the major seats of power. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The motion simply deals 
with the time that the House is going to be closed — order, order! 
— and it has nothing to do with the juggling of the federal cabinet. 
If the member has something more to say on the motion that’s 
before us, I’d be pleased to hear it. 
 
Order! Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am replying to the 
comments of the minister. The minister said he was going up to 
meet the cabinet committee on planning and priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve asked the member to  

get on with the debate on the Bill that’s before us. I would ask him 
to do that. Order. I’m not asking for the other members of that 
caucus to make any comment. I’m speaking to the member who is 
given the floor, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with some care to 
the comments of the minister. He moved the motion and gave his 
reasons why the motion should be passed. I propose to argue 
against the passage of that motion, and I propose to challenge his 
reasons. And if he can put the reasons, I can say why those are not 
valid reasons, and I am now saying it. I am saying why those are 
not valid reasons. I am saying, sir, that your reason for wanting to 
meet that committee is ill-starred because you have already been 
deprived of your opportunity to be an effective voice. 
 
You want to meet with the Minister of Energy. You could have 
met with the Minister of Energy from Vancouver. You are now 
going to meet with the Minister of Energy from the province of 
Quebec . . .(inaudible interjection). . . That’s right. You bet it is. 
And they are consumers of energy; consumers of oil, and they 
used to be — their minister used to be from a province that 
produced oil and natural gas. It will now be from a province who 
is quintessentially a consumer of oil and natural gas and doesn’t 
produce a cubic foot of natural gas, or doesn’t produce a barrel of 
oil. 
 
And we can expect, I am sure, that those concerns will find their 
way to the mind of the minister, and I hope, Mr. Minister, when 
you are in Saskatoon, whenever you get there, that you press — 
you press on the Prime Minister the desirability of having a 
minister who is knowledgeable about the concerns of energy. 
 
And now, Mr. Minister, you say you want to go to Saskatoon, and 
you say you want to meet that planning and priorities committee, 
and you want to press the concerns of Saskatchewan with respect 
to agriculture. Mr. Minister, you have been pressing the concerns 
with respect to agriculture, and the Premier has regaled this House 
on many, many occasions with what he believes he has achieved. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, when you go on the mission which you 
mentioned in your opening remarks, I want you to mention to the 
Prime Minister the desirability of having a minister of agriculture 
from western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I want you to underline that fact. You, 
Mr. Minister, have talked about whether or not we should be 
meeting here, or whether you should be in Saskatoon. That’s what 
the debate is about, whether or not the interests of Saskatchewan 
people will be better served if we are here in this legislature, as I 
contend, or whether you and some of your colleagues are in 
Saskatoon dealing with the Prime Minister’s committee on cabinet 
planning and priority, as you contend. 
 
That’s the issue; that’s what we’re debating. And I say to  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2409 
 
 

you, Mr. Minister, we would be better off if that committee on 
planning and priorities was dealing with agricultural problems as 
formulated by a minister who had some more knowledge of 
western agriculture than does the current Minister of Agriculture, 
Mr. Wise. I therefore think that with respect to Mr. Wise, either 
you are doing very well as the Premier consistently contends, in 
which case you don’t need to go to Saskatoon, or you are not 
doing very well at all, as I suggest is the case, judging from the 
condition of Saskatchewan agriculture, in which case there really 
isn’t much point in you going. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you are urging that it is important that this 
House adjourn so that you and your colleagues can go to deal with 
the cabinet committee on planning and priorities, so that you can 
urge upon them things which will be good for the economy of 
Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Minister, we know what the view of the 
federal government is with respect to the economy in 
Saskatchewan and western Canada. We know that. I say that the 
actions of the Prime Minister this last weekend speak much more 
loudly than any words he could say to you, or any words you 
could relay to this House as a result of those meetings. We just 
have to look at what has happened. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
whether or not, in the face of what has happened, you believe that 
any good purpose would be served by you and some of your 
colleagues going to Saskatoon to argue this case. 
 
In the face, Mr. Minister of what the Prime Minister has done, 
why do you believe it would be fruitful for you to go to Saskatoon 
to do the job which you have suggested is the purpose for this 
motion. We have concerns in western Canada. We have concerns 
in western Canada in four or five major areas, and I have touched 
upon energy, and that’s a major concern. You know that, and you 
can raise that with the Prime Minister, but you already have his 
answer. He said, I’m not concerned with western Canada’s energy 
concerns, I’m going to make a Quebec minister the Minister of 
Energy. 
 
Then we have other concerns. We have a concern about 
agriculture, and you say that you want to go to Saskatoon, you and 
your colleagues, to press those concerns about agriculture but, Mr. 
Minister, the Prime Minister has already spoken to you. He has 
left Mr. Wise in Agriculture. 
 
For the first two years of that government they had a minister of 
Agriculture form eastern Canada. We would have had every 
reason to expect that, when there was a cabinet shuffle, there 
would have been a move to have a minister of Agriculture form 
western Canada, but the answer was no. The Prime Minister said 
no. And I wonder why, Mr. Minister, you feel that to adjourn this 
House and for you to go to Saskatoon will be effective to change 
the Prime Minister’s horizons with respect to the importance of 
agriculture in western Canada. You didn’t offer any such 
comments in your opening statement, and it may well be that some 
of your colleagues will be joining the debate and outlining why it 
is important that you be there, why you expect to get results when 
the Prime Minister has spoken, and spoken in such a convincing 
way with respect to his concern about western agriculture. 
 
And now I turn, Mr. Minister, to the concerns of transport.  

We did have . . . There can be virtually no place in Canada that has 
any more concerns about transport than Saskatchewan. And you 
have indicated, Mr. Minister, that you are going; you wish to 
adjourn the House so that you can go to Saskatoon to talk to the 
Prime Minister about the concerns of Saskatchewan, and I suggest 
to you, about the transportation concerns of Saskatchewan. Well, 
Mr. Minister, we had a minister of Transport from western Canada 
— we had a minister of Transport from western Canada — but no 
longer do we have a minister of Transport from western Canada. 
No longer do we have . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Members 
opposite are suggesting that it’s important that the person who was 
minister of Transport is now Deputy Prime Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Based upon what deputies do, whether 
they’re vice-presidents of the United States or deputy prime 
ministers here in Canada, based upon Mr. Nielsen’s record in that 
post, I do not see how it will be of any particular merit — any 
particular merit — to Saskatchewan to have Mr. Mazankowski 
serving in that portfolio. He is no longer minister of Transport; and 
who is Minister of Transport? Someone who is attuned to the 
concerns of western Canada — Mr. Crosbie from St. Johns, 
Newfoundland. Now they have transportation problems as well, 
but they’re very, very different from ours. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They have a lot of railways in 
Newfoundland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The railways of Newfoundland, the 
negotiation is how all the tracks shall be pulled up and the Newfie 
Bullet shall be laid to rest, but I don’t want to get into that. I want 
to talk only about the concerns of Saskatchewan and whether or 
not you believe, Mr. Minister, that there’s any grounds for belief 
that if you go to Saskatoon and talk about transport with Mr. 
Crosbie, you are likely to get anything for Saskatchewan, or 
whether you wouldn’t be better off here dealing with the business 
before this House. 
 
The Prime Minister has already spoken. He has told you what he 
thinks about transport in western Canada; he’s put the portfolio in 
the hands of a minister from Newfoundland, a minister with a 
charming accent; a minister who has many, many attributes, but a 
knowledge of transportation in western Canada isn’t one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come to what I think is crucial . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m getting a lot of assistance, 
and if I wanted to talk about potash . . . I will talk about potash, 
because that has been suggested. Members opposite are suggesting 
to me that I ought to address my remarks to potash. 
 
The minister believes that he can go and talk to, I take it, the new 
Minister of Mines and address the problems of potash — it slips 
my mind just who the new Minister of Mines is. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Obviously the Minister of State  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2410 
 
 

for Mines is not a high profile person in this cabinet. The Minister 
of Energy, Mr. Marcel Masse, is a very high profile person and 
acknowledged, I think, to be now the head of the Quebec members 
of the federal caucus. 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Minister, about your proposition which you are 
advancing as the reason why we should adjourn this House, your 
proposition that you will talk to these ministers and great things 
will come for Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to remind you, Mr. Minister, that it’s incumbent upon you 
to make that argument, and in the face of what the Prime Minister 
has done, your argument is not a strong one. Look at all of the 
major portfolios of a financial nature which the Prime Minister has 
positioned in his cabinet. And what, Mr. Minister, gives you any 
belief that, based upon the Prime Minister’s performance — 
immediately after his election in September of 1984, and now over 
the weekend — he has very much concern for the economic 
problem of Saskatchewan and western Canada and your trip to 
Saskatoon would be worthwhile? What give you that idea? Is it 
perhaps the appointment of the Minister of Employment, Mr. 
Benoit Bouchard? Do you think he will have a concern and a 
knowledge of the employment problems of Saskatchewan and the 
prairies? Or is it the minister of regional economic expansion, and 
now called Regional Industrial Expansion, Mr. Michel Côté? Do 
you believe he will have a particular concern and knowledge such 
that you may go to Saskatoon with some assurance that your trip 
will be worthwhile, and that the adjournment of the House is in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people? I think not. I think not, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
(1500) 
 
Or is it perhaps the financial portfolios, the Minister of Finance, 
Mr. Wilson from Ontario, straight out of Dominion Securities 
Pitfield. Is it your persuasive powers with that minister which 
suggests to you that it would be a good idea for us to adjourn the 
House so that you can go to Saskatoon and persuade that minister 
to make some decisions which would be in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan? I think not. I think not. 
 
Or is it the minister in charge of the treasury board? Is it your 
persuasive powers with Mr. Robert De Cotret which suggests to 
you that you ought to leave this House, lay aside any concern 
about Weyerhaeuser which was a matter of very high concern for 
you a day or two ago, but now you want to adjourn the House and 
don’t want to talk about it. I say to you, Mr. Minister, there is no 
basis — on the basis of what the Prime Minister has done, there is 
no proper ground for believing that you will have a fruitful time in 
Saskatoon and that it is worthwhile for us to adjourn the House so 
that you may go there. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, the case you have made is a weak one. The 
case you have made is a weak one. You have argued that you 
should go to Saskatoon to talk to this cabinet and its chief 
committee, this key committee of this newly formed cabinet, in 
order that you may persuade this cabinet to make decisions which 
will be in the best interests of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, when I look at this cabinet, when I  

look at the changes which the Prime Minister has made, I do not 
see the merit of closing down this House so that you may argue 
energy with Mr. Masse, or finance with Mr. Wilson, or transport 
with Mr. Crosbie. 
 
Under those circumstances, Mr. Minister, I fail to see why you are 
arguing that you should close down this House, close down this 
House and go to Saskatoon in order to put this case. I believe, Mr. 
Minister, that we should be here. I believe we should be talking 
about Weyerhaeuser and PAPCO. I don’t, Mr. Minister, nor am I 
contending that every member opposite should be here. It is 
entirely possible for you to send 15 people to Saskatoon to talk 
with every cabinet minister and still have a goodly number here to 
carry on the debate on these important issues before us. 
 
Members opposite have said over and over again, why aren’t we 
talking about Weyerhaeuser? I would very much like to talk about 
Weyerhaeuser. I would like to talk about the arguments which 
should be put on that Bill. I heard the . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
This is the nature of the problem, Mr. Speaker. Some members are 
saying, why don’t you talk about Weyerhaeuser? Others are 
saying, let’s go, let’s talk about Weyerhaeuser, when the House 
Leader is saying, let’s not talk about anything; let’s go up to 
Saskatoon. And I think that that represents the problem. 
 
We’ve got a good deal of work to do here, a good deal of work 
with respect to Weyerhaeuser; questions that we need to ask; 
indeed we were challenged to ask them by the Premier in question 
period today . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to hear the minister, the House 
Leader, suggest that we ought not . . . that we do not wish to talk 
about Weyerhaeuser. I want, Mr. Minister, then to talk about 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, I bet you do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I do, indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There’s more talk back and forth 
across the House than there is from the member that’s on his feet, 
and I would ask you to give him time to make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there are many things about, 
let us say, the business before us, but I’ll instance the 
Weyerhaeuser deal as an instance that should be discussed, and 
should be discussed at some length. And I think we should get on 
with this, and I would invite the House Leader to withdraw this 
motion so we could get on with this discussion, because there are 
important aspects of that deal which have not yet been revealed. 
The minister has not yet given us the documents — and we won’t 
go over all that again; we’ll have an appropriate forum for that. 
 
But I want to say this: we do need to examine the financial aspects 
of that deal. We do need to ask ourselves two questions — two 
absolutely key questions. If this Weyerhaeuser transaction goes 
forward, what extra expenditure, or what savings will accrue to the 
Crown? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2411 
 
 

And that’s a key question. And in order to do that, we have to ask 
ourselves the other question. What money has been paid out over 
the last several years with respect to Weyerhaeuser? And those are 
key questions that I think need to be discussed, and I would like to 
think that we were here discussing them, here discussing them 
today and tomorrow. Members opposite profess to be very proud 
of their Weyerhaeuser deal. I wonder, then, why they want to shut 
down the House and not talk about it. 
 
Why do they want to say, fine, we’re here on Wednesday and we 
could talk about it for an hour or two, but after that we don’t want 
to talk about it on Thursday; we don’t want to talk about it on 
Friday because we’ve got other things we want to talk about and 
maybe the public will have forgotten about it by Monday. Well I 
don’t think they will have forgotten about it by Monday. I don’t 
think they will have forgotten about it by Monday. But in any case 
it seems to me we shouldn’t allow them to forget about it. 
 
If we are responsible members of this House, those who are 
proponents of that particular financial transaction, and those who 
question that particular financial transaction, involving as it does 
over $250 million, should be here in this House — should be here 
in this House today, should be here in this House tomorrow, 
should be here in this House on Friday talking about this 
transaction. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I am not suggesting that some members 
opposite may not wish to go to Saskatoon and talk with the Prime 
Minister and his cabinet, for whatever good it may do. I have tried 
to illustrate the fact that the Prime Minister has already spoken, 
and spoken in the way that really counts, when he named his 
cabinet. But I’m not suggesting that members opposite shouldn’t 
be there, some of them. But I don’t think that that means that all 
. . . 52 is it? I lose count as they peel off. But 52, I believe is the 
count . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
That’s right. There is still a large number, notwithstanding the 
defections; there is still a large number notwithstanding the 
reasons for leaving, some of them most unfortunate. There is still 
enough so that the members opposite could carry on the business 
of this House and could, at the same time, send some of their 
members to Saskatoon to, even at this date, speak to the Prime 
Minister on some issues involving transportation, and possibly 
advise Mr. Crosbie of the nature of railways. 
 
You could talk to Mr. Masse and advise him of the nature of oil 
wells, and natural gas wells and pipelines. I have every reason to 
believe Mr. Marcel Masse is an intelligent man, even though 
ill-informed on all issues with respect to energy . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
I think, as the member for Weyburn suggests — the member for 
Weyburn suggests it is . . . I suggest that he is an intelligent man 
and I want to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If any members have something 
they’d like to contribute to this debate, I would ask them to save it 
until the time when they get on their feet. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But I don’t want to belabour this point. 
My point is clear and simple: the numbers of the government 
make it possible for them to do all the things which the minister 
suggested should be done and still have the House here, sitting, 
dealing with the business of the House, dealing with issues which 
the government believes are important, otherwise they wouldn’t 
be spending quite so much money on television advertisements for 
the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
They must feel that there’s some merit in that Bill before us, since 
I wasn’t able hardly to catch a sports event over the weekend 
without seeing the costly television ads. They must feel there’s 
some merit in that. I didn’t see any ads with respect to 
Weyerhaeuser, but there may well be some there. 
 
And there are of course other issues before us which, in my 
judgement, ought to be dealt with. These are not earth-shaking but 
still, none the less, important issues that I hope will not be allowed 
to drop on the order paper, and they concern the amendments to 
the small claims provisions and particularly the provision s of The 
Trade Union Act. They were put forward with a good deal of 
fanfare, and I would very much hope that this House would be 
able to get to them. And I very much fear that if we don’t sit today 
or tomorrow or the next day, if we spend our time picnicking or as 
the case may be, then we will not get this work done, and the 
people of Saskatchewan will be the poorer for it. 
 
I know . . . I’m sure the Minister of Labour is anxious to proceed 
with the amendments to The Trade Union Act which he put 
forward, and I would be disappointed if that were not the case. I’m 
sure that he would not have put them forward had he not intended 
to go forward with them. And again, I don’t mean to direct my 
attention to the merits of the Bill. I am saying, there it is on the 
order paper; it was put there by the government. I think it was put 
there with the purpose of passing it by the government. 
 
And I fear that if we don’t sit, and if we have now two days off in 
the high summer, some of our energy may wilt, and we may not 
get to some of this important material which is on the order paper, 
having regard to the fact this is day 72 of the session. And I think 
we may well have already struck a record for any continuous 
sitting days with out a substantial break. I think the 72 is such. 
 
And I think, therefore, that there will be a good deal of pressure 
from wives and families and others to wind up this session. And if 
we put it over till next week, I very much fear that some of these 
important matters which are still before us will not get the 
consideration that they deserve. 
 
We are not, I think, through with our business yet, since we have 
first readings of The Queen’s Bench Act, and real estate brokers, 
and personal care homes and the like. I have every reason to 
believe that the personal care homes Bill is a fairly comprehensive 
Bill. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I say, therefore, Mr. House Leader, before I take my  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2412 
 
 

seat, I will make my plea once again, that you withdraw the 
motion — I see the mover and the seconder are still here — 
withdraw the motion and have us get on with the business of the 
House so that we can, as you say, address the Weyerhaeuser 
matter and all other matters before us. 
 
You, and I’m sure the public, will appreciate that you can have 
some of your people in Saskatoon. I’m sure that the public, as will 
we, will understand if a number of the key ministers are not in the 
House. We will address our . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I will 
commence that statement again. I was paying a little attention to a 
comment that I shouldn’t have done. 
 
My point is simple. If you have some of your people go to 
Saskatoon, we can still carry on the work of this House. You know 
that; we know that. We can make sure that the public knows that. 
There will be no criticism levelled at the ranks of the government 
simply because a number of their people are meeting with the 
Prime Minister. I think the public will say that’s a good use of the 
legislature, going on with the business, disposing of the matters 
before us, and having a number of key ministers meeting with the 
Prime Minister and his key ministers, speaking on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. That seems to me to be the way in which 
we can do our job best, the way we can discharge the obligations 
which were given to us when we were elected to this legislature. 
 
I therefore, again, Mr. Minister, suggest that you and the seconder 
withdraw this motion, that we carry on, do our job, and have some 
of your colleagues go to Saskatoon to do the job which they 
believe needs to be done and which, Heaven knows, we believe 
needs to be done. We just don’t think it can be done effectively 
with the new cabinet that has been sworn in by the Prime Minister, 
where he makes his preference for his colleagues from Quebec 
and Ontario all too clear. 
 
There’s no doubt that the cabinet shuffle dealt with the political 
problems of the party in Quebec when they’re running a third 
between the Liberals and the New Democratic Party. Under those 
circumstances, it is difficult to think that anything but those 
political concerns will be uppermost in the minds of the Prime 
Minister and his committee on priorities, but in the hope that 
something might be done, we would have no quarrel with the 
ministers being there, pressing the point. 
 
We would suggest that a sufficient number be here so that we can 
carry on the business of this legislation, do both jobs at once, get 
the work that’s on the order paper done. We would have no 
quarrel with ministers being there pressing the point. We would 
suggest that a sufficient number be here so that we can carry on 
the business of this legislature, do both jobs at once, get the work 
that’s on the order paper done so that we can wind up this session, 
already the longest continuous session in the history of this 
province. 
 
Let’s get on with it; let’s get our job done, and then we will be 
able to leave this Chamber where, if I may be permitted a 
comment, a level of animosity is developing which doesn’t do us 
as much credit as it might. Let’s finish the session, get the work 
done, and then have an opportunity to contemplate our successes 
and failures  

during the summer, steeling ourselves — or perhaps that’s an 
appropriate word for members opposite at least — steeling 
ourselves for the upcoming election which may come in October 
or some later time. 
 
I urge that upon you, Mr. Minister. Would you consider 
withdrawing your motion so we can get on with the business of 
the House and do the job that needs to be done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my remarks will be brief 
and to the point because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, at least some 
of the arguments advanced by the Leader of the Opposition have 
some validity — and I say “some” — and some merit. And I 
genuinely believe that the Leader of the Opposition does, in fact, 
want to stay here and get on with the business of the province, and 
deal with the Weyerhaeuser Bill and the pension Bill and those 
kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, he talks about sitting here for 72 days, and I 
remind him, Mr. Speaker, that about 15 of those days were dealing 
with the Department of Health estimates. And it’s not any 
different now than it has been in the past. The opposition are 
always the people who determine the length of the session, and it 
hasn’t changed. That’s always been the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can remember in the past when I was sitting on that side of 
the House when, with leave of the Assembly, we would adjourn 
for some particular function. We believe this one is important, the 
planning and priorities committee of the federal government. The 
Canadian government is the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
no matter what political stripe it is. We would have done the same 
for any other planning and priorities committee that was coming to 
Saskatchewan. But the members opposite obviously don’t want us 
to enjoy the kind of relationship we enjoy with the federal 
government. 
 
So I’m going to give, Mr. Speaker, members opposite an 
opportunity to show just how much work they want to do. And I 
would recommend, if the opposition would accept my proposal, I 
would recommend to my colleague, the member for Meadow 
Lake, that he withdraw his motion. And the motion that I would 
put, conditional on their acceptance of this, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Conditional on their acceptance of this, Mr. Speaker, the motion 
that I would put would be as follows: notwithstanding Rule 3, Mr. 
Speaker, that this House recess from 5 until 7 p.m. on July 2, 
1986, and sit from 7 to 10 p.m. this evening; and that when it 
adjourns on July 2nd — that’s today — it do stand adjourned until 
10 a.m. on July 3rd; and that the sitting hours on July 3rd will be 
from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., and from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m., and from 7 p.m. 
to 10 p.m., on the 3rd of July and subsequent days, with the 
exception of Sunday, until the business of the House has been 
dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would make that proposal, and I would recommend 
to my colleague that he withdraw his motion, contingent upon the 
acceptance of that proposal by members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I 
would now like to see members opposite put their money where 
their mouth is. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2413 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! Order, please. 
Order. I’m asking for order, and that implies all people, including 
the member for Shaunavon. Why was the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’d like to close debate, Mr. Speaker, on 
the motion before the House. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I don’t know why the member for Cannington was 
on his . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’m going to ask both sides 
of this House to come to order so we can carry on the business of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising to oppose the one motion 
that we have on the floor. There’s only one motion before this 
House. I know the member has been called Mr. Beauchesne and 
all kinds of names before because he doesn’t know the rules, and 
he tried to introduce a second motion while there’s one on the 
floor rather than talk to the House Leader and try and come out 
with a deal that would determine what we’re going to do. 
 
I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to speak against the motion by the 
member for Meadow Lake. This House and the function of this 
House doesn’t really matter to the people opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
What we do in here doesn’t really matter. They tolerate this place. 
And the blatant example today of trying to shut down this 
Assembly to go up to Saskatoon to eat, drink, and be merry, and 
have a good time, is a very good indication of the priorities of this 
House. 
 
I feel that the people of Saskatchewan — when they’re talking 
about the decorum in this place — and the comments I hear across 
Saskatchewan are very valid when they are saying that these 
people, when they first stood up and wanted to be elected and 
wanted to form the government, decided that we’re going to 
applaud rather than pat our desks because that doesn’t show any 
respect for the House. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve never 
seen a level of decorum like we have in here. I am very 
disappointed in what the treasury benches feel and respect and 
tolerate, and that’s why I’m against this motion today. 
 
I think that if the members opposite want to go up and meet with 
the cabinet, there’s ample numbers there that they can go and meet 
with the priorities committee of the federal government; there’s 
room for Mr. Bouchard; there’s room for all these people across 
the way to go up and meet with whoever wants to meet with him. 
And I would really encourage the Premier to get up there and meet 
with the Minister of Agriculture and meet with agriculture people, 
because you can look at here any time, Mr. Speaker, and you 
know that their whip is standing at the door and counting and 
trying to determine to keep a quorum. That’s always the case. So 
there’s always 40 or more missing, so there’s no reason in the 
world why 15 or 20 can’t go up and meet with the priorities 
committee and leave members here. 
 

It’s obvious how much respect they have for this House because 
when members are out of the cabinet, once they’re removed from 
it, other than maybe the member for Arm River, but some of the 
others — once they’re removed from cabinet they don’t bother 
attending any more. Where’s the member from Wilkie? Haven’t 
seen him one day this sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. You’re not allowed to draw 
attention to members, whether they’re here or not. That’s part of 
the parliamentary rules, and I would ask the member to get back to 
the subject of the motion. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The point I was trying to make, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’ll talk about the Bill before us, that there are sufficient numbers 
to maintain 15 or 17 in here. There are sufficient numbers of 
people. That’s the point I’m making, that the members have 
demonstrated that they can do activities and do duties in their 
constituencies or otherwise. And so I suggest that members go up 
and meet with the priorities committee and discuss the issues that 
are relevant and important, and let us stay here and deal with the 
issues that we’re wanting to talk about. 
 
I don’t know why the government wants to run away from the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. I don’t know. Last night at a function in 
Thompson Lake regional park, Mr. Minister, I happened to run 
into a person that stopped at the park. And they had Canada Days 
there and I had the privilege of cutting a giant cake. It was great. I 
enjoyed the day off, Mr. Speaker. But I think we’re refreshed and 
we’re ready to come back and talk about Weyerhaeuser. 
 
(1530) 
 
I met a fellow by the name of Holme from Tacoma, Washington 
and guess what? He’s been employed and worked for 
Weyerhaeuser. He’s been employed . . . And I know . . . And I got 
some firsthand information about Weyerhaeuser, and I want to 
stay here and talk about Weyerhaeuser and the kind of corporate 
citizens they are. I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan what 
Mr. Holme told me from Tacoma, Washington. I want to tell these 
people . . . because by a chance meeting he stopped and introduced 
himself to me and told me about his background and where he’s 
from. 
 
And I think these people want to run away from it. They think, 
well we’ve had two days off, we’ve had two days off now; and if 
we take the rest of the week off, maybe some people might start 
forgetting about the kinds of deals these people are making — 
maybe they’ll forget about them. And I want to tell you, we’re 
here to do the business of this House with the respect that this 
House should have for the business of the province, and I think it’s 
important that we continue with the work of this House. 
 
I think that members of the treasury branches can go and meet 
with the government members and it won’t affect us. If the 
member from Meadow Lake is here dealing with his Bill on 
Weyerhaeuser, there is 16, 17 other cabinet ministers can go up to 
Saskatoon; and when they come back, another one can go. 
 
And I think there is no problem, there is no problem with  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2414 
 
 

having them go up Thursday night if they have to have this party. 
If they have to go up and have this giant barbecue, that’s great. We 
can do that on Thursday night; I have no problem with that. In 
fact, I had that in my notes before I heard the member who tried to 
run two motions at one time. 
 
But the point that we need to discuss and the point that we need to 
make . . . I have before me, Mr. Speaker, a resolution that one of 
the reeves that’s a director of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities . . . He told me, our association went on 
record and we sent a resolution from our mini-meeting in May to 
this government. And the resolution reads as follows: 
 

Therefore be it resolved the governments of the Province of 
Saskatchewan and the Dominion of Canada be called upon 
to assist farmers by providing a policy to reimburse a farmer 
for 50 per cent of the cost of any chemicals used in the 
eradication of grasshoppers . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. At the proper time I 
think the member could bring that kind of information to the 
House, but I don’t believe this is the time, and I would ask you to 
come back to the subject area of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, the motion we’re debating is whether 
this House should adjourn so the Minister of Agriculture and the 
cabinet and all the PCs can go off and meet with the Government 
of Canada. 
 
And I’m telling you that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, that represents as many people as we do here — 
they represent all the farmers of Saskatchewan — passed a 
resolution unanimously and they drew it to my attention . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’ve just told the 
member that that can be brought forward at other times, but that is 
not a proper point to be raising on this particular motion. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The motion before us is whether we should adjourn 
and the reasons for adjourning. And my suggestion is that the 
Minister of Agriculture can go to Saskatoon with an important 
pressing issue and take that issue with him and talk to the Minister 
of Agriculture without adjourning this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. If the member 
wants to raise issues that the Minister of Agriculture should talk to 
the federal Minister of Agriculture, that’s fine, but the details of 
what he should discuss, I don’t think are part of this particular 
discussion. Order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, we talked about details. Now the 
broad, sweeping suggestion that this government pays 50 per cent 
of the cost of grasshopper spray is a broad issue. And that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is debating my ruling, and 
my ruling was . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, I’m not. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, you are, and I’m going to tell you to get on 
to another topic. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I will abide by your ruling, and I will 
say that when the Minister of Agriculture goes to Saskatoon, if the 
House adjourns or doesn’t adjourn, these are some issues he 
should take with him, and he can discuss those issues. He can talk 
to the Minister of Agriculture and he can talk to the Prime 
Minister. He can talk to the Prime Minister without us adjourning 
this House. We don’t have to adjourn the House to take an 
important issue. 
 
Now I see the member from my neighbouring constituency, from 
Bengough, in his seat, and I appreciate him being here. I’m not 
sure if he’s supporting me or not on this one. But the farmers from 
his area that I’ve met with, the farmers from his area that I have 
met with are pressing hard saying, don’t let up, and continue to 
press on this government the issue that the farmers should be 
reimbursed for grasshopper spray. And I’m saying that when the 
Premier goes to Saskatoon, he should discuss the agricultural 
issues, and the most important one on all the farmers in southern 
Saskatchewan is the amount of money they’re spending. 
 
And that’s why we shouldn’t adjourn. We’re here to raise these 
issues. And the topic is relevant now, because a week from now, a 
week from now, if we adjourn for a whole week, Mr. Speaker, 
there might be crops that are completely lost. And if the farmers 
would know this week that they’re going to be reimbursed for 50 
per cent of their grasshopper spray, if they’d find that out this 
week, they’d maybe buy more spray and hire aircraft to come in 
and spray it, because their crop is about that high and the plants 
are polluted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is abusing the 
privilege of the House. If you have something more to say on the 
motion, I would ask you to proceed, otherwise we’ll move on to 
the next member. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, my concern is that this House is 
going to be shut down. I am concerned that this House, by this 
motion, is going to be shut down, and we won’t have an 
opportunity to raise important issues. Now as far as I’m 
concerned, that is the most important issue of the day. 
 
If we want to use rules and say that they can talk about energy, 
and they can talk why they want to go and adjourn the House, but 
I can’t talk about the most important issue facing farmers — that 
are grasshoppers — and I can’t say that the Minister of 
Agriculture should take that important issue there, then we are 
debating the main reason for not adjourning this House. The main 
reason for staying here is because of the importance and the 
relevance of dealing with those issues. So I’m saying that the 
cabinet ministers that are coming down, we had before the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2415 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — By leave of the Assembly, to withdraw the 
motion which the member is debating? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have leave to withdraw the 
motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
requested that we withdraw the motion, and I’m asking leave of 
the House to withdraw the motion before the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Motion withdrawn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly, 
that I move the following motion, seconded by the Minister of 
Advanced Education: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly shall on 
Wednesday, July 2, 1986, meet from 7 o’clock p.m. to 10 
o’clock p.m., and at commencing Thursday, July 3, 1986, 
and each sitting day thereafter, this Assembly shall sit from 
10 o’clock a.m. to 12 noon, and from 2 o’clock to 5 o’clock 
p.m., and from 7 o’clock to 10 o’clock p.m., and that 
notwithstanding rule 3, on Saturday, July 5, 1986 this 
Assembly shall meet at 10 o’clock a.m. until 10 o’clock 
p.m., and there shall be recess from 12 o’clock p.m. until 2 
o’clock p.m., and from 5 o’clock p.m. until 7 o’clock p.m., 
and that the order of business shall be the same as on Friday. 

 
I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. Why 
is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —On a point of order. I want to make the 
suggestion to the government members that may help them out of 
a difficult spot that they find themselves in, and that is that there’s 
a major barbecue with the Prime Minister and cabinet on Thursday 
night in Saskatoon, and we would be in total agreement, if that is 
the reason, that we take Thursday night off. 
 
I also know that the government intends to meet with the federal 
cabinet for one hour as reported in the press. Whatever hour that is 
that the cabinet want to meet, we would be in agreement with not 
sitting. So whatever the point is that you need to make, we would 
agree to it. 
 
But I’ll tell you that the schedule of the federal cabinet in 
Saskatchewan, on PC stationery, which tells where they’re touring 
in the province, we are not in agreement with the three-day 
political tour instead of working in the Assembly. But if it’s for the 
one hour planning meeting, we are in agreement with them taking 
the hour off, or if it’s Thursday night for the barbecue, take it off. 
But I’m saying we’re not in agreement with a three-day political 
tour to try to bolster Mulroney’s failing and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please! The member is debating a 
motion that was withdrawn from the floor. Order, please. The 
member rose on a point of order, not on a speech and a 
suggestion-making process. Why is the  

member on this feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to speak to the point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No. There’s no point of order there. 
 
(1545) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Minister, I would want to go back to 
where we left off last week when we left, I believe, Bill 56, which 
basically sells off a number of assets of the P.A. pulp operation. It 
includes the pulp-mill and the chemical plant in Saskatoon and a 
sawmill and 7 million acres of prime forest land. And in this 
schedule that you sent across to me a week ago Thursday, part of it 
clearly indicates that if earnings are negative, that those earnings 
— or in layman’s terms, the losses — would be written off against 
the debenture owing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You referred to a cap that may be in place. Now we’re not 
accepting your argument, because when we were asking about it 
on that particular Thursday night, you gave no indication of a cap. 
In fact, you made the argument . . . in fact, you inferred that the 
amount of the losses should be written off. And then a few days 
later you come back and say there may be a cap. 
 
I wonder, today do you have any firmer in your mind what the 
signed agreement would say in that regard, whether the signed 
schedule B holds, where there is no cap; or your second argument, 
where there is a cap, and if so, what would that cap be on the 
losses that would be written off against the loan to the people of 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, it’s as I said the other day, Mr. 
Chairman. I said that there is a likelihood that there would be a 
cap. It’s still under negotiation and will continue to be under 
negotiation for some days and perhaps a few weeks into the future, 
and that’s exactly where the situation lies, as it did on Friday. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —I wonder if the minister could indicate, on 
behalf of the people of the province who are guaranteeing the loan 
or putting up the debenture, do you feel there should be a cap, or 
are you in a position to say whether you believe that all the losses 
that Weyerhaeuser may incur in the first three years should be 
written off against the debenture? 
 
And just for a point of clarification, when we were starting out on 
this, you indicated that the debenture was for $248 million. And in 
questioning I was asking, if it were 50 million a year loss for the 
first three years, the company, would they be allowed to write off 
that $50 million loss  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2416 
 
 

each year. And you indicated that they would be, which would 
make the loan, or the debenture, not 248 million after the 
three-year period, but 98 million. 
 
And I wonder at this time, can you indicate to the committee what 
your position is, as the minister in charge of this much money — 
taxpayers’ money, I might add. Are you proposing that there be a 
cap, and if so, what do you think the cap should be? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as I said, Mr. Chairman, the subject 
of a cap is a negotiating point. Obviously there are two parties to 
the negotiation. Our side, or the government side in this 
negotiation, is clearly suggesting that there is one. But I can’t say. 
I was unable to say then, and I’m unable to say now, whether there 
will be. I said there’s likelihood that there will be a cap. It’s clearly 
our position we’d like to see one. But as I said before, there are 
two parties to negotiation, and that negotiation is still going on. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —But I wonder if the minister could indicate 
his position, the position as the guardian or the member of the 
board of the operation that looks after the billions of dollars in 
taxes that the people of the province pay each year. I’m not asking 
you for the amount exactly, but can you tell me the range that you 
think the cap should be in? Obviously you’ve put something on 
the table, and at this point in time you must have put something 
out. 
 
And it’s not a matter of jeopardizing your position with the 
company. Obviously they already know — they already know 
what your position is, and I can’t understand why you’re being so 
secretive. Who do you think shouldn’t know about the negotiating 
you’re doing? The company obviously knows. You’re not dealing 
with two or three or four companies; you’re only dealing with one. 
They know what your position is. Why are you being so secretive 
with the people of the province? Why is it that you are unable to 
tell the people what you’re able to tell an American company — 
what you’re doing with their tax dollar? 
 
And that’s the difficult thing that people are telling us, is that they 
don’t understand how the minister is so secretive with their tax 
dollars — where he’s spending it, what he’s giving away — and 
saying that he can’t tell them because he’s in negotiations with the 
company. Well obviously the company knows your position, so 
you’re not hiding anything from them. And you’re not 
jeopardizing your negotiating possibilities with them because they 
already know what you have on the table. 
 
And what I would like you to clarify for the committee and for my 
constituents who are concerned about the drastic increase in taxes 
there have been under your administration, and I think the lack of 
confidence they have in your ability as public administrators, what 
are you proposing that cap to be to the U.S. forest giant, 
Weyerhaeuser? How much do you think that they should be able 
to write off against the amount they owe the people of the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have said prior to 
this that . . . You know, the member says, what are  

you being so secretive about? And what I have said is that the final 
negotiated agreement, the total agreement and all the schedules 
thereto, will be made public after closing of that agreement. 
 
He says, why don’t you want to negotiate here in the legislature? 
The point I make is that every single point in the negotiation . . . 
There are many separate points in the negotiation, each of which 
the two parties to the negotiation must come to an agreement on. 
And when they come to an agreement on point A, B, C, D, and in 
order like that, then the final agreement is signed. 
 
That’s what’s going on now, the negotiation on the various points. 
The member know that clearly. He wants us to negotiate here in 
the legislature. Now clearly the negotiations will not happen here 
in the legislature. 
 
As it relates to the cap, I have said that it’s likely that here would 
be one. It’s a subject of negotiation. I’ve said that. And clearly, if 
it’s a subject of negotiation, that point is being made by our 
negotiators from the government side. So it’s clearly my position 
that I would like to see a cap. Okay? That’s clear, and I’ve said 
that the other day. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —The minister, I think, determines what he 
wants to negotiate in the House, depending on what the politics 
are. And you will remember, Mr. Minister, that when the Minister 
of Health was negotiating with the doctors, in Health estimates, he 
made no bones about laying out what the proposal was to the 
doctors — not a hesitation in any sense of the word. He said, this 
is what we’ve propose to the doctors, and they can either take it or 
leave it. And with the nurses, the same thing; and with the school 
teachers, and with your own employees, the secretaries that work 
in the Department of Social Services. 
 
You seem to have one set of rules for the ordinary folk in the 
province, but when it comes to large, multinational corporations, 
you get down on your hands and knees, and you say, we have to 
hide these negotiations. Well there are many people in the 
province that believe the reason you’re hiding it is because you’re 
embarrassed about what you’re giving away. They really feel that 
there shouldn’t be any kind of a give-away in terms of writing off 
against the principal owing if there’s a loss. 
 
Can you tell me one other instance, if you’re a farmer, or if you’re 
a home owner, or if you own a small business, where, if you have 
a loss, that that would be taken away from what you owe the bank, 
or the farmstart corporation, or the ag credit corporation? Is there 
any other instance that you can refer the people of Saskatchewan 
to where a similar clause would be in place? Can you tell me one 
other instance, what other business that has this advantage? Is 
there one other one? An oil company? Anyone? 
 
Is there one other area where, if you have a loss, it can be written 
off against the principal owing? Well the member from Weyburn 
seems to think this is perfectly in order, but I don’t think there’s 
one small business in his constituency that gets away with having 
a loss and then writing it off against the principal owing. I don’t 
think that that’s practised in business in the province. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2417 
 
 

And why the special deal for this American company? You may 
have a good explanation for it. You may have a very good reason 
for writing off $50 million against the loan that the people of 
Saskatchewan are putting up if Weyerhaeuser loses 50 million. 
There may be a good reason for it. I can’t see it, but there may be. 
 
And can you tell me other instances for farmers — let’s say in the 
constituency of Morse, that my friend and colleague from Morse 
had a loss in his hay field, that he didn’t make any money on his 
hay this year — can a farmer write off his losses against the 
amount owing to the credit union or the bank or to the agricultural 
credit society? Which ones? Tell me the instances where that may 
occur. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member clearly 
. . . He says why would losses be written off in the next . . . So 
what he’s really saying by that, Mr. Chairman, is the following: 
maintain the status quo. That’s what he said: maintain the status 
quo. Keep it as it is now, losing $91,000 a day, which has been 
clearly demonstrated, $91,000 a day since the very day at the end 
of 1980 when you guys, you New Democrats, bought the 
pulp-mill. 
 
You decided that you should add it to the crown jewels, and you 
should add it to the great family of Crown corporations, and from 
the very day that you took it over, calculated out until the end of 
1985, this enterprise has lost $91,000 a day, Mr. Chairman. And 
that member stands there and says, maintain the status quo, keep 
the status quo, continue to hemorrhage money all over this 
province. That’s what he says. That’s what the New Democrats 
say. 
 
And they went out this weekend, Mr. Chairman, they went out 
among the citizens of the province this weekend, and they got their 
ears pinned back by the citizens of this province about their 
position on this deal. They got their ears pinned back on the deal, 
and they know exactly what the people of the province think about 
this. 
 
What the people are saying, Mr. Chairman, is the following: if 
you’ve got an enterprise that’s losing that much, this famous 
family of Crown corporations which their philosophy will not 
allow them to let go . . . So what did we have here in this Bill, Mr. 
Chairman? We came along first reading of the Bill, second 
reading of the Bill, and they said a paper-mill would be a pretty 
good thing. A paper-mill would be a pretty good thing. But what 
happened in the interim, Mr. Chairman? What happened? 
 
Here’s what happened: their philosophy was right there, and when 
they came face to face with that philosophy, that big brick wall 
which does not let common sense prevail in any way, what do 
they say? They said, oh, the family of Crown corporations, the 
great jewels in our crown, are being jeopardized. These guys are 
actually going to make a good business deal. They’re going to get 
rid of this hemorrhaging company. They’re going to save the 
taxpayer some money. 
 
That’s when they looked at that and they said, we can’t  

allow that, because that’s the Crown of the NDP. Not the people, 
Mr. Chairman. It’s the people who are paying the money on a 
daily basis, and it’s the NDP, the New Democrats, who will not 
allow it to go because it’s part of their very being — owning every 
enterprise that there is in the province. That’s what they want. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan don’t stand for 
it. The people of Saskatchewan don’t stand for their position. And 
from a very politically selfish point of view, I and all of my 
colleagues are extremely pleased that they’re in the position that 
they’re in on this. We’re pleased that they’re in the position that 
they’re in on this. 
 
I heard the Leader of the Opposition earlier today saying that their 
energies may wilt as they go on into the summer here. I heard 
them say, let’s sit in the House here for a day or two and then 
we’ll be out of here because our energies may wilt. Well I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll tell everyone of those NDPers over 
there and all of the people of Saskatchewan, the energies of this 
young government, led by the Hon. Grant Devine, Premier of 
Saskatchewan, will not wilt. Our energies are that we’ll be here, 
and we’ll fight this as long as they want to fight it, and they are on 
the wrong side of the issue, and the people of Saskatchewan are 
behind us on this, Mr. Chairman. And just hope they stay right 
where they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure what the 
minister’s ranting and raving about. What I have a difficult time is 
when the ministers, whether it’s the Minister of Health or this 
particular minister, get up and rant and rave. You always wonder 
what’s behind it. 
 
Why do you get up and rant and rave when we could carry on a 
reasonable debate and find out why this particular corporation is 
writing off their losses against what they owe? I mean, the simple 
question to the minister was, can you name any other businesses in 
the province? 
 
And the minister, as soon as I sit down, if you’ve recovered from 
that red-faced ranting and raving you did, can you tell me any 
other business that can write off their losses against what they owe 
the bank or the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member says, keep the 
status quo. He says, maintain that; maintain these losses at the 
level that they are now. He says, we in the New Democratic Party 
government of the day borrowed $162 million — borrowed it 
from two chartered banks right in Saskatchewan. Two chartered 
banks — borrowed it; paid interest out. And here’s the interest 
expense, Mr. Chairman, which the member want . . . which never 
came out, of course. They hid it over in the Crown corporations 
sector throughout their government. Here’s the interest expense 
which has been borrowed on an annual basis to pay the interest on 
the money that they borrowed to buy a pulp-mill. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Chairman, a government deciding that they should 
buy a pulp-mill. And they said to the people, we need this 
pulp-mill to add as one more jewel to the great  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2418 
 
 

Crown. That’s what they said. And the people said, how much are 
you paying for it. And they said how much they’re paying for it. 
 
(1600) 
 
But here’s the cost: 1981, the cost of interest alone, Mr. Chairman, 
$36,063,731; that’s in interest alone; and in 1982, $29 million in 
interest alone paid out by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to prop 
up the philosophy of the New Democratic Party. 
 
But did they tell anybody about the interest they were paying? No. 
What did they say? It came from the Heritage Fund. What was the 
Heritage Fund, Mr. Chairman? The Heritage Fund was this — was 
that they went out and borrowed from two chartered banks in 
Saskatchewan, $162 million, and paid that kind of interest. 
 
Now, 1983, $20 million interest; 1984, almost 21 million — 
$20,960,673 directly paid in interest by the public of 
Saskatchewan in this losing proposition. And now what do they 
say? 
 
And in 1985, just to complete the story to the end of that 1985 
year, $18 million paid out in interest by the people of 
Saskatchewan to prop up the philosophy of those New Democratic 
members over there who cannot get the blinders off and cannot 
understand that regardless of — they say — regardless of the 
costs, our jewels must stay in the Crown. That’s what they’re 
saying — regardless of the costs. The people of Saskatchewan will 
not stand for it any longer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So what do we have as an alternative? What do we have as an 
alternative to such extravagance by them? What do we have as the 
alternative to bleeding money, an operation, present status quo? 
The alternative is to have a paper-mill built by a major corporation 
who is willing to invest $250 million into the economy of 
Saskatchewan and to take the risk. That company will do that. 
They’ll build a paper-mill, something that the members opposite 
say, we’d like to see a paper-mill. Once they said that, but now 
they’re saying we’re not sure if we want to see a paper-mill. Keep 
the multinational Weyerhaeuser corporation out of Saskatchewan 
is what they say because that’s the philosophy that has the blinders 
on them all. So that’s what they say. 
 
So what we’re saying, Mr. Chairman, is the following: the status 
quo will not and should not be accepted by the public of 
Saskatchewan. We have an option which is a viable option which 
says a paper-mill will be built. The integrated facility will have an 
opportunity for the forest industry to live again, and what do they 
say? No, no, kill the forest industry. Forget about it because if it 
can’t be done in our way — their way, the Crown corporation way 
— then it should not be done at all. That’s what they say. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could address 
yourself to the question of any other businesses or farmers . . . Is 
there any other example where people who have losses in their 
business can write it off against the principal? Are there any 
examples that come to mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just an answer  

for the member. The income debenture route that we took is, and 
I’m informed by my officials here some of whom are involved in 
negotiation, that it’s not an uncommon form of financing, 
especially in an industry like this where the value of the particular 
assets are dependent upon so many variables, and where the future 
of — in this case — the integrated facility is best able to determine 
that. And quite frankly, the income debenture route is what was 
suggested to us by the accounting firm which deals with PAPCO 
in the first place, that being Peat Marwick and Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —I’m glad the minister has finally settled 
down because what I want to know is: can you give me some 
particular examples of where this kind of financial arrangement is 
made? Can you name some examples, over the last couple of 
years, and what deals would have taken place where the losses 
could be written off against what is owed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m told that it’s not uncommon, as 
I’ve said to you, that they use this sort of a method. What is 
uncommon, what is very, very uncommon is that there should be a 
wholly-owned government operation in this industry. There’s no 
question about that. That’s totally uncommon, and there’s no 
question that we’re breaking new ground, and the reason we’re 
breaking it is because you guys bought it in the first place. We 
shouldn’t be in this position, but we are. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —The minister fails to give any example of 
farmers or small-business people or large companies; whether it’s 
in the oil industry or in any industry that I know of, I’ve never 
heard of this. And I’ve seen many, many agreements and 
contracts, but I have never seen an agreement where the losses 
could be written off against what you owe. Never. 
 
And I want to say as well, is that when we talk about Crown 
corporations, everyone in the province will know that one of the 
first things the federal Mulroney government did in 1984 was to 
take over 1,700 service stations. And one can argue that the NDP 
are in favour of Crown corporations and the PC aren’t, but 
everyone knows that’s a goofy argument. 
 
Brian Mulroney, your buddy you’re going to meet with this week 
in Saskatoon, one of the first things he did when he became Prime 
Minister is buy all the Gulf service stations right across the piece 
in western Canada — 1,700 of them, I believe. And you can go on 
Albert Street now in Regina and buy Coke from that federal 
Crown corporation, and milk and bread. We would never have 
considered that because philosophically we were opposed to it. 
And this is how ludicrous that argument is, 
 
Saskoil, when we were running it, never would have considered 
selling peaches and groceries as a Crown corporation. Here Brian 
Mulroney, the great free enterpriser, the guy you’re going to meet 
with in Saskatoon, now owns the service stations along Albert 
Street. I mean, and your argument that the NDP want to own 
everything and the Conservatives want to give it back to the 
private sector, nobody believes that any more. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2419 
 
 

I mean, there are . . . I would say 90 per cent of the people in 
Saskatchewan believe that Sask Power and SaskTel should be 
owned by the people of the province, and that 50 per cent may 
agree that Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan should be owned 
by the people. 
 
But I’ll tell you, there are very few that agree with the 
Conservatives when they say we should nationalize the service 
stations on Albert Street. I mean, that’s how far gone you guys are 
with power . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well go and look on 
Albert Street. Petro-Canada and Gulf are now owned by the 
federal government, by the Tories. You went out and bought them. 
 
I just want to ask the minister again whether he doesn’t believe 
that a loan of this size should be paid back in the same way that a 
home owner or a business person would pay back in monthly 
instalments, so much of the principal and so much interest. 
 
The way the deal was originally explained in Saskatoon was that 
there was a $248 million debenture, 8.5 per cent interest I believe, 
to be paid back over 20 years. And some of us agreed with that. I 
didn’t argue with that. I didn’t think that was a bad deal. But that 
isn’t the deal. You misled the people when you said that to them 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
No, because they don’t have to pay it back. In fact what we’re 
saying here, and what you’re saying in the schedule, is that any 
losses that they have can be written off against the principal; that 
the interest only has to be paid if 12 per cent is made on the 
investment. And what I’m saying is that philosophically we should 
agree on one thing — that this deal be treated the same way as any 
small business or big business, repayment of the loan with interest 
be made in regular instalments. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you wouldn’t agree . . . Now you 
have told the people it was 20 years, but we have proven, or 
you’ve proven, that it’s 30 years. Don’t you think that the 
repayment should be on a particular date every month or every 
year, with interest, the same as you treat everyone else? 
 
When you loaned out a billion dollars to the farmers of the 
province, you said, here’s the repayment schedule — one payment 
every year for three years, equal instalments on one-third on the 
anniversary. That’s all on the form and everyone signed it. There’s 
no clause that if you have a loss that that will be written off against 
what you owe the Government of Saskatchewan. And why the 
unfairness of treating the multinational Weyerhaeuser, the 
American company, one way and the farmers or small-business 
people another. Like when Sedco goes out and makes a loan to a 
small-business person in Shaunavon, right in the agreement is the 
repayment schedule — so much a year plus interest and all the 
penalties if you don’t repay it. The farmers who took out the loan 
signed an agreement that, if they missed their payment, the interest 
isn’t 6 per cent, it goes to prime plus two. That’s what the 
agreement says. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take the loan? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —No I didn’t take the loan, but I’ll tell you, 
this is what the agreement says. 
 

An Hon. Member: — But that is a loan. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —That is a loan. Well it is a loan. It’s loaned to 
them by the people of the province. And what it says is that the 
interest rate is a maximum of eight and a half per cent. It can’t be 
more. It can be nothing. And if there are losses, even the principal 
is written down. 
 
Now this is a curious deal whether you agree with the 
Conservatives nationalizing service stations, or whether you agree 
with the NDP having pulp-mills or potash mines. They’re quite 
separated. We could stand here and I could argue that Mulroney 
shouldn’t have nationalized the service stations on Main Street in 
Regina and Shaunavon, but that’s got very little to do with how 
this is financed. Like, I don’t know. Do you agree with the service 
stations being owned by the federal government? Do the members 
in this room, the Conservative members — and Mulroney 
nationalizing them — do you agree with that? 
 
I mean we could . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, no he didn’t 
nationalize the Gulf service stations; Brian Mulroney did. 
Seventeen hundred of them. Now I don’t know if that’s the debate 
here or not. I don’t think it is. I think it’s the terms of the 
agreement where you’re selling the assets of PAPCO: a pulp-mill, 
a chemical plant, sawmills at Big River, and 7 million acres of 
prime forest land. That’s the issue. 
 
The issue isn’t whether you agree with the federal cabinet buying 
up 1,700 Gulf service stations because I don’t think that’s the 
issue, or whether you agree with myself and Al Blakeney buying a 
potash mine. That may be the issue for some debate, and I agree it 
is, but it’s not for today because the people in this province don’t 
separate out that they’re opposed to Crown corporations or they’re 
in favour of them. I think the majority of people are in favour of 
Sask Power and SaskTel. I think if you had an election on that, 
whoever was in favour of them would win. If you said on potash, I 
think that probably we would split half and half. That’s what I 
would guess. But if you said nationalizing service stations in 
Shaunavon — nationalizing service stations in Shaunavon which 
the federal government did, the PC government — I think 90 per 
cent would be opposed. 
 
And that’s one of the issues Brian Mulroney has gone from 52 per 
cent down to 31 or 32. That’s part of it, because he chose to get 
into nationalizing service stations and food stores. That’s what he 
chose to do, and nobody agrees with that. I don’t agree with that. I 
issued a press release when he did it, saying I was opposed to it. 
I’ll tell the world I’m opposed to it because I don’t think the 
federal government or the provincial government should get into 
the retailing. I don’t believe it. 
 
Now I don’t know whether we should be arguing about 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . .Well the farm land, you can argue 
whether you’re selling any. You’re now in the driver’s seat. You 
have millions of acres of farm land. You have millions of acres of 
farm land that you’re not selling, so you must believe in it. And 
the former minister of  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2420 
 
 

Agriculture, before he got turfed out, didn’t sell any of it. He kept 
it going. 
 
Now I say to the minister: do you believe that it’s right that this 
American giant shouldn’t make regular payments with interest? 
Do you agree with that principle? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of points. The 
member talks about Petro-Can, and the purchase by Petro-Can of 
Gulf stations, and so on. I would ask the New Democratic 
member, and I would ask him where he and his cousin in Ottawa 
and the rest of the New Democratic members will be when 
Petro-Can moves toward privatization. We’ll see where you are. 
We will see where you are. 
 
The member misleads by saying that this is a loan. He says that 
this is a loan to Weyerhaeuser. It’s not a loan. It is not a loan. This 
is a debenture which is, in essence, a mortgage on the assets which 
are in place. Okay? The assets are there and they’re in place. The 
assets are in place and they’re sitting in Prince Albert. 
 
Now where will these assets go? Mr. Chairman, what the member 
suggests is that the assets will leave Prince Albert, or leave 
Saskatchewan, the assets being a pulp-mill which is in place and 
operating. And so for him to say that it’s a loan, and compare it to 
a loan and repayment of a loan, is not true. 
 
So I make that point. The risk in this case is taken by 
Weyerhaeuser. The risk will be taken by Weyerhaeuser in terms of 
the building of the new paper-mill. The assets are in place that are 
there now, plus they will be adding to those assets with the 
construction of a paper-mill. Where, I ask the member, is the risk 
that will be taken by government other than the risk which the 
public of Saskatchewan had when they purchased it all, and in 
terms of the money that’s been lost up until this point? There was 
great risk in that, and I’ve outlined for the House and people have 
seen now the numbers. 
 
As it relates to just the way in which . . . the member asked for 
some examples of how some of these kinds of things can happen. I 
just read him an article. This is from the Prince Albert Herald of 
April 24, ’86. The headline is the following: “Money-losing 
Crown firm unloaded by Manitoba — the NDP government of 
Manitoba.” 
 

The Manitoba government has given a Dutch bus company 
$3 million and agreed to the possible loss of some jobs to 
have Flyer Industries, the biggest money-losing Crown 
corporation, returned to the private sector. 

 
And I’ll go on to quote another portion: 
 

Under the agreement Manitoba will provide Den Oudstin 
with a $3 million loan that is forgivable after three years if 
the company adheres to a business plan that includes keeping 
Flyer in Manitoba and maintaining a work-force of about 
250. 

 
Now at the very bottom of the article, under the headline, “Still 
responsible” — this is the Manitoba Finance  

minister at that time, Eugene Kostyra. Kostyra said: 
 

The province would have lost 56 million by shutting down 
the bus plant immediately. Under the sale to Den Oudstin, it 
will still be left with a $56 million loss when the sale of its 
shares and disposal of its assets is balanced against the 
financial commitments it retains. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the member asked for examples. Those are your 
cousins to the east of us. What I’m saying to you is, there are no 
examples that you can use in an industry that we’re dealing with 
here, in the pulp industry. We have a wholly-owned government 
pulp-mill which we are moving to the private sector and having an 
injection of money, as I’ve said so many times before, from the 
private firm, Weyerhaeuser Canada. And that injection of money 
will bring to this province for the first time — for the first time — 
a paper-mill which has been talked about in the forested area of 
the province for many, many years, back as far as . . . I’m not sure, 
but I know back as far as 1955 or ’56. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well, Mr. Minister, I had asked you about 
the principle of a repayment schedule where there would be a 
monthly or an annual instalment payment on the principal owing 
plus interest. Because this isn’t included in the schedule B which 
you have given to us. It’s a very technical document which 
basically says that the debenture doesn’t have to be repaid, and in 
fact in the first three years that the principal can be written down 
by having losses, that the losses can be written off against the 
principal. 
 
I suppose quoting from an NDP government in Manitoba seems 
like an interesting place for you to be getting your leads from. But 
what I want to ask you is the principle of having an annual or a 
monthly instalment, like a home owner or a small-business person 
would have. 
 
And I’m sure the member from Prince Albert, when he had a 
plumbing business, when he went to the bank he had a schedule of 
loan; and the farmer who got loans from Ag Credit Corporation 
down in my constituency had a plan to repay it. On the 
anniversary of his loan from the Ag Credit Corporation, he paid 
one-third of it back plus 6 per cent interest; and if he missed the 
interest payment, the interest then went to prime plus one at the 
Bank of Montreal, whatever that was the term to be for that time 
period, and there was interest on the interest. 
 
Here we have a loan set out where there’s no interest on the 
interest if interest payments are missed. I’m saying, how can you 
say this is fair, when the farmers on the one hand who have taken 
money or borrowed money from the provincial government have 
an agreement where there’s repayment schedule — one-third 
every year on the anniversary date plus the interest; and if the 
payment isn’t made, the interest isn’t at 6 per cent, but it goes to 
prime plus one, and there is interest on the interest owing — now 
how do you satisfy, when farmers are in the desperate situation 
they are, that they’re treated in the one manner, and 
Weyerhaeuser, an American corporation, is given what we are 
calling a sweetheart deal? 
 
I’m talking about the deal you’re making, not the  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2421 
 
 

principle of whether Tories should buy service stations or NDPs 
should buy potash mines. That’s an interesting debate, and I’d 
enjoy very much at some point getting into it because I don’t 
believe that government should own service stations. That’s my 
public position; I issued press releases. I do believe that we should 
own and have an interest in oil and in potash. That’s where I draw 
the line. Conservatives obviously think we should own service 
stations or else you would have fought it — or else you would 
have fought it. 
 
That’s a fine debate to have — the role of the public sector in the 
economic development of the country. We can talk about West 
Germany and Austria and other countries that have used the public 
sector . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, land bank you know. 
North Dakota and some of those radical states in the United States 
have land bank. The wheat pool, that radical organization, is now 
promoting land bank. And that’s a good debate as well. That is a 
good debate, but it’s got very little to do with the details of this 
particular agreement — it’s got very little to do with it. 
 
What I’m asking the minister is whether or not he agrees that there 
should be a schedule of repayment similar to what farmers are 
having to deal with with the Minister of Agriculture in terms of the 
ag credit corporation. I wonder whether or not you can now 
outline what you believe the schedule of repayment should be 
because I think it should be so much a month, in the principal and 
interest, and if the interest isn’t paid then a reasonable amount of 
penalty go against it. That’s the normal procedure. 
 
And the member from Morse will know very well because I’m 
sure that in his business of running a farm, a small farm, which all 
of us agree is small business, that we don’t have the luxuries of 
having our debt owing or the losses owing at the end of the year 
written off against our principal. It would be nice. Or if a home 
owner, if he missed some payments during the year, that that 
would write his principal down. We don’t have that luxury. 
 
What I’m saying: don’t you think it would be a good idea to have 
a schedule repayment which would include a proper amount of 
principal each month, plus interest, to this American forest giant? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve outlined that it’s 
an income debenture which we’re dealing with, it’s not a loan, as 
the member continues to suggest. That income debenture is the 
method used to determine the value of the assets through the 
future income, through the performance of the combined assets, 
those combined assets being the pulp-mill which is now in place, 
and the paper-mill which will be added to it. So those combined 
assets will bring life to the industry and with that will be more 
opportunity to make profits. And those profits will determine the 
value of the assets, and that will help us to determine the value of 
the assets. It’s very difficult in that industry to determine what that 
value is. 
 
Certainly leaving the status quo, as the members opposite have 
continued to suggest, is that we continue to lose money on a stand 
alone pulp-mill — continue, that’s what they want — keep a stand 
alone pulp-mill, continue to lose money at a tremendous rate. And 
who is losing the  

money? And it needs to be pointed out once again, Mr. Chairman, 
the public of Saskatchewan is losing that kind of money. It’s very, 
very important that we arrest that as quickly as possible, and that’s 
what this deal is doing. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Well, Mr. Minister, you can argue about 
whether or not the P.A. pulp-mill is losing money, and that’s a fair 
argument; you can make your point, and we’ll make ours. But I 
think what is most ridiculous is Gulf Canada, who is losing money 
on their service stations, selling it to the taxpayers of Canada. I 
mean, tell me about it? 
 
I know why Gulf was selling off that portion of the corporation, 
and why the brothers in Montreal wanted to get rid of those 
money-losing service stations, and they saw a sucker coming 
when the federal government, PC government was elected 
federally, and you grabbed them. You and your colleagues in 
Ottawa grabbed those money-losing service stations, and the 
principle that you’re arguing is a phoney one. What we’re talking 
about is the agreement you’re making — the agreement you’re 
making. 
 
Now I lost money on my farm the last two years. Using your 
philosophy, we should now give my farm away. That’s what 
you’re saying. Or Dome Petroleum has lost money for five or six 
years. You think that board of directors is going to give their oil 
company away if they go out? Of course not. That is the stupidest 
argument that anyone could ever make. It’s childish. It’s beyond 
belief that any government or any board of directors would say, 
because I lost money for a year or two, I got to give it away. 
Obviously the equipment is worth something; the forest rights on 
seven million acres is worth something. You could have got some 
money for the deal. 
 
Take your point of view that it was losing money. Take it that it 
was losing money. Don’t you think you could have got something 
for it even though it was losing money? Like my farm has lost 
money for two years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who owns it? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Who owns it? I own it. It lost money, but 
I’m not going to give it away, nor do I intend to give it away, nor 
would I have to give it away. But what you’re doing with this 
corporation, based on your argument that it’s losing money, is 
you’re giving it away to an American corporation. I think that’s a 
bad deal. It’s a bad deal; that’s my argument. 
 
Philosophically, you can argue where I draw the line on Crown 
corporations. I don’t think the Conservatives should have bought 
the Gulf service stations. I don’t think that the PC government, 
federally, that was elected on a platform of free enterprise, should 
have bought 1,700 service stations. I don’t think that I should go to 
the grocery store down there, owned by Gulf, as a taxpayer, and 
fund it. I don’t believe in that. I simply don’t. 
 
But I’ll tell you, for the member for Regina North or Regina South 
or wherever he’s from, he now has a couple of service stations. He 
now has a couple of service stations. He may get a job working for 
the federal government, pumping gas to the constituencies after 
the 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2422 
 
 

next election, because he’ll be able to get a job in the service 
station working for the federal government as a result of Brian 
Mulroney’s incursion into that private sector area. They’re now 
retailers of gas. They sell milk and bread, this right-wing, 
“philosophically opposed to Crown corporations” PC Party. They 
now bought up 1,700 service stations. 
 
(1630) 
 
But I say that I just think that this Weyerhaeuser should be making 
regular repayments to the people of the province who are putting 
the money up so they can buy this asset we already own. I think 
they should be making repayments. 
 
And to that end — and I’ll send a copy of the amendment across 
to the minister — that here is an amendment that would deal with 
that issue. This amendment would amend section 1 of the printed 
Bill and add the following section after 1 of the printed Bill, and 
would say: 
 

Notwithstanding any agreement or arrangement with respect 
to the sale of assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation in exchange for a 
$248,000,000 debenture from Weyerhaeuser, all principal 
and interest owing to the Province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to that debenture shall be paid in equal monthly 
instalments within 30 years. 

 
And basically, Mr. Minister, what that would do is set out a 
schedule where the company would be obliged to pay in 
instalments, every month, a certain amount of money — equal 
instalments for 30 years — and that that be set in place and written 
in the Bill so that the taxpayers of the province would understand 
that there was no special treatment being given to this American 
forest giant than to our farmers or small-business people or people 
in the oil patch who have a service industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, what the member clearly 
— and I have made the point a couple of times — but he clearly 
doesn’t choose to understand, and I’ll be charitable and say that he 
does. But I believe he understands and does not choose to 
understand that what this income debenture is, what the income 
debenture will allow us to do — us being the people of 
Saskatchewan, those who have been losing tremendous amounts 
of money on this asset that’s there now — and that is what we 
have an opportunity to do, through using this vehicle, is to 
maximize the value of the present assets, being the pulp-mill and 
so on. 
 
And that’s the only way. We have to be able to bring those assets 
to some maximum value, whatever that might be, and that will be 
determined by the profits which will come from the combined 
operation, that combined operation being pulp-mill and paper-mill 
which in itself, the combination of those two operations in 
themselves, will give us an opportunity in this province for profits 
to be made from the forested area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the amendment, this is clearly 
another stage in the little saga that started on  

Friday when they moved an amendment. What they clearly want 
to do, what the members of the NDP clearly want to do, is 
negotiate the deal, which clearly can’t be done here in the 
legislature. 
 
I have said those negotiations are ongoing. They are hopefully 
coming to a close at some stage in the very near future, and we 
cannot negotiate it in here. It’s clearly another example of some 
very political posturing by the NDP. 
 
On that basis, Mr. Chairman, I would ask all members to reject the 
amendment put forward by the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Blakeney Koskie 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Engel Shillington 
Lingenfelter Yew 
 

Nays — 28 
 
McLeod Muirhead 
Lane McLaren 
Pickering Parker 
Hardy Johnson 
Folk Young 
Myers Hopfner 
Hepworth Weiman 
Dirks Rybchuk 
Sandberg Caswell 
Klein Meagher 
Currie Muller 
Martens Baker 
Maxwell Glauser 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Swenson 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister 
what he anticipates the financial results will be over the new few 
years. He has given us some indication of what he says the 
financial results were during the last several years, and I want to 
see if we can project that forward. 
 
I won’t deal with the interesting aspects of sessional paper 131 
which has a projection of losses on the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company Ltd. But he has figures for 1981, ’82, ’83, ’84, and ’85. 
And he indicates that there was an interest loss in each of those 
years based upon some projection of what the cost of the shares 
would have been and the interest on the cost of the shares. 
 
I don’t want to question the method of calculation. I would and 
could, but that’s not the purpose of my comment now. 
 
What I want to do is ask the minister . . . and I hope he is 
following what I’m saying here. He’s got a column of annual 
interest expense, and he gives years for 1981, ’82,  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2423 
 
 

’83, ’84, ’85; ’86 might be a difficult year but perhaps he can do 
that. Could he give me an estimate of what the situation will be in 
1986, in 1987 and 1988? Would he have any reason to believe that 
the amount would be very much different that 1985? In 1984, he 
says it’s 20.9 million; 1985 he says it’s 18 million. 
 
I presume those differences come about because of different 
imputed interest rates. It’s a highly . . . I was going to say artificial 
— but calculation anyway. I don’t mean to get him upset with that 
word artificial. Isn’t it so that the losses in 1986 and ’87 and 1988 
and 1989 will be about the same as they were in 1984 or 1985 if 
interest rates are the same. Assuming interest rates are the same, 
those losses will continue on. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, I think that’s fair to say that would be 
the case and the reason being that there’s no compounding of 
interest in the numbers provided. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So that whatever maybe have been the 
lack of wisdom of the earlier deal of the purchase of the shares and 
the interest expense which has, according to the minister, 
continued to be borne, that will continue and the Weyerhaeuser 
deal will in no way help us until money starts flowing back from 
Weyerhaeuser in significant amount. If we lost 20 million or 18 
million by his calculation of loss in 1984, it will be the same in 
1994 unless substantial sums of money are rolling back from 
Weyerhaeuser. So the Weyerhaeuser deal in no way cuts down on 
that loss. 
 
For those who feel that the sale to Weyerhaeuser will cut these 
losses that the minister has with such ingenuity calculated, I just 
want to point out that there’s no reason to believe that the loss will 
be any less in 1994 than it will in 1984 unless interest rates should 
go down, the way this is calculated. 
 
I just want to make that point and I’m glad that the minister 
concedes that point, that to the extent that the loss is made up of 
interest on money borrowed to buy shares, that loss is going to 
continue, and continue until significant amounts are received from 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
The minister made clear in the last debate — and I don’t intend to 
revive that — that the nature of this transaction was not a sale with 
a fixed repayment term, but a sale in which the seller got 
something of the future profits, if any. That’s how he described the 
income debenture. And there is no anticipated profits at all, I 
think, for several years at least, at least until the paper-mill is built, 
and indeed the agreements, we are advised, provide specifically 
for what happens if there are losses. 
 
The point I want to make is that, to the extent that the losses are 
made up of these interest calculations, they are not really affected 
by the Weyerhaeuser deal. If those are losses, they will continue. 
And I say, if they are losses — obviously, in one sense of the 
word, they are a loss. 
 
If I buy a business and I put in $10,000 and I don’t get anything 
back, I think I’ve lost $10,000. The minister feels I’ve lost 10,000 
when I put it in and another thousand because of the interest in the 
next year and another thousand in the next year, and 40 or 50 years 
hence I’m  

still losing money, according to the minister. This is how this is 
calculated. 
 
This is relatively imaginative accounting, and I don’t think it 
makes a great deal of sense. But if it makes sense to say that we 
lost that money in 1984 and 1985, my point is that the 
Weyerhaeuser transaction, the losses are going to continue in 
1988, in 1989, and ‘90 and ‘91 and ‘92 and ‘93. Nothing in this 
deal will stop the losses, so-called. 
 
That’s point number one, and I don’t think that the minister can 
gainsay that. That, I think, is right. So that if that calculation, if 
that comment is not agreed with by members opposite, I’d like 
them to take the figures and work out any other conclusion, 
because that’s what’s going to happen. 
 
Now with respect to the annual profit and loss of PAPCO, that is 
. . . he says over five years it was 42 million; if he added in 1980, 
it would have been about 15 . . . somewhere around 15 million? 
And that is a business loss but not a cash loss. During those period 
— well just take the five years and your figures of $42 million 
over five years — the depreciation charged would be about $75 
million, and unless addition . . . except to the extent that capital 
was reinvested, there was no cash loss; except to the extent that 
capital was reinvested, there was no cash needed to finance that 
loss. 
 
Now we all know that depreciation is, in fact, an expense, but it’s 
a different kind of expense; indeed the income tax people call it a 
capital cost allowance because it may never be suffered. Now lots 
of things are bought and sold for more than they were bought, 
even though depreciation is charged. 
 
So I want to make those two points; one, to the extent that this deal 
is put forward as one which will cut down the losses, it doesn’t cut 
down any of the losses associated with the interest on the shares 
because they’re still going to be there, all of them; to the extent 
that it’s supposedly going to cut down the operating losses of the 
pulp-mill, those had not been a cash drain on the government 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well, I would be delighted if you’d get in and indicate what is 
wrong with this line of reasoning — what is wrong with it — 
because it seems to me that these are relevant and germane points. 
It seems to me that it’s useful to point out to the public that, while 
this sale may be a good sale or a bad sale, depending on its effect 
on the forest industry . . . 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the minister agrees that the 
interest losses will continue until significant amounts of money are 
received from Weyerhaeuser, if at all, and I wonder if he will 
agree that except for reinvestment — new capital in the pulp-mill 
— the annual losses of PAPCO have not involved any layout of 
cash by the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member . . . 
Looking down the column which he referred to — annual interest 
expense on the cost of shares, and going through the various years 
— and I made the point that I agreed with him that in . . . at least 
the projections of  
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2424 
 
 

interest rates stay the same, ’86-87. The projected losses in those 
areas would be similar to those that are indicated on the sheet. 
 
The other point that I would make, and where I’m at a divergence 
of opinion with the member, is that he says, keep this as it is, don’t 
do this deal; and we say, do this deal with Weyerhaeuser, because 
at the point at which Weyerhaeuser pays interest on the debenture, 
from profits on the combined operation, which is the only 
possibility of profits to be made in that industry, with that 
combined operation — we made that point before — that at least 
that’s the point where we, being the public of Saskatchewan, can 
arrest the losses that are being drained off at the present time in 
that form of that interest loss. 
 
And so we have said, let’s get on with this. We have a deal which 
is good in that sense, and which gives us the option, the people of 
Saskatchewan, the option to arrest those losses which will be 
ongoing, not only in ’86 and ’87, but ongoing for a good long 
period of time. And probably there’s more likelihood of them 
being ongoing for a very long period of time with only a 
stand-alone pulp-mill in today’s market dealing, dealing with a 
stand-alone pulp-mill which is not a paying proposition, or is it 
projected to be a paying proposition into the future. 
 
I understand the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg wants to 
introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you for the indulgence of the House. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d like to introduce a very special guest to our family; 
it’s my mother-in-law who is visiting us from California. And I 
would like the members of the legislature to extend a welcome to 
her here, Kathryn Baumbach is here from Lodi, California. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 p.m. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1986 

 

2425 
 
 

Corrigenda 
 
In the Hansard No. 71A FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986, 10:00 a.m. 
on pp. 2383 near the end of the page and 2384 near the 
beginning of the page, instead of Mr. Chairman please read Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On page 2385 in the second last paragraph in the left hand 
column please read SDOs (scheduled days off). 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 
 


