


















































June 27, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 27, 1986 
 
 

2381 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Advanced Education, the minister responsible for the 
sweetheart deal with Weyerhaeuser. Mr. Minister, despite your 
government’s obvious embarrassment at the terms of the deal by 
which you will turn over the $250 million of assets to 
Weyerhaeuser, despite your unwillingness to table the documents 
which you have signed, the facts, at least in part, are available. 
 
Weyerhaeuser gets $248 million of assets with no down payment 
— not a dime. Weyerhaeuser gets to deduct any operating losses it 
may sustain over the first three years from that $248 million. 
Weyerhaeuser’s deal provides that it will be allowed to make a 
substantial profit over 30 years and pay not a dime. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this. You offered this deal to 
Weyerhaeuser — nothing down, nothing over 30 years, and 
nothing at the end of the 30 years. When are you going to offer 
similar terms to Saskatchewan business people? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member comes with the 
same arguments as yesterday, and I’m sure will continue to. He 
continues to use the word, and I notice today in his using of his 
term “sweetheart deal,” he can hardly do it with a straight face any 
more. He knows that it’s a good deal; his philosophy is in his way. 
 
But in terms of the interest rate that applies to the debenture that 
he refers to, I can recall, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure you can, and 
the people of Saskatchewan can recall, when interest rates were 
way up there, way up there in the 17 and 18 and 19 per cent range. 
And they offered — that member, the former premier — offered 9 
and five-eights per cent interest to a developer from Toronto to 
develop a major shopping centre in Regina. And what did he offer 
to the small-business people of Saskatchewan? What did he ever 
offer to the small-business people in Saskatchewan in terms of 
interest rate relief? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
minister address the question I asked? When are you going to give 
a similar deal, or offer a similar deal, to Saskatchewan business 
people? Do you intend to make an offer, or do you intend to offer 
them mere arguments in diversion and not offer them the deal you 
offered to Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member does not want to 
acknowledge that there is 8 per cent money available to small 
business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There never was 8 per cent interest  

under their government. There is 8 per cent money available to 
small business in Saskatchewan under this Progressive 
Conservative government — interest rate relief which they never 
ever received from that government. There’s no question that 
that’s true, and for him to even raise it is quite incredible, in my 
view. 
 
But the deal that he refers to with Weyerhaeuser — once again a 
reminder, Mr. Speaker, and a reminder to the Leader of the 
Opposition: $91,000 is what that pulp-mill has been losing — 
$91,000 a day — if we just take it to that level. And if that isn’t 
hemorrhaging money, Mr. Speaker, what is? That is an absolute 
. . . 
 
We can go through the losses, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just go through 
the losses. In the year 1981 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to ask members on 
both sides of the House to control the hollering in the Chamber. 
We cannot be heard this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, new question. I ask a new 
question to the minister in charge of the sweetheart deal with 
Weyerhaeuser, and this is a very real question which I would like 
your answer to. Will you give us a commitment that no agreement 
will be signed which does not contain a firm commitment to build 
the paper-mill — a firm commitment — and that no assets will be 
transferred until the paper-mill is built? Will you give us that 
commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member knows that that commitment 
has already been given. The member knows that that is the case, 
that there will be a paper-mill before any transaction is executed. 
And yes, there will be a paper-mill there, and there will be a firm 
commitment for a paper-mill before any of the agreements are 
executed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, does the memorandum of understanding signed in 
March, of which we have schedule B, contain that commitment? 
And if so, will you table that part of the agreement which contains 
the commitment? And if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said that I would . . . 
We tabled the one schedule at which all of the . . . that portion 
where the agreement has largely been reached. I have said that I 
will table the total agreement upon closing; the total agreement 
which, I give the member the undertaking, will include a 
commitment to build a paper-mill. And yes, Mr. Speaker, the 
paper-mill will be . . . the construction will be started immediately 
— immediately — upon closing of the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as his former minister, Mr. Cowley said, as I say, 
and as he said when he was in government, this is not a 
negotiating forum, nor can it ever be a negotiating forum. But 
what I have done, which they never did, is said, we will give the 
deal . . . we will make the deal public after closing, as soon as all 
negotiations are complete and as all signatures are . . . and as soon 
as all signatures are applied to it. 
 

Free Trade Policy with the United States 
 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2382 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Acting Minister of 
Economic Trade and Development. Your government’s free trade 
policy is proving to be singularly unsuccessful. As is now well 
known, U.S. authorities have made a preliminary finding against 
Canada’s unsuccessful interest with respect to the soft lumber 
exports to the U.S., and that has major implications for 
Saskatchewan, which exports $16.5 million worth of softwood 
lumber. 
 
My question is this: in light of that American decision, what action 
have you taken? And will you admit that your free trade policy 
with the U.S. is not working, that instead we need a policy that 
will protect Saskatchewan and Canadian jobs instead of trading 
them off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have been through this 
argument several times with the Leader of the Opposition. When 
you’re looking at the discussions we’re having with the United 
States, it’s obviously in our best interests to protect the jobs we 
have here. 
 
What I’m concerned about is changing the U.S. attitude because 
they have been stopping us from exporting into the United States. 
They are now bringing action against the potash industry, the 
uranium industry, pulp and paper, shakes and shingles — a whole 
combination of industries, and the opposition says that they’re not 
for trade, they’re for protectionism. Well it’s the very role of 
protectionism that is causing us to lose our jobs here in Canada. 
 
I’m not so sure who wrote the question for the hon. member, but I 
don’t think he believes in protectionism. If he does believe in 
protectionism, and that’s what his question said, that I believe he 
should make it very clear, because I don’t. I would rather see us 
trade more with the United States than have them cutting us off at 
the border. 
 
So it’s my intention to make sure that we take a strong stand in 
fighting with the Americans with respect to those markets, and I 
will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. The second paragraph of 
today’s article in the Globe and Mail reads as follows: 
 

The preliminary ruling by the quasi-judicial government 
trade agency was a victory for the U.S. coalition for fair 
lumber imports. 

 
Will the Premier confirm that that is the group of which 
Weyerhaeuser is a member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether 
they’re a member of that group or not, but I know, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They are not a member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’m advised that they’re not a member, 
all right. But we have people here that are selling into the United 
States all the time, and you’re trying to saying that we don’t have 
any business being in the United States. We have industries here 
that invest in pulp and paper, and in livestock, and in oil and gas, 
and  

uranium, all over the place here in Saskatchewan, and they have 
access to the U.S. market. And now they’re cutting us off, and 
you’re asking, well, are they a member of the group? Do you want 
no one here to invest or export into the United States? What are 
you talking about? 
 
I mean, I can take an article here. This is the Manitoba pulp 
company; it’s in Western Report, right here. And here’s a pulp 
company, the pulp company that the NDP bought — Ed Schreyer 
bought — that has been losing money and losing money and the 
Manitoba taxpayers are throwing up their hands saying, is this 
ever awful. 
 
What have you got in Saskatchewan? The same thing. The Leader 
of the Opposition raises it today, says $91,000 a day, and they 
want to look . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order! Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. I might say by way of 
background, the public of Manitoba recently re-elected that 
government. You might wish you could do as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will the Premier confirm that the practical 
result of the free trade negotiations, which you and the Prime 
Minister have pursued with such vigour, has been to frighten, 
alarm and stir up U.S. protection interests so that this province and 
this country have had more difficulty trading in the U.S. in the last 
six months than we’ve had at any time in the recent decades? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member knows that 
protectionism has been building in the United States. His 
colleague, the Premier of Manitoba — Premier Howard Pawley — 
joined with me two years ago in signing a communiqué saying 
that protectionism in the United States is growing and somebody 
better be doing something about it to make sure that we will be 
into negotiations so that we can talk with them. 
 
I was reading this morning, as a matter of fact, the Premier of 
Manitoba put out his views with respect to the negotiations with 
the United States, and he is happy to see the negotiations. And the 
NDP here are saying no, don’t talk; don’t talk with them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to talk. They also just want to 
squeal. They have a $91,000 a day loser that they bought. They 
don’t want to fix it. They don’t want a new paper project. They 
just want to stick their heads in the sand. Well, they can stick their 
head in the sand if they like while, Mr. Chairman, we will 
negotiate, and we’re trying to protect and we will protect the jobs 
and the economic activity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We built this province on trading — trading agriculture 
commodities and resources — and we will continue to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, as long as we have the kind of government we have in 
Ottawa and the kind of government we have here, that can talk to 
other governments and not just cry in the dark. 
 

Proposed Tariffs on Potash Exports to U.S. 
 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2383 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
question to any minister that’s prepared to answer, and there is 
some reluctance — but anybody who’ll speak on behalf of the 
government’s free trade policies. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, your free trade government has repeatedly 
endorsed free trade positions of the Mulroney government and the 
so-called free trade positions of the Reagan administration. 
 
We note today that, in view of those facts, that Saskatchewan 
potash miners, some 400, were laid off for an indefinite period. In 
view of the fact that the Reagan administration has decided to 
intervene directly, aggressively against Saskatchewan potash 
exports to the U.S. on direct orders from the U.S. commerce 
secretary, a Reagan appointee, my question to you is: what are you 
doing in respect to those facts? What actions have you taken in 
order to protect the jobs of the people of Saskatchewan in respect 
to the vicious action being taken by the Reagan administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have been raising the 
concerns, and the Premiers have, with respect to protectionism in 
the United States. 
 
The hon. member now asks, have I heard of it, and what are we 
doing? I mean, all he can do now is cry wolf because for the last 
three years we have been working with our colleagues, other 
premiers. We have been putting together the cases. We have been 
making the negotiations. We have been taking the cases to 
Washington, and taking the cases to the government, taking the 
case to Ottawa, encouraging the trade negotiations to protect the 
very jobs that he’s talking about here. And he stands up and says, 
oh, did you know there’s protectionism in the United States? And 
he finally woke up after four years. It’s been going on for years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that the cases we prepared in 
Washington, the cases we prepared in Ottawa, the case we 
prepared with the governors and all the information . . . I can go 
back . . . At least the hon. member can talk to the unions in British 
Columbia. They’re in favour of trade negotiations, want to see a 
free trade agreement. They want to see that. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition stood up yesterday and he said, I 
want to see free trade in potash. Well he should tell the member 
behind him. The Leader of the Opposition stood up in my 
estimates and says, I want to see free trade in potash. That’s what 
he said. Now the member behind him sitting up there, from the 
Quill Lakes, saying, oh my gosh, we got to have protectionism. 
The member from Regina Centre says we have to have 
protectionism in potash. 
 
Well you guys better get it together. The Leader of the Opposition 
says, I want free trade in potash, and his members say, we want 
protectionism in potash. They don’t know if they’re coming or 
going, whether they’re in California or Saskatchewan. They don’t 
know whether to buy a pulp-mill or to sell a pulp-mill. And 
frankly, well, it’s not much wonder they’re $400,000 in debt. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I don’t know why the Premier is ranting and 
raving and not addressing the question. I mean, I don’t know why 
he continues to rant and rave and not answer the question. 
 
Mr. Premier, your free trade policy lies in tatters around you, in 
your confusion, and in disarray. Every step you have taken has 
backfired. And I ask you a simple question: what action has your 
government taken to date to tell the U.S. administration that their 
aggressive intervention against Saskatchewan interests in potash is 
unacceptable? What specific actions have you taken? Just a simple 
action of detailing to the people and the workers of the potash 
corporation what you, in fact, have done. Because every time you 
talk about free trade we seem to be getting more protectionism on 
the part of the U.S. — ever since you raised this. 
 
And your inability to negotiate. Tell us what you have done. What 
actions have you taken in light of this very severe attack against 
the potash industry of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, again I have to say, the 
opposition and the member from Quills has been encouraging us 
to market potash around the world, encouraging us to be 
aggressive in sales, and he’s been after the minister responsible for 
potash to do that. And they were after me when I was a minister. 
And we have been aggressive, Mr. Chairman. We have been 
marketing into United States, setting records, marketing into the 
rest of the world. And then when the rest of the world gets upset 
and they’re going to have some protectionism, then he stands up 
and says what have you been doing in potash sales? Well we’ve 
been doing just what he’s been asking us to do. We’ve been 
extremely aggressive all over the world. 
 
Then when we have some trouble with respect to protectionism, 
the Leader of the Opposition stands up and says, I want free trade 
in potash. That’s what he said right here in the legislature. The 
Leader of the Opposition, and he said, I believe in free trade in 
these commodities here in Saskatchewan like potash, like 
uranium. The leader of the B.C. union involving with pulp and 
paper says, I want a free trade arrangement with pulp and paper 
into the United States. And what do the members opposite say? 
The member from Regina Centre and the Quill Lakes, first they 
ask us what we’re doing when we’re aggressively marketing it. 
Then they say, we want protectionism in potash. They want 
protectionism in pulp and paper. They want protectionism in 
union. They have no more idea what they’re doing. First they 
don’t want to market; then they want to market. Then if you’re 
successful and you’re marketing, then they say, well I don’t think 
you’ve been doing a good job. Then if you have negotiations on 
trade they say, well I like free trade, but the other guy stands up 
and says, I don’t like free trade . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further supplement, this is the second time . . . I 
don’t know why the Premier is ranting and raving, because the 
Speaker has had to sit you down  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2384 
 
 

twice today. I don’t know why you can’t just answer a question, a 
very serious question. Is there something wrong with you? I don’t 
know. 
 
But I’ll try another question, a supplement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’m going to ask the 
members on both sides of the House to come to order. And I 
would ask the member from Quill Lakes to get on with the 
question if you have a question, otherwise, we’ll take the next 
member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a question. I want to proceed with it. 
There’s a lot of noise from the other side, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! I have called for 
order on both sides of the House. There was a lot of noise from 
both sides of the House, and I’m asking you to get on with the 
question and not to be making statements about the operation of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, very much for your 
co-operation in settling down the House. 
 
My supplement to the Premier is: have you received the 
assurances of the Mulroney government that it will take swift 
action to resist the unacceptable American government move 
against Saskatchewan interests and, in particular, the potash? Have 
you, in fact, contacted the Mulroney — your friend Brian — and 
can you indicate what steps your friend Brian will in fact take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, the hon. member 
asked what actions I’ve taken and what actions will I take. I have 
taken specific actions with respect to negotiations in Washington. I 
have met with governors in various states in the United States — 
western governors, mid-western governors, and so forth. I have 
made representations with respect to the whole negotiating 
package that’s going on in Ottawa. 
 
I will, Mr. Speaker, be meeting with the Prime Minister on 
Wednesday and Thursday of next week to be discussing the whole 
trade situation in the United States and Canada. I will be talking 
about the uranium developments, about the potash developments, 
pulp and paper, the pork industry, the entire bailiwick. I will have 
first-hand discussions. 
 
My cabinet colleagues are meeting with the Prime Minister and 
his cabinet colleagues right here in Saskatchewan, in Saskatoon, 
on Wednesday and Thursday. We will be completely reviewing 
the trade developments to date and talking about the negotiations 
and what kind of strategy to use. 
 
And as I pointed to the Leader of the Opposition recently, I 
recommended, and the western premiers accepted, the strategy 
that we go into the United States with the farm Bill on the table, 
with the deficiency payment in place, and the same sorts of 
ammunition has to be available in all industries as it is in 
agriculture when we negotiate with the United States. 
 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cease Trading Order for Farmsource Management 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
I direct my question to the Minister of Justice, and my question 
has to deal with a situation that some of my constituents have 
brought to my attention. It revolves around a company called 
Farmsource Management, Mr. Speaker, and a cease trading order 
that was issued some time past. 
 
Could the Minister of Justice give me an update as to where this 
company is at and what proceedings are being taken, so that I can 
inform my constituents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I want to advise the member that I 
don’t have all of the specifics with me. However, the cease trading 
order was issued by the securities commission early in 1984. It 
was subsequently investigated by the securities commission. Later 
the file was forwarded to the RCMP, and presently there is an 
RCMP investigation involving the matter. I prefer to not comment 
further on the details since it is under investigation. 
 

Health Hazard from Agricultural Chemical Spraying 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture and 
to the Premier. Despite your lack of concern, Mr. Minister, about 
the grasshopper infestation, it is a grave and urgent problem for 
thousands of farmers. The question I have this morning — and 
farmers have been approaching me — they’ve been . . . Could I 
have the attention . . . 
 
The farmers are quite concerned about the effects of chemicals on 
their bodies and reporting farmers in hospital and members of 
their families have been hospitalized. They know about protective 
measures, and they’re wearing masks and the protective clothing 
that they require, but they’re concerned about the health hazard 
and repeated sprayings and use of special chemicals, especially 
Furadan. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Government of Alberta has responded and is 
spending up to $200,000 to study the hazards of such chemicals by 
testing the masks and so on. My question to you, Mr. Minister: 
what action are we taking here in Saskatchewan? What is your 
government doing to ensure that we’re going to survive through 
all this with all the spraying that’s going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question with respect to our environmental or health research that 
we’re doing on the impact of spraying. It is a serious problem and 
I know there are risks. People in my family are actively involved 
in spraying for grasshoppers and have been using chemicals for 
some years. You have to be very careful, and I know of cases 
where people have become ill as a result. So I would be glad to see 
what our Departments of Health and/or Environment or whoever 
else might be doing research on the impacts of spraying and how 
to best cope with it and manage it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in Alberta 
they’re using sophisticated equipment to sample the air inside a 
mask area and right next to the farmer’s  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2385 
 
 

skin, and regularly test the farmer’s body fluids to find out what 
absorption levels there are through the skin and also through 
inhaling, and then they carefully study these effects on a number 
of farmers. I think this is a worthwhile study, especially in light of 
some fraudulent testing and information we’ve had about the 
federal government’s testings in the past, and I think it’s very, very 
important that this is done now because of the repeated use of 
chemicals that farmers are using. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member believes 
it’s a good piece of research, I’ve had very good co-operation from 
the Government of Alberta, and I suspect that that research will be 
shared with people on either side of the province of Alberta. So if 
he thinks it’s good research, I will be in contact with him, and we 
can share the results of that research. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are we going to do something? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’re doing that 
particular research and I can get access to the research, I’m not so 
sure we should both be doing exactly the same research. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Executive Council 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I had some questions on the 
Premier’s staff that I had wanted to ask, and I wanted to start out 
by asking a question on an individual who I think has left your 
employment, Dave Tkachuk. I wonder if you could give the date 
that he left your employment and the conditions that he left under. 
Was he an order in council, as you would say, an ordinary order in 
council appointment; and was there an order in council note when 
he left, concluding his employment? 
 
I just want to know the circumstances whereby he left the 
employment of your department and whether or not there was an 
order in council that severed his employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Tkachuk resigned the end of January. 
He was hired with an OC, but obviously didn’t have to have one if 
he offers his resignation, and it was accepted with regret. He 
received his salary as of the end of January, regular salary cheque 
and pay-out, SDOs (scheduled days off) and vacation credits, all 
accumulating as to the end of January 1986. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you tell me whether there was any 
severance pay or any package put together for the individual on 
his leaving, and whether or not there’s any commitment by the 
government or Executive Council to re-employment? Is he on a 
leave of absence, or is it a resignation, a formal resignation? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well there’s no commitment to have him 
rehired. It was just a straight resignation. He had 17 days SDOs, 
and vacation days, eight, accumulated for 25 days, and that’s it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Premier, in July of 1982, some time after you took office, you 
were quoted in the Regina Leader-Post as saying: “Deficit 
budgeting in Canada has to end if the country is to be competitive 
in world markets.” Did you believe that then, do you believe that 
now, and what progress do you think is being made by your 
government in eliminating deficit budgeting in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believed that then, and I 
believe it now, and I made those comments with respect to years 
and years and years of ongoing deficits at the federal level and the 
printing of money, which was obviously leading to some very 
serious economic situations for Canadians, nationally and 
internationally. 
 
At the same time, when a country goes into some unique 
situations, whether it’s wartime, or a province goes into some 
unique situations because of drought or disaster, if you will — and 
certainly what’s happened in Saskatchewan has been described as 
disaster — I believe the public sector should respond. 
 
I believe that you have been quoted, when you were minister, of 
saying that from time to time you would certainly live with a 
deficit under unique circumstances to help people and protect 
people. I feel the same. I would rather have a balanced budget or a 
surplus, but under conditions of where you’re not getting money 
from potash or agriculture or the major sources of revenue, in fact 
it’s costing you, then the only alternative, as you know, is to raise 
taxes a great deal or cut the fundamental core programs. And I 
don’t really believe that it’s the people’s fault that we got 
grasshoppers and drought and low wheat prices and low potash 
prices — certainly not the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
So in a situation where that happens, it hits, I’m quite prepared to 
defend them against high interest rates and provide them with 
some sort of comfort, to protect them from these abnormal 
economic or weather or international conditions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, in 1982 
this province had a very good crop. In 1982 this province had a 
very good crop. During those years, oil production was good — 
not tops, not as high as it has been at times, but good. Oil prices 
were exceptional. Indeed, they were record. They were record. 
 
When, Mr. Premier, crops are good, oil production is good, oil 
prices are record high, you had deficits — not drought. There 
wasn’t any drought in ’82; there wasn’t any drought in ’83 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . .We’re getting some assistance from the 
financial wizards from . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You need all the help you can get . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, I certainly do. I certainly do.  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2386 
 
 

Everybody in Saskatchewan needs a great deal of help if we’re 
going to be told that at no time during the last four years and some 
months of this government’s administration has it been prudent to 
manage well, has it been prudent to balance our books. At every 
single month since this government has been in office, it has 
decided to run in the red. 
 
And it’s been decided to run in the red when crops are good. And 
it’s decided to run in the red when crops are bad. It is decided to 
run in the red when oil production is high. It’s decided to run in 
the red when oil prices are high. It’s decided to run in the red when 
oil prices are low. 
 
And it hasn’t found one month in the last four years — and now 
it’s three months, and it’s going to be 4, 5, 6, who knows; it may 
be five years before this government decides to face the people — 
and in not one month has it found a time when it could balance its 
books. 
 
Now this says something about our times, of course. But it says a 
great deal more about the economic management of the province 
when at no time could it find a time when it could balance its 
books. And it says a great deal more about the commitment of this 
government to the tough job of balancing their books. 
 
They have had a commitment to spend money. They’ve had a 
commitment to raise money from ordinary people. But they 
haven’t had a commitment to raise money from the resource 
companies. They haven’t had a commitment to raise money from 
the resource companies. And as a result, all of us have much 
higher taxes today and in the future — today and in the future. 
 
If I may quote the Premier: “Deficits are just a deferred tax that 
must be paid by future generations.” Deficits are just a deferred 
tax that must be paid by future generations. 
 
This budget which we have before us says that in this year we will 
collect in provincial taxes something less than $1.5 billion. But in 
four years and two or three or four months, or whatever it is — 
four years and six or seven months, or five years, whatever it’ll be 
when you face the public — you will have run up deficits of well 
over $2 billion, and you have deferred taxes, more than one year’s 
taxes. You will have spent at least one extra year’s taxes over and 
above what you have gained. 
 
This, Mr. Premier — and now I’m talking about budgetary 
revenue. You’ve spent much more with borrowed money, and I’m 
not now addressing that. But I am talking about the things that you 
have financed out of your ordinary revenues. 
 
You have spent much, much more than you have taken in, and you 
have deferred taxes to be paid for by future generations. You have 
deferred those taxes, and more than one year’s full taxes in just 
four years. For every dollar you took in, you spent a dollar and a 
quarter, and you did it year in and year out, and you’re still doing 
it at a greater level than ever before — at a greater level than ever 
before. 
 
I know that others will want to participate, and I invite them so to 
do. I’m just using the Premier’s words to  

describe his actions. Budget deficits will make us less competitive 
in world markets — and he’s right. And every time we run up a 
deficit in this province, it means that we are going to have to pay 
higher taxes at some future time, and the Premier acknowledges 
that they’re simply deferred taxes. 
 
It means that every business in this province will have a harder 
time to compete five years hence than it would have had we not 
had deficit budgets. If we’d balanced our budgets, our business 
would be more competitive now, and more competitive five years 
from now. And it’s still going on; we’re making our business less 
competitive each day. 
 
We talk about competition and wanting to be competitive, but 
what we’re doing — what we’re doing is making our industry less 
competitive; what we’re doing is storing up for them taxes they 
have to pay. And the Premier agrees with that too. Deficits are just 
a deferred tax, and we have been deferring them at a greater rate 
than ever in the history of Saskatchewan, so that we know that 
future taxes are going to have to be going up and up. 
 
(1045) 
 
There is no alternative, as we’re seeing at Ottawa now. The 
Premier says that Ottawa has run up massive deficits. They really 
have not been running up massive deficits except after about 1976, 
in my recollection — about 10 years now of massive deficits. Here 
in 1982, when you said this — “deficit budgeting in Canada has to 
end” — they had been running up massive deficits for about five 
or six years. And Mr. Premier, that’s just about where we are in 
Saskatchewan now, running up massive deficits for about five or 
six years, five of your budgets — huge deficits for five budgets. 
And that, Mr. Premier, is the very thing which you were, I said 
quite properly, criticizing in 1982, pointing out the dangers in 
1982, and four years later you have done exactly the same thing. 
 
For four years you have run up massive deficits. And by and large 
these are not massive deficits because you have spent a great deal 
more money. You have spent some more money, but massive 
deficits because you have not gathered in money. You’ve not 
gathered in money from the resource companies. In the value of 
oil produced in this province we used to take in more than 40 cents 
on the dollar. We’re now taking in something of the order of 25 
cents on the dollar and leaving the other 15 cents with the resource 
companies who have made record profits — made record profits. 
 
And those, Mr. Premier, are the reasons why we have these 
massive deficits. And those are the reasons why we will have to 
pay, our Saskatchewan people — what you described in 1982 as 
future generations — will have to pay the deficits which you 
properly characterized as deferred taxes. 
 
Mr. Premier, this type of administration worries business people. 
When I talk to them they say, I know somebody’s going to have to 
pay, and I know that some future government is going to have to 
gather in money. Just as the federal government is now raising 
taxes and lowering services, so future Saskatchewan governments 
are going  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2387 
 
 

to have to raise taxes and lower services. I don’t know when or 
where, but it will come. And those business men know, they know 
that when taxes are being raised, local people and local business 
men have to pay their share and thereby become less competitive, 
thereby have a harder job carrying on their business. 
 
And certainly there’s no question that ordinary people know that. 
Ordinary people, lawyers and others, know that when there are big 
deficits, when there are big deficits this year, sooner or later 
they’re going to have to pay. The bond dealers have to be paid; the 
bankers have to be paid; and we have to maintain services, and 
that costs a lot of extra money. That’s a course of action this 
government has decided upon after saying it wasn’t going to do it. 
 
We all heard the Minister of Finance in his first budget say, I will 
balance the budget over four years. And we saw him retreat from 
that each time. We saw him balance not one single budget, let 
alone balance over four years. Every single one was a deficit, and 
by and large each one was worse than the last. By and large each 
one was worse than the last, and this one is certainly the worst of 
all, certainly the worst of all. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, you were on the right track in 
pointing out the dangers of deficit budgets. You were on the right 
track in pointing out the dangers of deficit budgets, but you have 
not followed your own advice. You have not followed your own 
advice, and you have led this government into massive deficits — 
deficits such as this province has never seen, never seen, and this 
province should not have to see, because our economy is one that 
is very volatile. We all know that. 
 
And when we are faced, not only with maintaining services during 
a downturn, but also having to deal with the debts accumulated by 
improvident governments in the past, we have a difficult time, 
And that is the future you have given to Saskatchewan people. 
You have said to them, yes, I know that our economy is volatile, 
and there will be years when it will be tough to maintain services, 
but I, the Progressive Conservative Premier of this province from 
1982 to 1986 or ’87, whenever it is, I will say, you will have to 
bear, not only the costs of those services in tough times in the 
future, but also you’ll have to bear the debts that I left with you, 
the cost of servicing those debts. That’s what I bequeath to you; 
that is my legacy to you. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, that’s what you have done. And I ask you, do 
you intend in the short months which are available to you to start 
balancing your books in some way, start trying to raise some 
money, or are you going to continue to increase the deficits which 
you have imposed upon these people. Do you intend to continue to 
operate your government at a very substantial loss every year, 
every month, every week, every day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll be glad to respond 
to the hon. member. Several things come to mind. I mean, day 
after day after day in the legislature they are asking for money. 
They ask for $100 an acre payment. They ask for taxes to be given 
back. They continue to ask for more money for education, and 
they  

ask for more money for health, and they ask for more hospitals to 
be built, and they ask for more equipment, and they ask for more 
nurses, and they ask for more roads. They ask for all these things. 
Then the Leader of the Opposition stands up and says, well you 
have yourself a deficit. Then when we try to make some 
significant moves to correct what we inherited, which was an 
economic disaster . . . 
 
And let me give you a couple or three examples. I’ll start with the 
so-called balanced budget in 1982. The balanced budget in 1982 
was not balanced at all. And the Leader of the Opposition has been 
in government long enough to know how you play with numbers. 
They estimated revenues in ’82 of $600-some million in oil, and 
they knew very well that the oil revenues wouldn’t be that high. 
Anybody could tell you. The actual were something like $70 
million less than that. And they have forecasted those. I mean, the 
Leader of the Opposition was in here the other day saying, well 
I’ll tell you how you fix the books, he says. He says, you know, 
you can pay $3 million for something, but you can put it on the 
books at 23 million, and he says, there’s no net gain and there’s no 
net loss, but it looks pretty good. Well he’s been in that business 
for a long, long time now and he knows precisely what you can do 
to show the public what’s on there. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what we had here, we had the potash . . . The 
provincial government under the NDP put together money, 
borrowed it for potash — something like, I think we’ve got here, 
418 million; Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, 
250 million; the Prince Albert Pulp Company, 186 million. And if 
you want to argue about whether your 3 million or 10 million or 
20 million was cooking the books, under how you wanted to stick 
it in there, I’ll tell you one thing that the $165 million that was 
borrowed was for real and we’ve had to pay the interest on it — 
Sask Oil and Gas, 94 million; Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, 68 million. 
 
Why I’ve got over a billion dollars here that was borrowed to buy 
something, and when I try to get out from under a mess that’s 
losing $91,000 a day, the member opposite says, oh, you can’t do 
that. I mean, we’re $300-and some million in the hole on that, and 
he’s the first to raise it in question period. 
 
But you can’t get rid of that. Now he’s standing up and saying, 
why don’t you balance your books? I mean, he won’t let us fix it; 
he won’t let us sell; he won’t let us build; he won’t let us create; 
and at the same time he wants more money for health and more 
money for education — $100 an acre for this and $100 an acre for 
that. 
 
Look, you and I both know the politics of standing in the 
legislature and talking about how good you were and how good I 
was. I’ll go through your last four years and my first four years, 
and I’ll do it in some detail, because you did not do well. Not only 
politically did you not do well but economically and socially you 
did not do well. 
 
Now when we inherited this outfit, we not only had all this debt 
and contrived balanced budgets, and you’d rob from the Crown 
corporations — and I’ve been through  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2388 
 
 

that with you before — hundreds of millions of dollars even from 
one Crown. You never told people what you did with that. you 
threw it into the pot. But why didn’t you mention wheat prices; 
why didn’t you mention potash prices; why didn’t you mention 
uranium prices; why didn’t you mention the oil revenues that even 
your forecasters admitted when we got in here they knew full well 
that you wouldn’t have that kind of revenue. 
 
And I can show you that oil revenues did go up with some real 
heard work to keep people investing. And you mention that we 
only collect 25 per cent of the revenue and you collected 40. Well 
let’s make it very clear. The royalty structure that you had we 
didn’t change at all. For all existing oil it stayed right there; you 
know that and I know that. What we said to these people is: you 
come in here and you drill and drill and drill, and I don’t care if 
you drill 100 dry wells, if you find one, I’ll give you a year off and 
then I’ll tax you the same high royalty rate. Do you know what we 
got after a year? Even if we had it for one year we’d have all those 
wells in here, all at the 40 per cent which you’re talking about. But 
you don’t know about economic incentive. 
 
How do we get people in here? If you can’t plan the seed in the 
spring, it’s going to cost you. You have to invest. And we said, 
you can drill 100 dry holes and you won’t get a nickel, but if 
you’ll come in here and find one, we’ll give you a year off and 
then we’ll charge you the highest rate in North America — and 
you like that rate. So of course we did that. And your argument is, 
oh, but look in this year we’re not collecting as much. Well when 
you plant your crop, your colleagues will tell you, you’re out some 
money, you’re out some money because you invest. 
 
When you build a pulp-mill and you are going to invest in it, and 
you build a paper-mill and you’re going to invest, you’re going to 
have to take some risk and invest. 
 
Now you’ve put this province in jeopardy over a billion dollars, 
and we’re paying the interest, whether it’s on the pulp-mill or 
whether it’s on potash mines. And the pulp-mill has been losing 
money and the potash mine’s losing and you’re saying, well for 
Heaven’s sake, that’s all my fault. It’s all my fault. 
 
Well we can play these games. Your forecasts, I can show you, 
were way off. They’re an awful long ways off. The interest rate 
changes, you didn’t mention that. Potash prices dropping a great 
deal around the world, obviously that’s not my fault. When you’re 
into an agriculture situation where you have massive drought and 
grasshoppers, that’s not my fault. Uranium prices dropping, that’s 
not my fault. 
 
I mean, it’s been economic difficult times and everybody in 
Canada knows about it. Here in this province . . . And at the same 
time now we’re looking at dramatic drops in oil prices and oil 
revenues, what do you want me to do? Do you want me, as you 
do, say at 22 per cent interest rates I don’t care if you’re hurting; 
I’m going to stick it to you because I believe that the government 
will have to be protected. And you hung in there and protected the 
Crowns, and you had them charging gas tax for SGI rates, and you 
had them charging all kinds of things to protect  

that holy family of Crown corporations. 
 
What I did was said the people are more important than the 
government bureaucracies. That’s what I said. Now you say it’s 
future taxes . . . I’ll tell you what will happen. If you get revenues 
— say potash prices go up, oil prices go up, wheat prices go up, — 
you get money, money at the same tax rate. 
 
I think the member from Shaunavon said last night at 22 per cent 
interest rates he made a profit. Well if you’ve got $7 Durum and 
$12 flax and you’ve got uranium $150 a tonne, you’re going to 
make some money and you were even . . . or potash $150 a tonne, 
you’re going to make some money. If world prices turn around, 
interest rates fall, you know that you can make massive revenues, 
and it’s on the cycles. 
 
So I got into a drought cycle and decline in prices even with 
production up and you say, oh well, that’s my fault, that the 
international price . . . Look, nobody believes you. I suppose you 
can say that some might. Well some might, but certainly you 
won’t fool all the people all the time. 
 
With respect to taxes, you know the taxes that we have cut for 
families and ordinary people. You know them. And we have cut 
the sales tax, and we have provided huge heritage property 
improvement grants for senior citizens like they’ve never seen 
before. For low income people we’ve cut the tax. You don’t 
mention that we cut income tax. You don’t mention that people at 
the low end of the scale have had 20 to 30 per cent tax cuts — not 
10 per cent in income tax — 20 to 30 per cent. You don’t mention 
that we’ve charged an awful lot more tax on people like banks and 
railroads, much more than you did. You don’t mention that. 
 
Well I just say, Mr. Speaker, you can go along the Manitoba 
border where people are now coming across Saskatchewan to go 
to Expo, and they know there’s no tax on gasoline and there’s no 
tax on shoes and shirts and clothes and sneakers and running 
shoes, and they appreciate that. They’re going to the legislature in 
Winnipeg saying, why don’t the NDP in Manitoba treat us as well 
as the PCs in Saskatchewan. And they’re upset with it, and they 
say, why aren’t we competitive? Why don’t they think about the 
people? Well. 
 
(1100) 
 
And you mention deficits. We went through this before. Do you 
think Alberta’s rosy? They didn’t change governments and they’re 
into a deficit situation. Same government. Manitoba’s on the same 
government. Went through the same conditions but didn’t have a 
drought. Do you think that they’re on a surplus situation? Not on 
your life. They got another massive debt. It’s difficult. 
 
You go to the state of Nebraska. It’s difficult because of 
agriculture, because of high interest rates, and because of 
commodity prices. So you think it’s just this administration? You 
can’t make people believe that. When I go across this province 
people say: I believe, Grant Devine, that you have tried in difficult 
times. And you’ve gone to the people and listened and responded,  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2389 
 
 

and you have protected them. And you have put money in 
education and health; you put money for seniors; you have helped 
people in social services. In terms of new jobs created, in any 
other jurisdiction you want to look at, we’ll compete with 
Manitoba, Alberta or anybody else. 
 
Well I can only say that I don’t like deficits any more than you do. 
We have drought, we have potash prices dropping a hundred 
bucks a tonne, and we have serious economic conditions facing 
the people. You can go to them and say, I will doubt your taxes to 
balance the books because there’s a drought, or the prices fell. 
And that’s what they got from you. In the good times you lost it — 
you lost it. Why would you lost? I mean something must have 
went haywire if you had it all together. 
 
You lost because people said you weren’t listening. And now 
you’re telling me at the same time, day after day, Grant, I want 
you to get me this and this and this and this — money for this, 
$100 an acre for that, more money for this, more money for that. 
And now you stand up and say, and now I want you to balance the 
budget. And your campaign promises — you’re not worried about 
the budget. You have offered more money — about a billion 
dollars — in your platforms already. Last night the member from 
Shaunavon was up there, seven for this and seven for that, seven 
for this — we’ve had people add it up and it’s fortunes, hundreds 
of millions of dollars. 
 
Now you tell me where you’re going to get hundreds and 
hundreds of millions of new money if you’re going to change the 
taxes that I’ve had, and you’re going to do all these things at a 
hundred bucks an acre and pay for all this stuff. And I’m already 
in a situation where we’ve expanded markets and you’re going to 
say, well, it’ll be nothing to this. We’ll just fix it. Look, well 
clearly you can’t have it both ways. We can stand in here and 
argue for a long time. 
 
I agree with you — I agreed with you; we don’t like deficits. 
Deficits, as you have said in this legislature, and we can get you 
the quotes, from time to time you should have a deficit — I’m 
paraphrasing — if it’s difficult times and you have to protect the 
people, then you should. 
 
So we have had dramatic declines in wheat prices, very terrible 
interest rates, dramatic decline in potash prices and revenues — 
you know yourself, instead of getting 2 to $300 million a year, it’s 
cost us 25 to 100 million; there’s nothing that you can do about 
those prices. Uranium prices are down, and now oil prices are 
down. I’m not sure what you expect anybody to do about those 
price situations. 
 
So your forecast of a balanced budget was wrong in ’82. You put 
me in that position. You’re costing me $91,000 a day in the 
pulp-mill, and you won’t let me fix that. Your public Crown 
corporation in potash is losing us 50 to $100 million, and what do 
we do about the prices? Can’t do that. You put the risk on the 
taxpayer. Your philosophy says the public sector should own it, 
and when you own it you bear the risk. And if you don’t like the 
risk, then you shouldn’t be into it. Now if you believe that the 
taxpayer should bear the risk of $91,000 a day and the equivalent 
in potash prices because of international price, fair enough. That is 
future taxes. If you want to look at future  

taxes — all those investments. 
 
So I mean, we have a legacy of CCF and NDP governments that 
built this and it lost, and built and lost, and bought and lost, and 
bought and lost. Well I don’t blame you for trying. Everybody 
should be encouraged to try to invest. But when I get people to 
invest, and I encourage them to drill and I encourage them to 
expand and I encourage them to build pulp- and paper-mills, I 
think you could give me the same courtesy that I will give you. 
We want to see development. And we want to build. But when 
there are really difficult times, I believe the public sector should 
stand in there and protect people, protect them against high interest 
rates and drought and so forth, and if it costs them, then I believe 
you get it back when the times are better and prices go up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 
your difficulty is that you think everyone was born in 1982. You 
expect the people of Saskatchewan to believe that there never have 
been low grain prices before, there never have been low potash 
prices before, there have never been low oil prices before, and 
therefore these are all something that never happened before. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, there have been droughts before, and there have 
been low oil prices before, and there have been low potash prices 
before, and governments have faced up to these and have not had 
massive deficits. 
 
Between 1944 and 1982 there were no massive deficits — no 
deficits of any significant size at all. There wasn’t a deficit of more 
than perhaps $10 million in the whole period. And those are the 
hard facts. And it is you who have decided on a different tack of 
massive deficits. And it’s simply not true that none of these 
circumstances have ever happened before. And these are the hard 
facts, that there have been occasions before, at times indeed when 
oil prices were low, potash prices were low, and wheat prices were 
low. All true. All true in the early ’70s. 
 
And then I say to you, Mr. Premier, that you still want to carry on 
in the way you are. There’s no point in our debating this. You 
have reached the conclusion that your job is to get some public 
servants who will come up with some excuses so that you can 
justify having any size of a deficit. And the deficit this year will be 
6 or $700 million, calculated on the same basis that the member 
for Kindersley calculated his budget last year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Less than Manitoba’s though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And the member opposite who has been 
sent here to shout, and in accordance with your custom of having 
someone sitting here in order to harass the members on this side, 
he is suggesting that it’s less than Manitoba, and he’s wrong again. 
Wrong again. So I want to say that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will step back so the member from Saskatoon can 
get at my mike. He’s just about at it now . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Right. Well the member from Moosomin is 
talking about politicians resigning, and he knows more about that 
than most people since he’s just  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2390 
 
 

decided to take the honourable course — the honourable course 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I think that we do need a little quietness on 
both sides here and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Our side didn’t make any noise, Mr. 
Chairman — not one word! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The debate continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’ll just sit down until . . . I’ll just wait a 
moment till members get control of themselves. No, no, I’m . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell him to shut up again, Allan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well no, our people are speaking from 
their feet; members opposite are speaking from their seats — and I 
think that’s a fair difference. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t think there’s any point in belabouring this. 
The Premier obviously believes that massive deficits are in the 
best interests of this generation and the next generation of 
Saskatchewan people. He obviously believes that policies which 
he has pursued — which have given record profits to oil 
companies and low revenues from oil companies — were good 
policies. He believes that he should congratulate himself if he gets 
the same amount of money during a period when oil prices 
virtually doubled; he believes that. 
 
Well he can believe that, and we all have the legacy of that belief. 
We are all going to have to pay off that deficit, which is going to 
cost us about $250 million a year to service up to now. That’s 
more than we spend on the medicare plan. That’s a good deal 
more than we spend on many, many other key investments and 
key expenditures — a good deal more than we spend on our 
universities. I think we could look at the Highways department, 
and its total budget would be less than $250 million a year. 
 
So the expenditures that we need for things like highways and 
medicare and universities are in fact going to pay the interest and 
the carrying charges on that deficit. We all know that; it’s a fact. 
There’s no way that we can wish it away, and it’s true. And we all 
will have to pay that for almost indefinitely. The 250 million, I 
suppose, would retire it over 20 years, the interest and any small 
sinking fund, a couple or 3 per cent a year. 
 
And so over that period of time Saskatchewan people will have to 
bear that amount, and they’re going to have to continue to bear a 
great deal more if this government is re-elected and continues on 
its policies of spending a great deal more than it takes in. And the 
Premier was right the first time in saying that that’s going to make 
us less competitive and it’s deferred taxes. And unlike the 
Premier’s comments that everybody is going to make money, it 
just makes common sense; it turned out, as a matter of fact, that 
everybody didn’t make money, and it wasn’t common sense. 
 
All of these facts are known to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Premier would wish that people would believe that these didn’t 
make any difference, that  

somehow deficits are an abstract thing that don’t concern the 
ordinary citizen, but I tell you that it does concern many ordinary 
citizens and a great many small-business men. And I simply leave 
it at that. We clearly have a difference of view. He believes is 
massive deficits, and it doesn’t matter what he says, that’s what he 
. . . what he does speaks so loud, it doesn’t matter what he says. 
And he has had five massive deficits, any one of which would 
have been larger than the accumulated deficits since he . . . before 
he came to office since 1905. But let’s forget 1905, but certainly 
since World War II. 
 
Nobody has run up deficits other than tiny ones that may be an 
accounting deficit, two or three . . . and he has adopted a different 
policy. Fair enough. We know what policy he pursues. I want to 
record the fact that we believe that prudent financing is not out of 
style, and that sooner or later some government in this province is 
going to have to tackle the problem the very massive problem 
created by the government opposite. I don’t think I need to 
belabour that point; I think it’s well understood by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, fair enough, Mr. Chairman. I would 
just point out that when the hon. member says that there never 
were deficits before in Saskatchewan, and that these times are just 
the same as they ever were, I can just . . . I just have to ask him: 
why is Alberta running a deficit with the same government it had 
in the good times? Why is Manitoba running this very large 
deficit? We’ve got an NDP government to the east of us, and a 
Tory government to the west of us, and they haven’t changed, so it 
wasn’t . . . in our cases we changed governments, but we were 
under the same circumstances. 
 
And there is a concern in Albert, and I was reading it this morning 
in Western Report, that the $14 billion heritage fund could be 
gone in Alberta within a matter of four or five years. It’s called the 
fund envy, and what they’re saying here, and I can just quote, says 
this: 
 

. . . either the provincial government raids the fund to cover 
the debt, or it borrows money elsewhere, its current course; 
either way, the debt will soon equal the amount in the fund. 

 
Well these are not normal times, Mr. Chairman. If you’ve got a 
$14 billion heritage fund in a province like Alberta that has been 
accumulating wealth, and he says within a matter of years — 
within four years, this economist is predicting; this is Brian Sharp, 
University of Alberta, economist department chairman, says: 
 

. . . $14 billion will either be gone, used up, or the equivalent 
amount will be borrowed in Alberta because of the times. 

 
And the member opposite said these are not unique times. Well he 
may think he’s a magician, but I’ve got the NDP in Manitoba with 
a huge deficit, and I believe, I suspect, they’re trying to be fiscally 
responsible. I’ve got the deficit in Alberta, and they’re looking at 
losing the entire heritage fund, and he says, oh, these are normal 
times. And I’ve got a deficit in British Columbia, a deficit in 
Ontario, a deficit in Quebec, and a deficit in the  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2391 
 
 

Maritimes, and he says, oh, these are just typical. Well, maybe 
typical to him, but when we’ve looked at 20-some per cent interest 
rates on top of massive declines in commodity prices, obviously 
it’s not normal, and he can’t say that it is. 
 
And I’ll take you to people up and down, businesses or not, that 
you may find one that says, oh, the provincial deficit is a problem, 
but at the same time he’s got one himself, and he understands the 
problem. So you can try to make it a political problem if you will 
but these are not normal times that we’re living in or have lived in 
these last few years, either because of drought or interest rates or 
the decline in prices, and so forth, and people from coast to coast 
or up and down the North American continent will tell you that. 
 
(1115) 
 
Secondly, he says that we lost revenue in oil. That’s simply not 
true. So let’s get the facts on the table. Oil production is up 13 per 
cent; provincial government oil revenues from 1978-81 versus 
’82-85, any combination you want to look at, they’re up 79 per 
cent — oil revenues — because of things that we have done. 
 
His concern is about the percentage take when you have a 
one-year holiday. Well I’ll grant him that when you’re going to 
invest, it’s going to cost you. Then they pay the full royalty rate 
and we have 3,000 more wells pumping than when we started, and 
they will pay the high royalty. That’s precisely why we did it, and 
it worked very well. Total value of petroleum and natural gas 
rights and sales in Saskatchewan is up 137 per cent. So in 
industries where we could encourage production up, obviously 
we’ve had some success. 
 
Don’t leave the impression that oil revenues are down; they’re not. 
The percentage in the short run to encourage that production is 
down. I’ll give you that. It’s down for a reason, and we planned it 
that way so we could get some production and then they can pump 
oil. We’ve had some really good finds, and I expect there’ll be 
some more finds. 
 
Finally, I don’t ever hear the member opposite encourage the 
federal government to balance the budget. I don’t hear the NDP 
say that the members of parliament, Mr. Benjamin and Mr. 
Nystrom from Regina, I don’t hear them talking about the feds 
balancing the budget. Don’t . . . they say, cut, cut, cut, cut; don’t 
you cut this. That’s all talk about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No — spend, spend, spend, but when you come to the Tory 
government in Saskatchewan, oh, balance the budget. The Tory 
government federally who got the mess that was put together by 
Mr. Trudeau, the former prime minister . . . I mean I don’t hear 
anybody from the NDP saying, oh, we got to balance that budget 
federally. No. They selectively chose. 
 
When you’re talking to the business man in Regina, do you say, 
oh, isn’t that a wicked deficit we’ve got provincially? Do you ever 
mention the deficit federally? I doubt that. I’ve never heard you 
mention it in here when you’re talking to me about the deficit. I 
don’t hear Benjamin or de Jong talking about the deficit federally.  

No. Oh, this poor farmer needs $100 an acre, and this needs to be 
fixed, and that needs to be fixed, and then when you’re in here, 
you’re saying, oh, you should balance the budget. People know 
that you can’t have it both ways. So they’re pretty astute, pretty 
astute politically in Saskatchewan, and they know when you’re 
talking out of both sides of your mouth. 
 
So I would just say, if you want to be consistent, I’ll join you and 
say, yes, federally and provincially across this country we should 
have balanced budgets, and we should work as hard as we can to 
have them balanced. At the same time you can’t have campaign 
promises that promise a billion dollars just flowing out and you 
don’t have any idea where you’re going to get the money. You 
certainly can’t get it from the potash industry, the uranium 
industry; and oil prices have dropped, and grain prices are down. 
Who are you going to get it from? You can’t just go out and . . . 
The media has been asking you. They thought you were really 
going to be serious about this deficit, and within seconds of talking 
about the deficit, you were into a complete campaign platform that 
was spending money left, right, and centre. Well I just say, if 
you’re going to be consistent, then you’re going to have to be that 
way politically because they’re going to catch you up on it. 
 
I know that we have a deficit, and I don’t like it, but I have put it 
there to protect people during some difficult times, and they 
understand that in Manitoba, in Alberta and B.C., in Ontario, and 
right across the piece and north and south. And it’s difficult, and 
it’s not typical. 
 
So we can argue about it, but I don’t want to leave the impression 
that oil revenues aren’t up because of what we did. They’re up a 
lot, and when the royalty finishes, year after year after year we 
have 3,000 more wells that are going to be pumping at the high 
royalty — and that makes sense. And you said so in the 
legislature. And you said you believe in that royalty holiday. You 
had a problem with the in-fill holidays but you are quoted as 
saying, I see no problem with the royalty holiday. And you said, I 
see no problem with free trade in potash. 
 
I’m telling you, I’ll be telling the folks that, because you can’t 
have it both ways. If you believe in the royalty holiday, then say 
so. don’t stand in here and say that we’re giving it away when you 
have one hand . . . I can give you quotes that you believe in it, and 
then you stand up here and say that you don’t. You stand up and 
say that there’s less revenue, and I can show you that revenue is 
up. 
 
You’re against it on one day, and you’re for it the next. You’re for 
free trade in commodities — you’ve said that in the legislature the 
last time here, and then you get your colleagues to stand up and 
say they’re for protectionism. 
 
Well I don’t think that you have many principles left in terms of 
what you really believe — what you really believe. I don’t know 
. . . What is an NDPer today? What are they? You’ve been all over 
the map. I don’t want to leave the impression that oil revenues are 
down; oil revenues are up, and you support royalty holidays and 
you’ve said so; and you support free trade in commodities and 
you’ve said so. So I just want to put that on the record  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2392 
 
 

so that you can’t have t both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to attempt 
to rebuff that rather remarkable exercise in semantics. 
 
But not directing one’s attention to the facts, I will just make two 
very simple statements. I have many times called for the Mulroney 
government to do better at financing. I can think of comments I 
made last evening saying that I didn’t approve of the billion dollar 
bail out of the two banks. I said I didn’t approve of the $500 
million that went to the Reichmann’s on the Gulf oil deal. And I 
didn’t approve of the $500 million that went to Dome Petroleum. 
And those are some of the things which would have dealt with the 
federal deficit. 
 
I have indicated a great number of tax loopholes of which I did not 
approve. Members opposite were very proud of the scientific 
research tax loophole that cost the people of Saskatchewan their 
share of some $2 billion. We know it was brought in by the 
Liberal government. I’m not denying that. But it was brought in 
with the full support of the PCs and with the opposition of New 
Democrats who have said those types of give-aways cost people 
money. 
 
So I don’t want to debate the federal budget here. But the 
suggestion that we have never called for the federal government to 
get it’s tax affairs in order is bizarre by reason of the fact that the 
last election a major plank of the New Democratic Party, federally, 
was fairness in taxation and plugging corporate loopholes — 
plugging corporate loopholes — you know, the tax expenditures 
of some $30 billion. 
 
Now all of them are not bad, but 10 or 15 billion of those are 
straight give-aways. You know that; I know that; New Democrats 
have complained about them; PCs have endorsed them. That’s all 
I’ll say about that. I will not ask any further questions on subvote 
1. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Legislation 

Ombudsman — Program Services 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 

 
Item 14 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, just to refresh the 
members of the committee, would you indicate whether all of 
items to 13 inclusive have been dealt with by the committee on 
internal economy or what the . . . I think that’s the appropriate 
name. We all know the committee to which I refer. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Yes, for the Leader of the Opposition, I can 
confirm that items 1 to 13 inclusive have been dealt with by the 
committee. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in view 
of the comments by the Ombudsman about the pressure of his 
work and the number of cases that are not being dealt with in 
respect of which delays are being encountered, is it the intention of 
the government to review this matter and provide additional funds 
for the Ombudsman so that he can maintain an appropriate 
turnaround time in dealing with the complaints of citizens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, before I answer the 
question, I should introduce the official — Mr. Ken Barker, 
assistant to the Ombudsman — I understand since 1973 assistant 
to the Ombudsman. 
 
As it relates to your question and the budget for the Ombudsman, 
you will know, of course, based on your discussion during this 
committee with the Premier during Executive Council estimates 
that there is always, particularly during these times, a difficult time 
in setting priorities and where money should go. The Ombudsman 
is one that we try to keep fairly tight. I guess you could suggest 
that that’s an indication of the weakness of the minister at cabinet 
when he’s arguing for these things. But the reality is that I wasn’t 
successful in getting additional funds during budget discussions. 
 
As it relates to the suggestion of the hon. member, will we be 
considering additional funds so that he can clean up his turnaround 
time? I’m always open to discussion with the Ombudsman, and 
any arguments that he’s able to advance with me will be taken into 
consideration. And if we can find that he is indeed in a difficult 
situation as it relates to support to achieve the desired turnaround 
time, I will again take those arguments to cabinet, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 
(1130) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Legislation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the portion of the agreement 
which permits losses to be deducted from the principal owing is 
not the most expensive item of this  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2393 
 
 

agreement, but it is by far, in a way, the most bizarre. That’s a fair 
feat because it is a bizarre agreement. This is the most bizarre 
provision in a quite bizarre agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate knowing what the thinking was 
behind the government’s agreement to include this province is an 
agreement. I have never seen anything like it before. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well not many people will have seen a 
wholly owned government pulp-mill, so we’re breaking some new 
ground in several areas here. But the end result will be that the 
government will be out of the operation of a pulp-mill. As for the 
member, to say he has never seen anything like it before is not 
necessarily the criteria upon which it should be judged. 
 
I would say that we had two options going into that, and I have 
explained this before, but I will go through it with the member. If 
you think about the two parties coming to the table to say, okay, 
what are the options as it relates to the losses during the period of 
time that the paper-mill is under construction, which will take a 
couple of years and so on. Now during that period of time there 
will be losses continuing on the stand-alone pulp operation. 
 
One of the options could have been that we as a government could 
have said, we will continue to absorb those losses and pay for 
them up front on an annual basis, cash, which is what goes on now 
over the last number of years. Those losses have been outlined, 
and I will be pleased to go over them again with the hon. member. 
So that could have been an option. 
 
Or on the other hand, the option could have been to say that those 
losses will be deducted from the debenture and become, for lack 
of a better term, paper losses off the debenture rather than 
cash-up-front payments required by the province of Saskatchewan 
in the given year ’86, the given year ’87, and so on. 
 
We chose the second option because we think it’s the most 
prudent option. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You chose the second option because you 
can’t delay the election for three year. Mr. Minister, you have 
unwittingly confirmed something else, and that is that the 
agreement transfers the pulp-mill now, here and now; it is not 
conditional upon building any paper-mill. 
 
There was, of course, an alternative for you, Mr. Minister, and that 
was to transfer the pulp-mill when the paper-mill was built, but 
you didn’t do that. You chose to transfer the pulp-mill now, here 
and now, and you have got this weird provision whereby they can 
deduct losses which they claim from the purchase price. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Minister, just to confirm that they’re 
getting the pulp-mill here and now, and it is not in any way 
conditional upon the building of the paper-mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman, I have said before and 
said before that no agreements will be executed which do not 
provide for the construction of a paper-mill. No agreements will 
be executed of any kind,  

whether it relates to the guarantee or whether it relates to the 
debenture. No agreements will be executed unless the guarantee of 
the paper-mill is there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is this agreement conditional 
upon the building of a paper-mill? The Premier quite clearly 
yesterday suggested it wasn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m sorry. I just missed the last part of 
your question. Would you mind repeating it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I asked you to confirm that this 
agreement is not conditional. This agreement transfers the 
pulp-mill. It’s clear from the schedule, otherwise the schedule 
doesn’t make any sense at all. It’s clear that the agreement which 
you won’t give us transfers the pulp-mill. 
 
I take it, Mr. Minister, and I ask you to confirm that the agreement 
to which this is a schedule does not make the transfer of the 
pulp-mill conditional upon the building of a paper-mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well we’ve been through this before. 
What you have, schedule B, is a schedule to a set of principles, 
agreement of principles, and schedule B is the repayment schedule 
for the debenture — one aspect of the total deal, which I’ve been 
through many times and I think is well understood now by 
whoever has entered into an analysis of what’s happening. Okay? 
So whether you want to admit it or not, that’s what that is. 
 
Now if you just refer to the Bill, Mr. Chairman, and if all members 
of the committee would refer to the Bill, I would refer to two 
sections of the Bill which provide for the development of a 
paper-mill at Prince Albert, and it very specifically says that. In 
section 3(1)(c), the last two or three lines of the section relate to 
the whole thing, and I’ll just quote the last couple of lines: 
 

. . . in respect of a Saskatchewan project which will include 
improvements to a pulp mill and the development of a paper 
mill at Prince Albert. 

 
Now that’s very specific to “a paper mill in Prince Albert.” And 
that of course deals with the . . . Well what more can I say? It’s 
specific to a paper-mill. 
 
I’ll take you, Mr. Chairman, and to the hon. member from Regina 
Centre, to section 4(1), and in section 4(1) . . . I’ll just read the 
whole section: 
 

With the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in council, the 
Minister of Finance or such other member of the Executive 
Council as the Lieutenant Governor in Council may 
designate may enter into and execute agreements and 
indemnities, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
(enabling legislation, in other words, Mr. Chairman) with 
any person, agency, organization, association, institution or 
body within or outside Saskatchewan facilitating the sale of 
assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation and the 
development of a paper mill at Prince Albert. 

 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2394 
 
 

Which very specifically states, “the development of a paper mill at 
Prince Albert.” That paper-mill — as once again I’ll say to you, 
Mr. Chairman, and to all members of the committee and the public 
of Saskatchewan — the whole deal is contingent upon the 
development of a paper-mill in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I grant you, Mr. Minister, this is a grossly, 
grotesquely laborious process. It’s made so by the fact that you’ve 
given us part of the agreement and not all of it, and you’re playing 
hide-and-go-seek with respect to the rest of the details. 
 
I would readily admit to you that this is a grotesque way to go 
about handling the province’s affairs. But it comes about because 
you, I think quite by mistake, gave us part of the agreement and 
now you won’t give us the rest. And we are, as I say, playing 
hide-and-go-seek with you. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s patently nothing in this Bill which guarantees 
the building of a paper-mill. Indeed, 3(1) quite clearly states that 
the guarantee may be used for either improvements to the 
paper-mill, and that’s patently clear from the English language. 
 
Likewise, 4(1) uses the word “may,” and I ask the minister to 
consult any standard English dictionary for the meaning of the 
word “may.” The word “may” and the word “mandatory” have 
two quite different meanings. So there’s nothing in here which 
guarantees the building of a paper-mill. 
 
I ask the minister again; since it’s not in the legislation and no 
amount of stonewalling by you is going to put it in the legislation 
— if you want to bring forth an amendment, that’s something 
different, but it’s not in the Bill — is it in the agreement, or is it 
just another fit of optimism by this government that you can pull 
off this paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I read from section 
3(1)(c). The member stands immediately after, and immediately 
after he perused the section himself, and says that it provides for 
either the improvements to a pulp-mill or the development of a 
paper-mill. The Bill clearly states, Mr. Chairman — and I’ll just 
read that last line again: 
 

. . . which will include improvements to a pulp mill and the 
development of a paper mill at Prince Albert. 

 
(1145) 
 
It says that clearly. But one thing that must be made clear to you, 
this is the enabling legislation, the enabling clause; this is not the 
guarantee itself. This is what enables the government to enter into 
the guarantee. The schedule that you have is a schedule to a basic 
set of principles, which is just that — part of set of principles of 
agreement. It is not the agreement itself. I’ve made that very clear 
in both cases. 
 
So what we’re dealing with is a Bill which gives the enabling 
powers to enter into a guarantee, which is fair  

ball. And that guarantee will be on this basis — very specific, not 
to enter into a guarantee for all manner of things — enter into a 
guarantee “which will include improvements to a pulp mill and the 
development of a paper mill at Prince Albert.” 
 
Now if there’s anything that you think could be changed to make 
that more specific, I would like to know what it is. And if you can 
find “either/or” in that little word “a-n-d”,” I’d like to hear that as 
well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, since you continue to refer to 
the Bill as your evidence of a commitment by Weyerhaeuser to 
build the paper-mill, do I take it that there’s no such commitment 
in the statement of principles itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I have said, in the 
agreements themselves, the legally binding agreements which will 
be signed, final agreements, will contain the guarantee or the . . . 
you know, the guarantee of the paper-mill construction before 
they’re executed. I would say that. 
 
The agreements will be tabled. The agreements will be tabled after 
closing. The negotiations are ongoing. I’ve said that before, in 
terms of the final agreements. The negotiations are ongoing. They 
will continue. Negotiations will not take place here in the 
legislature, nor should they. 
 
But certainly the people of Saskatchewan will need to know and 
will want to know the final arrangements. And the people of 
Saskatchewan have the commitment on many occasions, from 
myself and from the government, that they will see those final 
agreements after closing, and after the closing of the negotiations 
and the signing of the agreements. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take it then, Mr. Minister, that the . . . Do I 
take it then that the deduction of losses from the principal was an 
additional inducement which had to be thrown in in order to get 
Weyerhaeuser to enter into this agreement? Do I take that to be 
what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t recall having ever said that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then what is the thinking behind the 
government in this bizarre provision? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I explained that very clearly. The option 
was either that we continue to absorb the losses in the 
free-standing pulp-mill . . . I explained that to you — the two 
options. 
 
We chose to go with the option of reductions from the debenture 
rather than . . . And you may argue. You may argue that the 
Government of Saskatchewan could have continued to take the 
losses. In other words, let the hemorrhaging continue. 
 
I just say that that’s not the . . . You know, this is from the . . . on 
behalf of the public of Saskatchewan. We chose not to do it that 
way, and I’ve been through that explanation just this morning, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2395 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — When do you anticipate Weyerhaeuser will 
take over the pulp-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — They will, at the closing of the 
agreements, Weyerhaeuser will take over the operations of the 
pulp-mill and begin construction of a paper-mill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What date do you anticipate it will close by, 
then? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have said before, and I mean, you know, 
you can look in an incredulous way at me and say . . . I’ve said 
before, in this very debate, that it was six to eight weeks from now 
that we expect that the final documents will be signed. And, you 
know, I can’t give you a date. There’s no set date, but as I’ve said, 
the negotiations go on, on some of the finer points, and we expect 
six to eight weeks form now that the final agreements will be 
signed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I take it there’s no cap on the 
amount of losses which might be deducted from the principal 
either? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that that’s one of the 
provisions that’s still under some negotiation, of whether the cap 
. . . there’s likely to be, but it’s part of the negotiations that are still 
ongoing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I am going to move an 
amendment which you have before you. I and my colleagues 
believe that the minister is wasting the time of this Assembly. We 
ask what are rather simple straightforward questions, and we get 
the most nonsensical comments from the minister, who if I were to 
ask the minister the time of day, he’d say, that’s something I can’t 
disclose until after the closing of this agreement. 
 
The minister won’t tell us a thing. He patently gave us the 
schedule by mistake. The schedule includes some provisions 
which neither I nor most observers of commercial transactions 
have ever seen before. By far the worst and the most bizarre, and 
the most dangerous is the provision that allows Weyerhaeuser to 
deduct from the principal owing, the amount of their losses. 
 
No one has suggested any means by which this government can 
control the amount of losses. When we asked the minister if it was 
cap, after a five-minute consultation in which patently neither he 
nor anyone else can concoct an answer which will withstand 
questioning, he says that’s subject to negotiation. Patently, what he 
means is there’s no cap. 
 
You have a simple straightforward provision in the schedule 
which isn’t subject to negotiation, and which I will read for the 
benefit of the minister, who seems to have a bad memory. I 
wouldn’t feel so strongly about that, except it’s going to cost . . . 
except his bad memory and his bad judgement is going to cost this 
province a quarter of a billion dollars. This provision says — I will 
find it here in a moment — this provision says: 
 

In the event that earnings as determined in accordance with 
paragraph 2 below, are negative in any year, including stub 
period (a “year”), prior  

to start-up, the principal amount of the Debenture shall be 
extinguished to the extent of such negative amount. 

 
Members will remember that earnings . . . that the ordinary 
meaning of earnings is not used. The meaning of earnings which 
accountants would attach to the word is not used. Earnings for 
these purposes mean earnings in excess of 12 per cent on invested 
capital. 
 
Since the mill is unlikely to ever achieve that and since, with every 
degree of honesty, the amount of the earnings can be manipulated, 
Weyerhaeuser can, for all purposes, with every degree of honesty 
and with no lying, cheating, or stealing — to use the Premier’s 
words — can reduce the principal amount by very large sums. 
And there doesn’t appear to be a thing this government can do 
about it. 
 
This is a clear provision which binds the government. It’s got 
Gaynor’s name on one corner, which is the vice-president of 
Weyerhaeuser, and it’s got Mr. Garnet Wells’ name on the other. 
So clearly this is binding on the government. This provision which 
allows Weyerhaeuser to deduct sums from the principal, which 
appear to be in the discretion of Weyerhaeuser, is unfathomable. I 
cannot understand why the government would agree to such a 
thing, and I cannot understand how the minister can pretend that 
he can impose any limit on this. 
 
There is within any financial statement some discretion, and 
apparently it is in Weyerhaeuser’s discretion how much is going to 
be deducted. I have not talked to a single person, be they lay 
people or financial people, who can understand why this 
government would enter into such a foolish provision, a provision 
which allows Weyerhaeuser to pay us about what they think 
appropriate. That’s the practical effect of subclause (b); 
Weyerhaeuser will pay us what they think’s appropriate. 
 
That is not satisfactory to this opposition; it isn’t satisfactory to the 
public. And when the members get out of this place and get back 
to their constituents, they’re going to find some awfully hard 
questions being asked of them. And one of the ones that’s going to 
be the most difficult to ask is this question here: how on earth 
could you enter into such a nonsensical agreement which provides 
that Weyerhaeuser can deduct, almost at their discretion, losses 
from the principal? 
 
I therefore move, Mr. Chairman, an amendment to subclause (1) 
— you have the amendment before you — which provides: 
 

Notwithstanding any agreement or arrangement with respect 
to the sale of assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation in exchange for 
$248 million debenture from Weyerhaeuser, under no 
circumstances shall any losses of Weyerhaeuser be deducted 
from the principal amount of that debenture. 

 
That is just common sense. And I suspect, if the members want to 
go home to their ridings, if they pass this, they’ll find at least one 
of the embarrassing question which is  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2396 
 
 

going to be awaiting them will have been washed away. If 
members hope to enjoy any peace over the weekend, you might 
consider agreeing to this. That is not an adequate reason to change 
a Bill. But I tell members opposite, I make that comment by way 
of telling members opposite that you are going to face a very 
angry public. The public are not one bit happier about this 
give-away than we are. So if you think what you’re doing is 
satisfactory to the public, then just turn down this amendment and 
go home and I’ll tell you, you’re going to find out that the public 
are outraged. 
 
The sum involved is very, very large. If you had received the cash 
for this instead of giving it away, it’s my calculation you could 
retire about one-eighth of the provincial debt. This is a very large 
sum of money. 
 
Although the grant to Gainers is as outrageous, in the sense of it’s 
irresponsible, the sums are trifling compared with this. This is an 
enormous sum of money. I know members opposite find the 
give-away of a quarter of a million dollars to be an amusing 
subject. I can tell you that the public don’t find this to be an 
amusing subject. And I can tell members opposite that if you 
persist in passing this Bill, you might at some point in time in the 
future succeed, but you are going to reap a bitter harvest when you 
finally are forced to call an election. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the amendment offered by 
the member from Regina Centre is clearly just political posturing 
in its . . . well it is clearly political posturing. 
 
What the member wants to do now is negotiate the deal in the 
legislature. That’s what he’s saying; we want to negotiate. What I 
will say to him and to everyone in the province, that we have very 
competent negotiators. They will be continuing to negotiate with 
Weyerhaeuser’s corporation, and that negotiation is ongoing, as 
I’ve said before. 
 
(1200) 
 
When it’s complete, which we expect to be in not long from now 
— when it’s complete and the agreements are signed, you will see 
the outcome of that. What I said, as it relates to a cap on the losses, 
potential losses, is that there is likely to be a cap. That’s still a 
subject of negotiation. I clearly did not say that there won’t be, and 
I clearly didn’t say that there will be. What I did say, that there’s 
likely to be, and I will stand by that. 
 
There is one thing that’s absolutely clear though, and I want to 
make it clear to the member. There certainly is no cap on the 
losses now, given the status quo. There’s no cap on those losses 
now, that’s for sure. There is no cap — now. 
 
I have clearly outlined to you the reason that we chose this option 
rather than a continuation of the absorption of those losses directly 
on an annual basis to pay those losses directly out in ’86 and in ’87 
and so on. So I’ve explained that to you. Now you may disagree 
with it. That’s fair ball for you to disagree. But I’ve explained the 
rationale and the reason for going with the option which I chose. 
 

What we will have when Weyerhaeuser Canada begins to operate 
the pulp-mill, what we will have is something quite different in 
terms of the marketing of pulp than what is the present case. The 
present case in the marketing of pulp is that we deal in the spot 
market. The case, when it becomes under Weyerhaeuser Canada, 
will be what they will bring to it, other than their expertise in the 
operation of the pulp-mill, and so on, but they will also bring their 
marketing network and their expertise in the marketing network 
and in their world-wide markets. And that should be, and we 
believe it will be, of benefit to that pulp-mill. 
 
But in any case, I don’t know what more I can say except to say 
that we certainly reject the suggestion by the member, because it is 
nothing less and nothing more than just political posturing. We 
can expect that, and certainly that’s what this House is for — 
certainly much more for that than it is for the negotiations of a 
major deal to take place in here. So we won’t negotiate. But this is 
an attempt to posture as well as to negotiate, and we reject that on 
both counts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the 
amendment. The reasons for it were basically given by the 
minister — basically given by the minister. 
 
The minister says that in six to eight weeks this mill will be turned 
over to Weyerhaeuser Canada. He says it will be operated in a 
different way than it would be operated if it were operated by the 
Prince Albert Pulp Company. And he says the reason is that it will 
be marketed differently — the product will be marketed 
differently. And what he said was that this mill will now sell its 
product through the organization, the world-wide organization, of 
Weyerhaeuser incorporated. 
 
Now just think of that for a minute. Here is Weyerhaeuser Canada 
— out of the minister’s mouth — selling its product through 
Weyerhaeuser subsidiaries all around the world, and the profit or 
loss, because of these dealings between Weyerhaeuser Canada and 
Weyerhaeuser incorporated and its subsidiaries, are going to be at 
the expense of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you think of that for a minute. You think of that for a minute. 
Would you sell your business, your business, a merchandising 
business, to anybody, saying to him, you operate my business — 
the one I used to own — and if you suffer a loss, we’ll knock it off 
the purchase price. And further, you can sell all the product you 
produce to companies which you own or control. 
 
Now it doesn’t take very much ingenuity for Weyerhaeuser 
Canada, when it’s selling all its products to companies which are 
associated with it, to make a loss. It doesn’t take a lot of ingenuity 
for Weyerhaeuser Canada to price that product, when it’s selling 
to Weyerhaeuser U.S. or Weyerhaeuser Italy or Weyerhaeuser 
whatever else, to price it in a way that Weyerhaeuser Canada at 
Prince Albert will suffer a loss. And every one of those losses will 
be at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no suggestion, and the minister hasn’t given us  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2397 
 
 

any assurance, that there will be any protections against non-arm’s 
length dealing. None whatever. Non whatever. And here we have 
. . . 
 
I ask anybody who has ever been in business — ever been in 
business — whether or not you believe that a transaction, from a 
subsidiary company to another subsidiary company, will always 
be at market price — everybody knows that’s not true. Everybody 
knows that that’s the bane of tax enforcement, the bane of any 
government agency which is trying to assess at what price goods 
are moving between a parent and a subsidiary, or between two 
subsidiaries. 
 
And everybody knows that, within limits, companies can site the 
profit in one place or another, and there’s nothing illegal about it. 
Indeed, proper accounting practice would suggest that the products 
be priced low to the subsidiary, priced low to the marketing 
agency in the United States. 
 
There is a general accounting principle which says that you shall 
not declare a profit by selling something to yourself, but only 
when third-party money is in. Now if any of the lawyers or 
accountants around deny that, then they obviously are displaying 
something about themselves, but not about accounting principles. 
And if you thought about that for a minute, you’d agree. 
 
If I owned company A, and I have company B, and then we’re 
going to sell something to the world, to a third party, I would 
hardly be able to say I made a profit by selling from company A to 
company B. I made the profit when there’s some third party 
money in the pot. 
 
And therefore it is entirely likely that Weyerhaeuser, in selling 
from Weyerhaeuser Canada t Prince Albert to Weyerhaeuser U.S., 
will price the product not to make a large profit in Prince Albert. 
This would defy accounting principles. And I say to you, it is 
entirely likely under those circumstances that Weyerhaeuser will 
be able to run up a big loss in Prince Albert, all of it accruing to 
Weyerhaeuser U.S., but the loss is at our expense — the profit 
accrues to Weyerhaeuser U.S., and I say this all without any 
impropriety. 
 
There is no suggestion that there is any set rule in pricing between 
one subsidiary and another — no suggestion that there’s any set 
rule. There is a fair amount of judgement in that pricing. 
Weyerhaeuser can make the judgement and the people of 
Saskatchewan pay for the judgement which Weyerhaeuser makes. 
So that’s point number one, point number one. When 
Weyerhaeuser at P.A. is selling to itself in Weyerhaeuser, Tacoma, 
or Weyerhaeuser in Rome, then there is no assurance that the price 
will be such as to produce a profit at Prince Albert — none 
whatever. 
 
The second point is really quite different. It deals with the 
chemical plant at Saskatoon. A quick reading of schedule B 
appears to indicate that, eight weeks from now when 
Weyerhaeuser takes title, it can sell the chemical plant at 
Saskatoon. there are certain limitations about selling the pulp-mill, 
but none of them appear to apply to the chemical plant. 
 

It seems also clear, Mr. Chairman, that the chemical plant makes 
more money than the pulp-mill. I may be misinformed on that, but 
it’s my belief that the chemical plant is a money-maker, whereas 
the pulp-mill during the last downturn of the pulp industry has not 
been a money-maker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hasn’t ever been a money-maker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well members opposite will suggest that 
a track record of profits from 1966 to 1982 is not money-making. I 
would be rather happy to have a business that had that sort of a 
track record. That’s what the pulp-mill made. Nobody denies it 
made money until it was taken over by the government opposite. It 
made money until 1982. 
 
But this is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . May I ask you, Mr. 
Chairman, to allow . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The Leader of the Opposition requires some 
quiet so he can make his point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And this is a serious point. My question 
is whether or not — and not a question — I say that my 
information is that the chemical plant was a more profitable outfit 
than the pulp-mill during the downturn of the last two or three 
years. I say that Weyerhaeuser would be able to sell the chemical 
plant, and therefore increase the losses, increase the losses to the 
pulp-mill. They may well sell it to themselves through another 
Weyerhaeuser subsidiary for all we know. But they could sell it, 
and I see no prohibition there. And you can look to see why 
there’s a prohibition with respect to the pulp-mill, and none with 
respect to the chemical plant, and thereby increase the losses — 
all, again, at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if members opposite put a different interpretation on 
schedule B, I would be happy if they would refer me to the 
provisions which they rely on. But I say that it’s here. I say that 
that’s possible. And I say that therefore the people of 
Saskatchewan run the additional risk of having a very substantial 
increase in the losses because of a sell-off of the profitable 
portions of the enterprise and leaving the less profitable, at least at 
this downturn in the pulp-mill industry, the less profitable portions 
of the enterprise — all, again, at the expense of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say the only way we can protect ourselves against those tow 
eventualities, and no doubt there are others, is to have an 
amendment which says that these losses, that when Weyerhaeuser 
is operating the mill, profits or losses shall be at Weyerhaeuser’s 
expense. And that seems to me to be a reasonable thing. I’d be 
delighted if any members would enter the debate and give us an 
instance, one instance, where they know of an enterprise which 
was sold to be operated over an extended period of years by the 
purchaser, with profits and losses to be at the vendor’s expense — 
just one, just one instance of that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And members are suggesting that they have them. I hope they will 
not deprive the committee of their information. Just one instance. 
And I say I can’t recall any. You can occasionally get two or three 
months. But an extended 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2398 
 
 

period of years, a purchaser operating a company, after they take 
over, operating a company and whether they make a profit or a 
loss is of no interest to them, since it’s all going to be at the 
vendor’s expense. I can’t recall a single such occasion because it 
would be wildly improvident on the part of the person selling a 
mill, the vendor. And I don’t think they can point to any. 
 
And I think that the only way we can protect the people of 
Saskatchewan is an ordinary commercial way — and this is not an 
ordinary commercial transaction, the one they’re proposing — to 
apply ordinary commercial rules. And the ordinary commercial 
rules are this: when you buy something and you operate it as the 
buyer and you make a profit, the profit is yours; and if you make a 
loss, the loss is yours, and you shouldn’t be able to move the loss 
back to the person who you brought it from, the vendor. 
 
That’s ordinary commercial practice. We’re not seeing it here. 
This amendment would assure us that we were following ordinary 
commercial practice, and that’s why I support the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well several points, Mr. Chairman. First 
of all, you know the member, and what I have said before and I 
believe to be the case, I believe that the member thinks that we 
have competent negotiators working the deal for us. You can say 
so if you like. The member from his seat says there’s no evidence 
of it and he doesn’t think we have. I have faith in the negotiators 
that we have and the people at Crown Management Board and 
others who are working on this deal and on others. 
 
And what I would say to the member is that there will be . . . 
When you see the final agreements, finally signed and finally 
negotiated, there will be clauses there to the effect that . . . I don’t 
pretend to be a lawyer and I know the member is a lawyer, but 
clauses to this effect — that accepted Canadian business practices 
will be adhered to by the company without regard to the terms of 
debenture. Just so that you can know that. 
 
(1215) 
 
And another point that I might make as it relates to your 
suggestion that Weyerhaeuser will enter into some type of magic 
bookkeeping and all the rest of the kinds of things that you always 
suggest that private sector firms will do in order to bilk the public, 
or whatever it is that you have this great fear of. What I would say 
to you is that first of all, when I mention about the marketing of 
pulp, the ownership and the operation of the pulp-mill are two 
very different things. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan now owns the pulp-mill. Clearly the 
operation of the pulp-mill are the people who are there and 
operating the pulp-mill, and I believe that those people will be 
operating the pulp-mill after. They’re the same people that 
operated it for Parsons and Whittemore; they operate it now for 
the Government of Saskatchewan who are the shareholders; and 
they will probably operate it for Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
So the market pulp that goes out of that mill will be public 
knowledge in terms of the amount of pulp that leaves the  

mill. It will be public knowledge in terms of what the price of pulp 
is, or in other words what the pulp market is. 
 
So you’ve got the amount leaving, what the pulp market is, and so 
on, and yet the member will stand and say that Weyerhaeuser, 
through some kind of fancy bookkeeping, will sell it at different 
prices to themselves, and all the rest of the things, which always 
comes back, Mr. Chairman, to the belief of that member. 
 
And I believe more and more as I watch in here and as I followed 
his career in this province, I believe more and more that he comes 
to that brick wall that is his philosophy which says, if you’re in the 
private sector, you can’t be trusted. He believes that. He’s come to 
that belief somehow, but he continues to come to that. I mean, 
that’s the direction that his arguments will take him. That’s the 
direction that his colleagues will take him, and I believe that that’s 
the direction that their party’s going in the province and has been 
for some time. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we’ll reject the amendment for the reasons that 
I stated before in the fact that it is nothing less or nothing more 
than political posturing and an attempt to negotiate the deal here in 
the legislature, which is not the proper forum for such 
negotiations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just to 
reply to a couple of the ad hominem arguments which you 
addressed. The suggestion that somehow I’m opposed to the 
private sector is fairly amusing considering the fact that I grew up 
in a household that so far as I’m aware, I can’t remember my 
father ever getting a pay-cheque in his life. He was always in 
small business, and unlike some members opposite, I have been in 
small business. I was keeping books in small business, privately 
owned small business, when I was 14 years old. 
 
I say to the members opposite, a lot of them don’t have any 
experience at all with small business. My grandfather was a 
small-business man all his life, and this suggestion that somehow I 
think that they’re all swindlers . . . I’ve got one brother and he has 
spent his entire life in the wholesale fruit business, and if you’re 
suggesting that somehow I think that these people are all 
swindlers, that is childish nonsense — childish nonsense. 
 
The member opposite says that I am suggesting that someone is 
cheating and cooking the books, and of course that is entirely 
wrong . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake says I said that, and of course he is not telling 
the truth. I very much suggest that he probably knows that, but 
perhaps he doesn’t. I’ll give him the benefit of the doubt. 
 
I am saying that using the normal business practices, this can 
happen — normal business practices. I wonder if the members 
know of the problems which any taxing agency has. I wonder if 
they know of the artificial rules which governments have had to 
set up. Let’s take a company like — pick one — Imperial Oil, 
Esso, Exxon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Co-op would be the first one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Co-op is rather different because it 
doesn’t . . . the co-ops all operate separate agencies,  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2399 
 
 

separate retailing agencies, but Federated would be all right — 
Federated would be all right. Where do you think Federated makes 
its profit if it saws lumber at Canoe in B.C. and ships that lumber 
to Federated’s wholesale agency in Saskatchewan and then sells 
that lumber to the Prince Albert co-op? Where do you think it 
makes its profit? 
 
Well I tell you, I tell you this: because there are no strict rules on 
this, the governments of Canada had to set up artificial rules to see 
where the corporate taxes go. 
 
You will say that the co-op is a bad example on that. I will use 
Esso where they have a refinery in Alberta and they move their 
gasoline to Saskatchewan. There are no particularly established 
rules, and that’s the point I make. And if you think they are, please 
tell the governments of Canada who have had to set up their own 
artificial rules to say that Esso’s profit will be distributed across 
Canada on the basis of the number of employees it has and the 
number of sales it has. Artificial rules they have had to set up 
because there is no well-established accounting principle of the 
price at which Esso’s refinery in Calgary or Edmonton should sell 
its products to subsidiaries across Canada — across western 
Canada in this case. 
 
Those rules are not there. Those rules are not there, and they use 
different principles. And there’s nothing to suggest that Esso is 
cooking the books. We’re not suggesting that at all. We’re 
suggesting that there is no set rule. And if the member for Prince 
Albert can stand up and say what the set rule is for moving 
product from one part of a conglomerate to another part of a 
conglomerate, and if they can tell me where it’s set out in normal 
accounting principles, please tell me. I say it isn’t there. 
 
And I say that there will have to be some rules for 
non-arm’s-length trading. We don’t see them, and without them, 
then there is a good deal of discretion all within normal accounting 
principles, and all well beyond any suggestion of impropriety on 
Weyerhaeuser’s part. 
 
Weyerhaeuser is in business. They will make solid business 
judgements. And surely that’s what all of us would do when we’re 
in business. We would make solid business judgements. And 
Weyerhaeuser can make a solid business judgement which will 
move a lot of loss to the people of Saskatchewan. This amendment 
would make that impossible, and that’s why I support the 
amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Blakeney Tchorzewski 
Engel Lingenfelter 
Koskie Lusney 
Shillington  
 

Nays — 30 
 
Birkbeck Morin 
McLeod Muirhead 
 
 

 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Parker 
Duncan Johnson 
Schmidt Young 
Myers Hopfner 
Dutchak Rybchuk 
Dirks Caswell 
Embury Muller 
Sandberg Baker 
Klein Glauser 
Currie Zazelenchuk 
Martens Gerich 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Petersen 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I take it 
. . . Oh I’m sorry, I’ll wait till your staff return, actually. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s no commitment to the paper-mill in the 
master agreement to which this is a schedule. You repeatedly refer 
to the Bill as the commitment to the paper-mill. do I take it the 
only commitment in writing at this point in time which has been 
signed by Weyerhaeuser, which can in any sense be called a 
commitment, is in the Bill? There’s no commitment in the 
agreement to which this is a schedule, and there’s no other 
agreement in existence. Do I take that to be the case, that you look 
to the Bill as the sole source of a commitment to the mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve been through this a 
couple of times — more than a couple of times. There is a 
commitment, Mr. Chairman, to the construction of a paper-mill. 
The paper-mill will be an integral part of the operation. The Bill 
which we are dealing with here, the enabling legislation, clearly 
states, very clearly states in two separate places — this Bill clearly 
states that there will be development of a paper-mill at Prince 
Albert. 
 
I have clearly stated to you that there will be no agreements 
executed — whether they be as it relates to a guarantee on the 
paper-mill, financing of the paper-mill, or as it relates to the 
debenture which is for the purchase of the assets of the p resent 
pulp-mill — that there be no agreements executed without it being 
a part of the agreement that a paper-mill must be built at Prince 
Albert as an integral part of this operation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And, Mr. Minister, what riding does 
Weyerhaeuser represent in this legislature? Well you say the Bill 
is the commitment to the mill. The Bill only commits the 
legislature. Weyerhaeuser is not, so far as I know, a candidate in 
the last election, therefore I fail to see how the Bill can commit 
Weyerhaeuser to much of anything. So I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well there’s no agreement. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it’s fairly obvious there’s no 
commitment by Weyerhaeuser to a mill. 
 
Mr. Minister, given your optimism, what capacity of  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2400 
 
 

a mill do you hope to negotiate with Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the Bill is enabling 
legislation. The member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Your 
point, all right. Your point is very hard to see at any time, I can tell 
you that, Mr. Member from Regina Centre. 
 
The Bill is enabling legislation. What this Bill enables the 
Government of Saskatchewan to do when passed is to enter into 
the agreements. Those agreement swill be entered into. Those 
agreements will be signed and they will be made public after that 
closing. I have said that. 
 
They will be developing a paper-mill and the provision will be in 
the final agreement which says a paper-mill is part of the 
agreement. And there will be no agreements executed either 
relating to a guarantee or to the debenture. I’ve said that before; 
I’ve said that now on several occasions. The member still does not 
want to accept it. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What capacity of a mill do you hope to 
negotiate? What are you looking for in return for the pulp-mill . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if that’s said on the record, that 
would be very useful information. That would be very useful 
information is that was said on the record. What capacity of a mill 
do you hope to negotiate with Weyerhaeuser? What’s the capacity 
of the mill which you hope they build? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the capacity of the mill, of 
the paper-mill which will be built, will be 200,000 short tonnes of 
paper per year, and to put that into some perspective in terms of 
the industry in Canada, it will be the second largest paper-mill in 
this country, second only to one operated by Domtar at Windsor 
mills, Quebec. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m told by my colleagues that there’s only 
one mill now in Canada. If that’s the case this would have little 
difficulty in achieving the status of being second largest. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure which of your colleagues 
you’re listening too. I believe it was the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who told you. If that’s your research 
source, he says there are only two mills in Canada, I will say to 
you and I’m informed that there are seven or eight paper-mills in 
Canada. This one will be the second largest in the country. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If negotiations proceed with respect to the 
paper-mill, when do you hope to close the agreement, and when 
would you expect construction to start, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We’ve been over this a few times as well 
before, Mr. Chairman. But I have said that we expect the 
agreements to be closed in six to eight weeks from now, but as 
time goes here it’ll soon be five to seven weeks if we carry on and 
continue as we are. But anyway it’ll be six to eight weeks is what I 
said in the House a few days ago and continue to say now. And 
when do I expect construction? We are assured that construction 
of the  

paper-mill will start, well, let’s say immediately after closing of 
the agreements. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’ve now got me somewhat 
puzzled by your tactics. Mr. Minister . . . Well given the nature of 
the tactics, I think they would puzzle anyone. Mr. Minister, I had 
assumed you were not giving us the master agreement, to which 
this is a schedule, because the master agreement contained only a 
soft commitment to the paper-mill. It appears to be wrong. It 
appears that the agreement, to which this is a schedule, contains no 
commitment at all. That appears to be what you’re saying. 
 
I therefore do not understand why you can’t give us what, I think, 
you intended to give us, and that was the agreement itself and not 
the financial arrangements. The language which you used when 
you were giving us that suggested you were going to give us the 
statement of principles itself. What you gave us was the schedule 
to the statement of principles. 
 
I now do not understand why you can’t give us the principles of 
agreement itself. It would go a long way towards clearing up the 
many questions which are being asked, and might well shorten up 
this portion of committee of the whole. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, what is there in the principles of the 
agreement that is going to embarrass you? What is it that you’re 
refusing to give us? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I can assure the member that there is 
nothing that will embarrass me. 
 
What I have said — and I’ve given the explanation before, and I 
stay with that — is that there are portions of the final agreement 
which are still being negotiated; those portions relating to some of 
the principles in the other principles of agreement to which 
schedule B, that you have a copy of, is a part. Right? 
 
Now I know you understand this, but I know as well that you 
choose not to attempt to understand it, or you choose to pretend 
that you don’t understand it. 
 
So what I’m saying is that there is nothing — for certain — there 
is nothing that will embarrass myself or the government. And 
there’s no question about that. And what I have said to you, you 
will know that very quickly because you will have the total 
agreement in your hands after closing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have two questions. Does the 
statement of principles mention the construction of a paper-mill? 
And if so, will you read that portion of the statement of principles 
into the record for us if you won’t give us the whole agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I won’t, you know, because what this 
could logically lead to is, you say, well this clause and this clause, 
and I’ll be reading the clauses out. So I won’t do that, but I will 
say to you that there will be . . . in the final agreement that 
commitment will be there, and you’ll see that at that time. 
Negotiations just cannot, negotiations cannot be conducted in this 
forum, nor will  
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2401 
 
 

they be conducted in this forum. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, what the minister is saying is he won’t 
read this into the record because he’s afraid that, if he does, he 
won’t know how to say no to all my other requests. I say that I’ve 
got more faith in the minister’s obstinacy than he does. You’ve 
done a fine job of saying no over some 10 hours of discussion on 
this Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that there’s nothing in the statement 
of principles about the mill — that this is simply optimism on your 
part. I also suggest to you that they got the mill here and now; 
that’s theirs. And if this agreement is some way conditional, if the 
transfer of the mill is in some way conditional upon the building of 
the paper-mill, then I dearly wish you’d give us that portion, read 
it into the record if you like, and that will bring to an end one very 
serious question which we and members of the public have about 
this thing. 
 
So if the transfer of the mill is conditional, the pulp-mill is 
conditional upon the building of the paper-mill, read that into the 
record. That will go a long way towards ending the confusion and 
questions which exist with respect to this bizarre agreement of 
yours. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have said that we 
would provide that one portion, which I gave you, of the basic 
principles upon which an agreement can be struck. There are 
many aspects which continue to be under negotiation, and they 
will be, and we will not get into a clause by clause of divulging 
what’s in the principles of agreement. 
 
But we will, as I said before, you’ll have the total agreement. And 
I know that even you, even the member from Regina Centre, who 
accuses me of being overly optimistic, I believe was your term. I 
would accuse you of being overly pessimistic because, as you are 
wont to do in most cases, mostly based on just the nature of your 
philosophy and your party and the rest of it, which is just 
pessimism based on a basic mistrust of people, and they just . . . on 
this trust. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t mistrust most people, Mr. Minister. I 
just distrust this government. I trust Weyerhaeuser to make the 
best possible deal for their shareholders; that is their responsibility. 
I do not trust this government to make the best possible deal for 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, which is your responsibility. I trust 
you only to make the best possible deal for your re-election; that’s 
all I trust you to look out for. 
 
Mr. Minister, I indeed am negative about this agreement unless I 
am assured that they’re not going to get the pulp-mill and not build 
a paper-mill. If I have that assurance, that would clear up one 
important question. There’s a couple of others, but it will clear up 
one very important question. It would clear up one important 
question if I had the assurance that they’re not going to get the 
pulp-mill until the commitment to the paper-mill is unequivocal. If 
I had that assurance, that would answer one very important 
question. But the minister is obfuscating; he is avoiding the 
question. All I get from my request that we be given assurance of 
that is his statement that we’re negative because we don’t trust 
them. 
 

Well I ask you, Mr. Chairman, who would trust them? We spent 
four years watching this government stumble from one disaster to 
another because they were overly optimistic. They came in to 
office, Mr. Chairman, with a promise to cut sales tax — eliminate 
sales tax if I recall it — cut income tax by 10 per cent; going to 
bring power out to all of the farms . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member is wandering from the 
topic, and I would ask him to get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me say that we are being asked to trust 
this government’s optimism. I say that this province has suffered a 
good deal by trusting their optimism. The public trusted this 
government in the last election to deliver on their promises. I was 
pointing out, Mr. chairman, that their track record is not very 
good. Now they want us to trust them again. They want us to trust 
them on their promise to deliver a pulp-mill, and I say that, given 
their track record, you’d have to be a fool of the highest order to 
trust this government to deliver on its promises . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well I would like to find that out. I wish you people would call an 
election. The member from Lloydminster wants to know how the 
people would vote. I would love to find that out. I say for a quarter 
of a billion dollars you ought to call an election. This is an 
appropriate issue about which to call an election. This is not small 
potatoes. This is very, very tall cotton we’re dealing with. This is a 
perfectly appropriate issue about which to call an election, and I 
say to members opposite: if you’re confident that you can sell the 
agreement, then call an election. Call an election. This is quite an 
appropriate issue about which to call an election. 
 
You are not going to call an election because you refuse to justify 
this Bill. You absolutely refuse to do it. The minister stands here 
in the Legislative Assembly making a mockery out of this place, 
talking about irrelevancies, refusing to answer questions — 
questions which are perfectly legitimate and which are on the 
mouths of a lot of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And if members don’t think that they are going to meet some hard 
questions about this thing, then I tell you, you’ve spent too long in 
this place and some more of you should start wrapping up some of 
these record bad attendances that some members are guilty of. 
 
I say to members opposite, if you expect anyone at this point in 
time to trust you, then you’re dreaming. This is not 1982. You 
don’t approach this issue with an unwritten record. You came into 
office in 1982 with virtually no record at all — a full half century 
since you’d ever been in office — and so you were trusted, 
because people didn’t know what kind of buffoons you were. 
 
I say in 1986 it’s a different ball game. Very, very few people, 
outside Conservative Party stalwarts, are prepared to trust you 
people because they’ve seen what you’ve done. They’ve seen you 
come into office promising tax cuts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Weyerhaeuser trusts you. 
 
  



 
June 27, 1986 

 

2402 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Weyerhaeuser trusts you. One of the 
members opposite says that Weyerhaeuser trusts you. Well I’ll tell 
you, if anyone is prepared to give me a quarter of a billion dollars, 
I’ll trust you. You’ve got my promise, if you’ll give me this deal, 
I’ll trust you. 
 
I had an individual say to me the other day, who has the same 
financial circumstances as I do virtually, he said to me: I could 
enter into this agreement in good conscience because I could carry 
out this agreement — and he could. It doesn’t require a cent from 
Weyerhaeuser, not a cent from Weyerhaeuser. 
 
I might not have the management ability to run the pulp-mill, but I 
could in all conscience enter into that agreement knowing that I 
could carry out the financial terms of that agreement. 
 
So I say to members opposite, if you think we or the public are 
going to trust you to negotiate a good deal, then you’re dreaming. 
The public did that in ’82 and they’re not going to do it in 1986. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it’s time I moved that we rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 
 


