


















































June 9, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 9, 1986 
 
 

1763 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and to the Legislative Assembly here this 
afternoon, some students from the Morse Elementary School, and 
they're seated in your gallery up on the right hand side here. And 
they are accompanied by their teacher, Richard Postnikoff, and 
chaperons, Shelley Gerbrandt, Maureen Roberts, and Sheila 
Glydon, and Earl Conn is the bus driver. 
 
I'd like you to join with me in welcoming them here. But before 
you do that, I just want to indicate that Morse gained some 
recognition in a very positive note last winter, and they had the 
mixed curling, provincial curling champions from Morse, in the 
Lee Weppler rink, and Mr. and Mrs. Weppler, and Mr. and Mrs. 
Merv Toews. I haven't had the opportunity to mention that here, 
and I thought I'd like to do that in conjunction with the school 
being here. And so I'd like the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure at this 
time to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, a group of 27 grade 8 students from St. Dominic Savio 
Elementary School. They're presently seated in the Speaker's 
gallery, and they are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. James 
Hubenig. 
 
I'm sure that you will enjoy your visit to the Legislative Building 
and, as well, I'm sure you will enjoy question period. I'll be 
meeting with you for pictures and drinks immediately after 
question period, and I would ask all the members to join with me 
in extending a warm welcome to these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a real pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 30 grade 7, 8, and 9 students from the Yorkdale Junior 
High School in Yorkton. And not only are we welcoming them 
here to Regina today, but they have just arrived from four or five 
days visiting Expo in Vancouver, and I wasn't sure if you had 
made it in time or not. 
 
But I want to say that Alice Shuster, and Mrs. Patsy Schell, and 
Mrs. Polegi, the chaperons, are with their students today. We hope 
you had an excellent visit in Expo, and we hope you enjoy the 
city, or the things that go on in our legislature here this afternoon. 
And welcome to the legislature. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Management Tactics in Gainers Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier in the absence of the Minister of Economic Development, 
and it concerns the decision by the government to provide Alberta 
millionaire Peter Pocklington with more than $20 million in 
Saskatchewan taxpayers' money — 10 million of which will never 
be paid back. 
 
Has your government, Mr. Premier, been following the events at 
the Gainers plant at Edmonton in recent days, where hundreds of 
people have been arrested and where there've been a number of 
violent confrontations as a result of Mr. Pocklington's decision to 
try to drive down the wages of his employees? 
 
And my second question is . . . First, have you been noting those 
facts? And secondly, do you support the kind of aggressive, 
anti-worker tactics used by Mr. Pocklington in this dispute; and if 
not, have you advised him that these tactics will not be tolerated if 
he expands his operations into Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I watched with the hon. 
member, I'm sure, the events on television, and listened on radio, 
and read the newspapers with respect to the activities that are 
going on there. I believe he said something about the Government 
of Saskatchewan handing $20 million to Gainers and they would 
keep 10. Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to point out that when people 
come into the province, we do provide them the industrial 
incentive grant to create jobs. If we had an automobile 
manufacturer coming in here, say we competed for an automobile 
or truck manufacturer say for western Canada from Japan, we'd 
provide him with incentives to set up those jobs here. 
 
We do the same for anybody that wants to develop new jobs. If 
they create new jobs in Saskatchewan, we'll give them the 
industrial incentive package and a Sedco package. I know that it's 
maybe more fashionable now to raise it now because there's a 
strike. I could point out a couple of things with respect to the 
labour dispute. One is that the hon. member, I think, to be fair 
could point out as well that the farmers' packing plant in Alberta 
— I believe it's Fletcher's — the farmer-owned marketing board 
packing plant is going through the same thing. I mean, he could 
raise that as well, to be fair, that it's across the board that there are 
some negotiations that are going on between the farmers and their 
packing plant and the union on one side, as there are with Gainers 
and the union on the other. so with respect to the negotiations, it 
kind of cuts across the board. It's not just Gainers; it's obviously 
another packing plant. 
 
With respect to them coming to work in Saskatchewan, anybody 
that comes in here lives by the same labour laws that everybody 
else does. And if the majority of the workers want to have a 
unionized shop, they will, and that's the way it is, and everybody 
will live by those rules. 
 
So with respect to the brand-new bacon plant that's going up in 
North Battleford that I know the hon. member has trouble 
supporting, that new plant . . . and if the members there that want 
to go and have a unionized shop, and if  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1764 
 
 

the majority of them do, then we live by the same labour laws 
here, whether it's in North Battleford, Regina, or any place else. 
 
So with respect to the facts, I'm aware of them. I note that they're 
going back to the negotiating table. With respect to whether it's 
anti-worker or not, I think it's fair that you'd have to look at the 
farmers' marketing board and others. And I would say that we 
enjoy both union and non-union types of contracts here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are some differences with respect to bargaining, I know. I 
know members opposite have said labour unions should become 
more militant. I don't particularly agree with that. The Leader of 
the Opposition, the NDP have said, militant labour is the thing to 
be, that labour should be much more militant. I'm not so sure that 
people want to see militancy on either side. So I wouldn't agree 
with militancy. I would say, back to the table, negotiate it, and fix 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You speak 
of Saskatchewan labour laws applying. Are you aware of Mr. 
Pocklington's comment reported in the press on June 5th: 
 

I am not going to have another collective agreement with 
anyone. I will deal with the employees on an individual basis. 

 
Mr. Premier, if Mr. Pocklington seeks to follow such a course of 
action in Saskatchewan, will you stand up and say, this is not in 
accordance with Saskatchewan law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that's precisely what I said, 
that anybody that operates in Saskatchewan will live under the 
rules that we have here, and if the majority of people working for a 
particular firm want to have a unionized shop and it's accepted in a 
democratic fashion, then that's the way it is. They're back to the 
negotiating table now, as I understand it, in Alberta. So they've 
taken shots at each other, or fired across each other's bow in 
carving out their position. but we will all hope that there's less 
militancy on both sides so that they can get back to work and have 
full employment in the jobs that they were doing, as well as have 
reasonable and fair settlements on both sides. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has 
mentioned the Alberta pork marketing board: is the Premier 
satisfied with Mr. Pocklington's dealings with the Alberta pork 
marketing board, and would he commend Mr. Pocklington for 
dealing with the Saskatchewan pork marketing board on the same 
basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very good 
relationship with respect to the Saskatchewan pork marketing 
board and the marketing arrangements, the discussions that go on 
between Intercontinental Packers, and the discussions that go on 
between the board and Gainers and others, and with respect to the 
new bacon plant and so forth. So I don't think it's a really good 
idea to be frightening people because of some labour negotiations 
that are going on in Alberta. 
 
I fully expect that we will have a good bacon plant  

in North Battleford, that it will be constructed in a very positive 
fashion, employ an awful lot of people. I understand that there's 
hundreds of jobs there, and there's indeed hundreds and hundreds 
of applicants for those new positions, and I suspect it's something 
that the community of North Battleford is looking for. I know that 
the hon. member is not in favour of the new bacon plant, but that's 
his choice. We are. We will be creating these. We like the paper 
plant, the bacon plant, the fertilizer plants, and so forth. Those 
things were not here when we took over, but they will be here and 
continue to be here as the result of what we've been doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does 
the Premier have any objection to filing in the legislature copies of 
all agreement signed between his government and Mr. 
Pocklington so that all may know what the deal is made between 
your government and Mr. Pocklington? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well obviously, Mr. speaker, in due course 
— all those documents are public. I just remind the hon. member 
he was not elected to nationalize the potash industry, and he went 
all about it without tabling anything. And he took $650 million of 
people's — spent — and we're still paying for it, and he never put 
a single solitary thread of evidence before the people. He just went 
and did it. 
 
When he's talking about $10 million in a bacon plant, it doesn't 
even mean that much with respect to the potash mines where we're 
still paying fortunes for; didn't create one new job — $650 million 
on a political whim and he never did ask the people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, let 
me remind you that yours is more than a casual relationship with 
Peter Pocklington. He's a candidate for the leadership of the 
Conservative Party and he's . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 
statements rather than asking questions. If you have a question, get 
to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I made a serious mistake in thinking the same 
rules apply to both sides of the House. The Premier . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! If the member has a question, I'll 
take the question. If he doesn't, we'll move to the next one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Does the Premier agree with the president of 
Intercontinental Packers, Mr. Fred Mitchell, that Peter Pocklington 
is trying to pull a big scam with this violent strike? Mr. Mitchell 
noted that three of the four meat packers in western Canada, 
including Intercon in Saskatoon, have already signed collective 
agreements providing their employees with the same wages which 
the Gainer workers are attempting to bargain. And he asked: if 
these companies can afford to pay these rates, why can't Peter 
Pocklington? 
 
Do you agree with Mr. Mitchell that Peter Pocklington's claim that 
his company will go under if he has to pay fair  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1765 
 

wage rates is little more than a big scam? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do remind my 
colleague here across the way, the hon. member, that from time to 
time I certainly do agree with Mr. Mitchell on his observations 
about the meat industry, and I believe he's an astute business man. 
I will also remind the member, as I remind his colleague, that the 
Pork Producers Marketing Board in Alberta is going through the 
same thing, right? And I think it's only fair that you should be 
talking about their negotiations. These are farmers . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They have not been on national television 
trying to aggravate the crisis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well he says they haven't been on national 
television. It's a little more fashionable to be talking about Peter 
Pocklington on television than it is with the farm product 
marketing board in Alberta having the same negotiations. I just 
raise it because they're both going through the same thing. All 
right? 
 
So I hope that both settle. I hope the marketing board that runs 
Fletchers settles with their union, and I hope the union that's out 
negotiating with Gainers have good settlements, that they get back 
to the table and they negotiate and they all have a fair and 
reasonable settlement. I mean, obviously, everybody does. So if 
the hon. member wants to imply anything else, well, I mean, it's 
. . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Premier, you refer to 
Fletchers. It's not as clear that Fletchers relish the kind of 
confrontation that Peter Pocklington does, because Peter 
Pocklington has been on radio and television with statements 
which can be designed for nothing other than to aggravate the 
situation rather than settle it. 
 
Is this what your government is planning to import, this kind of 
confrontational management style, and shelling out millions of 
dollars of taxpayers' money to accomplish this violence in 
Saskatchewan's labour scene? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
knows that that is not the case. And we have had very good 
management and union negotiations and settlements in 
Saskatchewan right across the board, Mr. Speaker. We have strong 
support for the new companies that are coming in. For example, 
the Weyerhaeuser Company is very much supported by people 
that I talked to in Prince Albert, whether they work inside the 
pulp-mill or outside, or unionized or not. The same applies to 
people who are looking for jobs in the meat-packing business. 
They like to see the new companies come in. So I look forward to 
good labour negotiations. 
 
You and I both know that they may, as I said, take shots across 
each other's bow when it comes to negotiations. And it's a little bit 
more fashionable, more fun, to be talking about Peter Pocklington 
in the media, than it is the farm products marketing board, the pork 
council, that has the same negotiations going on. 
 
So I mean, I'm sure he understands a little bit of that. He's  

been in politics a while and in the media from time to time. It's 
much easier to talk about one than it is the other. There will be fair 
settlements in Saskatchewan. We'll all live under the same rules. 
 

Dispute with Saskatchewan Doctors 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Question to the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you report to the Assembly on what 
medical services have been withdrawn today as a result of your 
inability to reach a settlement with the Saskatchewan doctors? 
And can you tell us what specific steps you have taken to protect 
the health and safety of the general public in Saskatchewan where 
medical services are withdrawn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I think it's 
not fair for the member opposite to accuse me of my inability. 
There's negotiations that have been taking place — were taking 
place. I've invited the doctors back to the negotiating table at any 
time; that offer stands. 
 
The question that the member asked is, what type of procedures 
are in place to ensure that no one is having undue suffering or 
danger? I have a system set up of monitoring with hospital 
administrators to see that things are taking place. And it's only 
more of an inconvenience than a danger to anyone's medical 
health, as I understand. We monitored this in Prince Albert a 
month ago when it happened there. We did the same in Swift 
Current the other day, and the same is going on at Humboldt 
today. 
 
So whatever further withdrawals of service the doctors feel are 
necessary, you can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 
monitoring the situation as closely as we possibly can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I don't think that the 
Saskatchewan public will be very comforted by what you have got 
to say on the issue. It's becoming clear to the general public that 
you don't want a settlement. You want a confrontation with the 
doctors. You people are so desperate to get an election issue going 
that you're prepared to jeopardize the safety of the Saskatchewan 
public to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member is making 
statements rather than asking questions. I would ask you to get 
directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I will get directly to my 
question. In light of the fact, Mr. Minister, that you have created 
this unnecessary confrontation with Saskatchewan doctors, isn't it 
your hidden agenda to create a fight rather than to have a 
settlement brought about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how the member 
opposite can accuse me of wanting to have a confrontation when 
I've called daily for the doctors to come to the negotiating table. 
 
He talks about a hidden agenda, Mr. Speaker. It might be 
interesting for you to know, and the people of Saskatchewan, that 
the legal counsel for the doctors of  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1766 
 
 

Saskatchewan is one Mr. Ching, ex-deputy minister of Labour 
under the Blakeney government, and law partner of candidate Roy 
Romanow and ex-candidate Taylor. So I think if there's a hidden 
agenda that it may well look on that side of the House to see the 
advice that's given to the Saskatchewan doctors by Roy 
Romanow's law partner. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems unseemly 
strained in answering to this question, and he didn't answer the 
question. Mr. Minister, if the protection of the public health and 
safety is uppermost on your agenda, then why have you allowed 
this dispute to get to this point? It's been dragging on for nearly a 
year and you have failed to deal with this in a very serious and an 
urgent way. If the truth be known, Mr. Minister, you've been 
dragging your feet in order to start this confrontation which you 
are now continuing to try to elevate to higher levels. Isn't that what 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. If the 
member would refer to Beauchesne's, you'll find that you're not 
allowed to impute motives in question period, and that's what the 
member is doing. If you have a question that's a legitimate 
question, I would ask you to proceed with that question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I will proceed with my 
question. Mr. Minister, isn't the fact that there have been months 
of confusion, indecision and backtracking on your part, as a result 
of your desire to have this confrontation rather than to reach a 
settlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, that's absolutely false. 
Saskatoon Agreement II was worked out with mutual discussions 
with the doctors of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Saskatchewan — the only such type of agreement in Canada — 
ending extra-billing in a peaceable way. This is the first set of 
negotiations flowing from Saskatoon Agreement II. Those 
negotiations have bogged down. However I can say most 
sincerely, from our side of the table, we are most interested in 
resuming those type of negotiations. 
 
And I say further, if the member opposite, with his connections to 
Mr. Ching and Mr. Romanow, if he's very interested in getting 
negotiations going. he should tell his political cronies to advise the 
doctors likewise. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and I have a 
question to the Premier in that the Minister of Health refuses to 
address the issue, even in this House, in a serious way. 
 
Mr. Premier, since your Minister of Health appears incapable of 
reaching a settlement with Saskatchewan doctors, will you now 
make a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to get 
personally involved in this dispute? And will you sue the powers 
of your office to bring the two sides together and urge them to 
reach a settlement as quickly as possible for the good of all 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said this morning on 
television, I am very confident that we're close to a settlement. The 
discussions that I witnessed showed that both sides were very 
close. I have every confidence in my cabinet ministers and in the 
Minister of Health, in terms of his ability to describe what is in 
Saskatoon Agreement II, and all the financial implications that we 
have looked at. I have been briefed by the minister; I have sat and 
certainly discussed it with the medical profession. And as I said, 
we're very, very close. 
 
There may be, as I said on television this morning, some sympathy 
for the doctors in Ontario with the medical profession here, 
because they know what they're going through. And that's the end 
of extra-billing in Ontario and it's the end of extra-billing here. 
And I believe there's maybe a little sympathy or empathy, if you 
will, but we're very close. And as I understand the negotiations, 
and I understand the rapport between it, I believe that when we get 
back to the table, Mr. Speaker, we can settle it very, very quickly. 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Hospitals 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to direct a question to the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Minister, are you aware that a separate protest is under 
way today at St. Paul's Hospital in Saskatoon, where seven 
specialists, the seven anaesthetists, have withdrawn all but 
emergency services to protest your government's inadequate 
funding for hospitals around the province? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you explain to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers why you were afraid to tour the hospital, as arranged, 
and to listen to the concerns of the doctors and others at St. Paul's 
about your government's funding priorities? Why did you back 
out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, there was no . . . Mr. 
Speaker, there was no back out whatsoever. The St. Paul's 
Hospital, the chairman advised me on Friday that they were 
cancelling the procedure, the cement pour that was supposed to 
take place today. I indicated to Mr. Fleck that I would be willing to 
attend there, but the hospital board decided to postpone it for a 
while. 
 
I just want to clarify a few of the allegations the member opposite 
has made about the funding to St. Paul's Hospital. Let me indicate 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that St. Paul's be funded at a higher level this 
year than it was last year. And it would be interesting to know that 
the increase in funding to St. Paul's Hospital since we took office, 
over the last four years, has increased some 53 per cent in their 
funding — 53 per cent over four years. And I would point out 
that's higher than any other hospital of its class in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, due 
to the inadequate funding from your government, all but 
emergency service was cancelled at St. Paul's Hospital for a 
two-week period, both last Christmas and last Easter. A 
month-long shut-down is expected over the summer months, and a 
further shut-down is planned for next Christmas. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1767 
 

All are required because of the hospital's budget deficit, and the 
deficit is a direct result of your government's failure to adequately 
support existing hospitals. 
 
I ask you: is the minister aware that over the past four years the 
waiting list for surgery for St. Paul's Hospital has nearly doubled 
from 1,200 names to about 2,000; and are you aware that the 
waiting period for surgery over the past four years has gone from 
five or six months to a total of 14 months? I ask you: what action 
are you prepared to take to rectify this here condition in the health 
care for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it seems strange that he thinks 
that 53 per cent increase over four years is not adequate funding. 
Let me indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this Assembly, the 
difference in funding over the last five years. 
 
In 1981 - 82, the gross operating expenditures approved for St. 
Paul's Hospital was $21.1 million, and the approved ADC 
(approved daily census) was 285. It goes up year by year, Mr. 
Speaker, and I won't take the time in the House to read all of the 
years, but we'll look at 1985-86 where the approved operating 
budget is $32.3 million, with an approved daily census of 298. 
 
So a continual increase, year after year, and my officials have been 
assured that the in-patient summer activity this year will be the 
same as last year, and that the number of cases daily admitted will 
be higher than it was last year. 
 
So to make these types of allegations, that the funding to St. Paul's 
Hospital has not kept pace, is completely wrong — completely 
wrong, Mr. Speaker — because the very fact that it's increased 53 
per cent over that period of time — I say again, the highest of any 
hospital of its type in this province. 
 
And I'd like to remind you . . . And it's ironical when I see the 
member from Quill Lakes stand in this House and start 
complaining about waiting lists, because I can remember the days 
when I was in opposition and one Mr. Rolfes was his health 
minister. He stood in this very House, back in that seat there, and 
said the sign of an efficient hospital was a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask the minister how you 
can shell out a quarter of a million dollars in taxpayers' moneys to 
a PR firm to organize meetings and write speeches for you, and at 
the same time deny hospitals adequate funding? And how can you 
support a government that has spent over $20 million in 
advertising this year on self-serving government advertising and 
then tell the hospitals that you have no money? How do you 
justify it? What are your priorities? Is it health care or the survival 
of the Tory party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think anywhere in 
Canada, other than this province, do the people understand that the 
priorities of their government is health care. The government of 
Grant Devine has done more in health care for the province of 
Saskatchewan  

since being elected than any other government in the Dominion of 
Canada. When you see 11.6 per cent of the budget this year put 
towards health care, I think no one can question that that is a 
considerable thrust in health care. When you see 1,600 nursing 
beds being built in this province in reaction to a moratorium . . . 
 
We talked earlier about potash . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
 Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the minister of 
forestry I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Forest Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation 
Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members in Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just prior to orders of the 
day, and by leave of the Assembly, I would move: 
 

   That the name of Mr. Tchorzewski be substituted for that of Mr. 
Engel on the list of members comprising the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise  



 
June 9, 1986 

1768 
 
 

today and move second reading of The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 1986. The amendments being proposed in this 
legislature have been recommended to me by the benchers of The 
Law Society of Saskatchewan. 
 
Most of the changes are intended to facilitate and simplify the 
procedures followed by the discipline committee of The Law 
Society. For instance, to avoid appointment of several 
vice-chairmen of the discipline committee who act when the 
chairman is absent or has a conflict of interest, it is proposed that if 
the chairman is unable to act he shall designate another member to 
act in his stead. 
 
The hearing committee will now be able to amend a formal 
complaint during the course of a hearing. But if such an 
amendment has the effect of changing the charge against the 
member, or adding a new charge, the hearing must be adjourned to 
give the member an opportunity to prepare a defence to the new 
charge. 
 
This Bill also repeals a section which provides that The Law 
Society shall report to the Minister of Justice, who may then 
intervene in the process when a member is suspended or is struck 
from the roll. An adequate appeal process makes such a provision 
unnecessary. And the Special committee on Regulations, in its 
review of the proposed new Chartered Accountants Act, 
recommended deletion of this power in all professional association 
statutes. 
 
The Law Society, in addition to the annual audits of lawyers' 
accounts, is now doing random spot audits. A new provision 
allows members to be charged for the expenses of these audits in 
situations where the audit reveals evidence of a contravention of a 
rule or by-law of the society. 
 
Finally, pursuant to a recommendation by the national law 
society's body, it will be necessary for persons who wish to be 
admitted to practise law in this province to be Canadian citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the Legal 
Profession Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want an opportunity to 
take a look at the comments made by the minister in introducing 
the second reading, and also to pursue the amendments with some 
discussion with the Saskatchewan bar. And I therefore beg leave 
to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Duncan that Bill No. 47 — An Act to 
amend The Direct Sellers Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 45 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 36 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, beside me, deputy minister Mr. Hnatiuk; 
directly behind me, associate deputy, Raynell Andreychuk; to her 
right, Dan Cunningham; and to the right of my deputy minister 
here, Mr. Uhren. And as well to assist us here today is Mr. Ian 
Wilson from the Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to begin by asking some questions on the item listed as 
subvote 1, administration, and then I will want to ask some 
questions about salary-related items and trips and so on. 
 
I note that, in the estimates over the years, since 1982 - 83 there's 
been a very substantial increase in the budget for administration. 
In 1985-86, which is the last fiscal year, I believe you budgeted 
$8.5 million for administration. There was, through the year, a 
supplementary amount of 2.2 million that was added to that, for a 
budget of 9.8 million. Back in 1982 - 83 the budget for 
administration was only 4.4 million. We see overall, over that 
period of time, an increase of 122 per cent. 
 
That seemed like a very high increase in administration when you 
have, your government has, been cutting back or freezing funding 
for non-government organizations and other such organizations. 
There may be a justifiable explanation, but I would certainly like 
to hear it. Can you explain this dramatic increase in the cost of 
administration of the Department of Social Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Would the member clarify the percentage 
figure that he used? You said something — 120 per cent increase. 
What exactly were you referring to? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am referring, Mr. Minister, to the 
administration budget, subvote 1. Since 1982 - 83 there has been 
an increase of well over 100 per cent in your budget for 
administration of your department. It's got nothing to do with the 
programs of your department as such, but the administration alone 
has increased by well over 100 per cent, I think in the area of 122 
per cent since the budget of 1982 - 83. 
 
And just maybe it'll help; I'll repeat it again. In 1982 - 1983 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1769 
 

the cost of administration in your department, subvote 1, was $4.4 
million. Your budget for this year — I just misplaced it for a 
minute — is well in excess of that. Can you explain the increase in 
your administration budget over that period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well you're going to have to be more specific 
when you said you misplaced it, because it's important that we do 
not mislead the public. I want to know exactly what figures you're 
referring to, and then we'll be able to respond to them very 
specifically. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Very simple, Mr. Minister. I'm referring to 
subvote 1, the subvote dealing with administration. It's in your 
Estimates book. I have it here: first item of the Department of 
Social Services, administration, budget $9.8 million. In 1982 - 83, 
that same subvote, administration, $4.4 million — an increase of 
somewhere in excess of 100 per cent, close to 122 per cent. 
 
I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, a question that should be very clear 
to understand: what is the nature of such a dramatic increase in the 
cost of administration in subvote 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, naturally over a 
four-year period of time we are going to experience salary 
increases, and over four years those are going to be significant in 
terms of the implication that they would have. So part of the 
increase is explained through normal salary increases over a 
four-year period of time. 
 
The second explanation for the increase has to do with the 
implications of the young offenders programming as it relates to 
the province of Saskatchewan. As you are aware there was a 
Young Offenders Act passed by the federal parliament; that Act 
has substantial implications for all the provinces. Here in 
Saskatchewan we have had to provide additional programs and 
services as a consequence of that Act; therefore, we have had to 
significantly increase personnel which, of course, means that there 
are financial implications. 
 
The third rationale for the increase in administration has to do with 
our SAP automation project. As you know there was a 
recommendation some years back that the SAP system, the 
Saskatchewan assistance plan system should have been 
automated, should have been computerized; that was never done 
years ago. We believe that is a very important element of 
rationalizing and providing a more efficient SAP system in the 
province. That has had significant fiscal implications for the 
Department of Social Services' budget. So when you add up the 
SAP automation, the young offenders' implications, and the salary 
increases over four years, you have the rationale for the increase in 
administrative costs. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am sure, Mr. Minister, that the salary 
increases over that period of time, with the attitude of your 
government, have not been 122 per cent, even though you tend to 
reward your personal staff and others differently than you reward 
the general public service. Can I ask you, Mr. Minister, how much 
of this budget in  

administration is for the purposes of the word you say is being 
done under the Young Offenders Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The total young offenders implication is 
$760,000. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, all that expenditure is being 
made under the administration budget that is included in subvote 
1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There are additional costs not included under 
this subvote, but the figure I have given you pertains to this 
subvote. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. That 760,000 is a large sum, 
but a small sum compared to the increase of 122 per cent which 
we have seen over the last four years, Mr. Minister, which seems 
to me a very unusually high increase. Now you mentioned that 
you are computerizing the SAP, the Saskatchewan assistance plan 
program. You have been computerizing that now for the last two 
years. Are you telling the committee that you're still in the process 
of implementing that now in the third year, or is that process now 
complete? Because if it is complete, Mr. Minister, then I would 
question the efficiency of putting in your computer system, 
because obviously it has not saved you any money; it has not 
saved the taxpayers any money. It appears it is costing them a 
considerable amount of money more. Is that implementation of the 
computerization of SAP completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the member's information, this SAP 
computerization project is one of the largest computerization 
projects ever undertaken by any particular department. So we're 
not talking about something which is going to go from conceptual 
stage to implementation stage in a very short period of time. We 
have had to deal with the conceptual stage; then, of course, we had 
feasibility; then there was design; then there was the 
implementation of pilot projects. Those pilot projects are finished; 
we're now evaluating the pilot projects. 
 
We will then be moving to the implementation phase, and the 
entire implementation phase we expect to be concluded with the 
project entirely running as projected by sometime in July, August, 
'87 - 88 which is exactly within a few months where the project 
was anticipated to be when it was first begun in terms of its 
conceptualization and feasibility. 
 
It's not the kind of thing that one implements in a short period of 
time. It does have to be done intelligently, and that takes a fair 
amount of time. And as I indicated, we have had two pilot 
projects; those are presently being evaluated and then we will be 
moving into the full implementation phase. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would never pretend to be an expert on 
computerization or computers and I'm sure the minister wouldn't 
either, but it seems to me to be an unusually long period of time to 
be implementing this program which has been praised by some 
members of the government as creating much more efficiency 
when it's implemented and so on. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1770 
 
 

I would be interested in knowing, and I'm sure the committee 
would as well: how much has the department spent until now? 
And will you include in that how much you're planning to spend in 
this fiscal year on this project? I kind of suspect it's probably a 
large amount of money, and I think it is useful for us to know how 
much was spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We'll provide that to you shortly. I would 
simply respond to the member that I have had previous experience 
in the conceptualization and implementation of computer 
programs and systems on a much smaller scale than the one we are 
talking about today. But even those particular systems themselves 
required substantial lead time before one could even begin to 
implement on a pilot basis. And once that had happened, there was 
considerable evaluation and reform of that which had previously 
been thought to be appropriate that had to take place. 
 
In the smaller projects that I was involved with we were talking 
about a full year before anything could even be considered 
complete. And the member would, I'm sure, want to know that the 
comparison of the projects was such that likely the one that I was 
involved in previously might be 10th the size of what we're talking 
about here. So they certainly do take a long period of time and you 
don't want to make mistakes. And I'll get the information on the 
stats for you right away. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — When you have it, send it over, and then I'll 
ask other questions on it when I get it. And we'll go on to another 
aspect of this subvote. Mr. Minister, if your staff will work on that 
it will be okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm now dealing with specifically the other expenses 
portion of this subvote — other expenses — you have budgeted 
$5.4 million. Last year you had budgeted $3.8 million. That, in 
itself — it's got nothing to do with staff salaries because that's in 
another portion of the subvote — that in itself is a very dramatic 
increase, and I think is dramatized even more when one considers 
that in 1982 - 83 other expenses had a budget of 1.3 million. You 
are now having a budget of 5.4 million, an increase of 315 per 
cent. 
 
But my more specific question is: why the increase from $3.8 
million last year to $5.4 million this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well there's the SAP system funding, 1.3 
million this year; and the young offenders' information system, 
470,000 for this particular year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One more question on the SAP 
(Saskatchewan assistance plan) system project. Is this setting up of 
this project or the doing of the project being done in-house by 
officials in your department, have you contracted that out to 
someone, or is the Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation 
doing it? Can you tell me how his work is being done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It's a partnership approach. There is a team of 
individuals, led by department staff working in conjunction with 
the contractual staff, and the arrangement is with Systemhouse. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'll wait for that 
other information which your officials are preparing for me. Can 
you give me a list of names and salaries of your personal staff 
which will include their salaries that they are making now and 
what they made last year? 
 
Mr. Minister, while the copy is being Xeroxed, can you also do the 
same for me for the salaries of your major officials in the 
department — the deputy, the associate deputy, and your 
executive directors? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have here the senior department 
officials. I notice there has been, since April 1, 1985, a 3 per cent 
increase in salary. Can you tell me whether there was any 
increases to any of the people here during 1985, other than this 3 
per cent between April 1 of '85 and April 1, 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see the other 
sheets are here. Thank you. Mr. Minister, are these the staff, your 
personal staff, dealing with the Department of Social Services, and 
do you have other personal staff that have responsibilities for other 
departments, in that you have more than one department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, I have four ministerial responsibilities, 
and there are other staff. Information was sent over pertaining to 
Urban Affairs during Urban Affairs estimates. These individuals 
pertain to the Social Services' function in my office, and of course 
it's fair to say that from time to time people are going to be 
involved in other responsibilities. When you work in one office, 
you can't simply say that this particular individual is going to do 
this and nothing else. There are times when their duties are going 
to overlap and they're going to be asked to do something that 
relates to some other department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, one Mr. 
Hild, who received a salary increase of 12 per cent last year, no 
longer is responsible for duties related to the Department of Social 
Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Hild is in the Department of Urban 
Affairs appropriation. He is not involved in terms of appropriation 
out of Social Services. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Since Mr. Hild received a 12 per cent 
increase in 1985, when most other people in the public service 
were receiving no increase at all, I'm interested in knowing: on the 
list of staff which you have provided me, Mr. Minister — one 
Lyle Krahn, William Rayner, Shelly Fuller, and Ruth Wright; and 
Ms. Fuller obviously has not worked all the year; it must be a new 
employee — can you tell me, for the three people who you have 
listed for me, salaries for June 1, '85, and June 1, '86, whether in 
1985 prior to June 1 any of them had received an increase in 
salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the information of the member opposite, 
concerning a Mr. Krahn, he commenced employment June 6, '84 
as a trainee at 20,037, and then  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1771 
 

was promoted to a ministerial assistant 2 on June 1 of 1985, and 
the salary was 24, 055, and then received a normal increment in 
'86 to the figure that you see on the page before you. 
 
Concerning Miss Wright, she was promoted to the senior 
ministerial secretary position from a ministerial assistant B 
position, which she commenced in 1983, July 1983. So then on 
May 1, 1984 she was promoted to that position as being senior 
ministerial secretary at 20,098 per month, and then each year 
thereafter on January 1 received an annual increment increase. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, in my calculations, in the 
year June 1 '85 to June 1 '86, your personal staff has received an 
increase of 4 per cent in pay, slightly marginally more than 4 per 
cent; your senior administrative people have received 3 per cent 
— and I know that those figures can't always be translated because 
3 per cent of $73,000 is considerably more than 4 per cent of some 
other amounts. 
 
Can you explain how your personal staff is getting higher 
increases, but people in the department are getting lower 
increases? We have made this point in the House before, and I 
make the point about the negotiations that took place with various 
numbers of people in the public sector, including teachers who, in 
1985, your government said should not get any increase in pay. 
Ultimately there was a lump sum, but that does not affect their 
salary base. 
 
But with your personal staff, Mr. Minister, those rules don't apply. 
And I know you will call it promotions; you will call it 
reclassifications. The point is, you have found a way to increase 
the staff — and I don't mean to pick on one individual, but Mr. 
Krahn who since 1984 has had his salary increased by something 
in excess of $6,000 a year, or around $6,000 a year — I'm not sure 
that there are many other people in our society who have had their 
salaries increased by $6,000 a year. As a matter of fact, that's 
two -thirds of the amount that people who are working on a 
minimum wage and trying to raise a family are making. that's what 
those people are making, the amount that your personal staff has 
had increased in their pay. 
 
And I really have to question the fairness of that. We won't pursue 
it for long, but I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we will 
then. If you choose to pursue it long, I will too, and we'll get into a 
good debate on it. 
 
I'm just telling you, you should treat the people, the general public 
in Saskatchewan, in the same way as you treat — I'm not talking 
about only you personally; I'm talking about all of the ministers — 
as you treat your personal staff when it comes to remuneration. 
 
How do you justify an increase of 4 per cent to your personal staff, 
but less than 4 per cent to everybody else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, it always disturbs me when 
we come to this time in the estimates and we find the members 
opposite not wanting to tell the whole story. 
 

The members of my staff receive increments in the same way that 
anybody else in the civil service receives increments. And just as 
anybody else in the civil service receives a salary increase if they 
have a promotion, staff in my office, if they assume higher 
responsibilities, new duties, are reclassified; are working longer 
hours than previously; have greater responsibility on their 
shoulders than previously; they also receive a promotion and a 
commensurate salary increase. 
 
Now I asked the member from Regina Centre, when he was on his 
feet on a similar issue the other day, whether or not he would put 
on the record his support for the principle that civil servants, when 
they receive a promotion, should also receive a commensurate 
salary increase. Do you know what? He refused to put his support 
on the record for that principle. 
 
Now I want to know whether you, also, are in objection to the 
principle that anybody working for the public of Saskatchewan, 
who receives some kind of a promotion which means increased 
responsibility, should not also receive a commensurate salary 
increase. I want to know whether or not you support that or 
whether or not you are in opposition to it. Because I can tell you I 
will go through my riding and I will let the public servants of 
Saskatchewan know exactly where the member from Regina 
North East stands if he stands in opposition to that principle. 
 
That is a fundamental principle which I support, which members 
on this side of the House support, and I would have thought that 
the members of the NDP party would support it also. 
 
There was a time when you were just an MLA and you were not a 
cabinet minister and you received a certain salary. When you were 
promoted to the position of cabinet minister under the former NDP 
government, your salary increased commensurately. You didn't 
say, no, I'd better not accept this salary increase even though my 
duties have increased. You knew full well that it was appropriate 
that if your duties were increased, your salary should be increased 
as well. 
 
That is exactly the principle that I hold in my office, that we hold 
in the Department of Social Services, that I hold as the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission, and that we as a 
Progressive Conservative government hold. People who receive 
promotions will receive increased salaries in the public service of 
Saskatchewan as long as this government is in power. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I do not argue about people 
who receive promotions getting the kind of pay that their new 
position is scheduled to pay. That is quite reasonably and normal. 
 
I object, and so do fellows and my colleagues in our caucus, to 
what you have done, and that is make a mockery of that whole 
principle when it applies to your political appointees, totally in 
contradiction to what happens when it applies to other people, 
whether they work for the government directly or whether they 
work for some agencies that are funded by the government. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1772 
 
 

In 1985, Mr. Minister, people who worked for the public in the 
Government of Saskatchewan received no increase in pay. Even 
the member from Moosomin will agree to that. But many of your 
political appointees received increase of 4 per cent, 8 per cent, 12 
per cent, and 16 per cent — that was in 1985. That is the principle 
that I'm arguing against. 
 
That seems to me utterly unfair. And it seems to the public of 
Saskatchewan to be utterly unfair that you apply one set of rules to 
your political appointments — and I don't question their 
capabilities; I'm sure they're quite capable people — but you apply 
a different set of rules to the general public service, as a 
government. 
 
In your particular situation, Mr. Minister, maybe you've applied a 
fair set of rules, but I'm talking about the government, and that has 
not been the case. And that's the point that I'm making with you 
here today. Simply because one is a political appointment 
shouldn't make that person any more privileged than somebody 
else who works in the normal public service, whether it's at a 
associate deputy minister level, or whether it's at a social worker 
level, or whatever — although I know that the ways of 
determining those salaries are different in that there's a different 
kind of negotiations that take place. 
 
Mr. Minister, you may want to comment on that, but I will ask my 
next question and then let . . . you can comment, and then you can 
answer my next question. 
 
I would like to have from you — and I know you're not . . . have 
not been known to be as wide a traveller as some of your 
colleagues. But I would like to know the trips that you have taken 
in the last fiscal year by government executive aircraft — that's a 
standard question — and all of the information that goes with that: 
the purpose of the trips, the destination, the kind of officials that 
you want to provide for us, and so on. And, well, I'll stop with that 
one; then I'll ask you my next one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well before I respond to that question on 
travel, I wasn't surprised to hear the response from the member 
opposite. You conveniently ignored the very important principle 
that I was attempting to establish and to communicate to you. 
 
Public servants are public servants if they are paid from the public 
purse. And if they receive some kind of a promotion because their 
duties have been increased, then they should receive a 
commensurate salary increase — whether it is in the deputy 
minister's office, whether it is at the social work level, whether it is 
at the minister's level, whether it is in middle management, 
wherever it is. That is a very important principle. 
 
Now you seem to suggest that somehow it's okay for some public 
servants to receive salary increases if they are promoted, but not 
for others. Now I as a cabinet minister, and my colleagues, we 
have decided on our own that we are not going to take salary 
increases; nor have we done so for the last two or three years — 
three years running now, third year in a row that we have decided 
not to take personal salary increases. But we have said that 
anybody working for the public service in Saskatchewan, if they 
receive a promotion, they will also  

receive a salary increase. 
 
In my own Department of Social Services, which has 
approximately 2,000 employees, there are many people over a 
four-year period of time that for one reason or another have been 
appointed to a higher position and have received a commensurate 
salary increase. 
 
And the same thing has happened in my office. I have had staff 
leave; I have had staff promoted; I have more staff in my office 
today because of the four responsibilities that I have than I had 
previously. So it's understandable that the chief of staff is naturally 
going to receive more. That's common sense. And I would have 
thought that the member opposite would have been fair enough to 
recognize that, regardless of the political battles that they would 
like to fight and win. 
 
There are some very simple principles that we would all agree 
with. And if I were in opposition and you were in government, I 
think I would be arguing for the principle that any public servant, 
if they have a promotion, should receive a commensurate salary 
increase. And that is the position that I stand by and will continue 
to stand by. 
 
As it relates to travel in my capacity of Minister of Social 
Services, I will provide the member opposite with the same 
information that I provided concerning my travel in the 
Department of Urban Affairs, and I will send that over at the 
appropriate time. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, surely your staff must have 
that information now in that you must have anticipated this 
question. Can you have somebody photocopy that information so 
that I can get it? And secondly, can you also give me the trips that 
you have made out of province or out of the country on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan in your capacity as the Minister 
of Social Services, the purpose of those trips, all people who may 
have accompanied you, and the total cost of those trips? And I 
mean with that, flight, meals, accommodation, and so on — the 
trips out of province and the trips out of country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated that I will provide 
the member with that information. The information that I have 
before me is the first opportunity that I have had to review this 
particular information in detail. I would like to review it myself, 
and I will give it to you later today if that's satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Certainly if you are unprepared to give it to 
me now it's going to have to be satisfactory. What I don't 
understand, Mr. Minister, is why every time we get to ask that 
question, even though we've been doing the estimates of your 
government for several weeks now, we have minister after 
minister stand up and say, I don't have that information, when you 
very well knew it would be asked. Surely you have a briefing 
session with your staff in preparation for your estimates. 
 
Can you tell me whether I will at least be able to have that 
information before 5 o'clock in case I want to ask . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, that's not what he said. He  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1773 
 

said, when appropriate; probably later today. And if I can get them 
before 5 o'clock, in the event that I may want to ask you some 
questions on it, I would appreciate to have it. I don't need it right 
now. If you don't have it, I can't get it. But your staff will be able 
to get it for me by 5 o'clock, I hope. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I indicated that I would provide it to 
you today. You said you don't need it right now. That was the 
point I was making originally. And we will pass it on to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Sorry, I guess I didn't make myself clear. 
Will you give it to me before 5? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. I now have 
the information on the SAP automation project costs. The figure 
for '86 - 87 is incorporated, and this is the total figure, I assume: 
$4.1 or just about $4.2 million is what it's costing to implement 
this computerized system. Am I correct that the total accumulated 
cost is $4.1 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — To implement and operate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, that's all here. I see that — 
development, implementation, and operation; and the operation 
for '85 - 86 is $724,630. But this is now . . . Mr. Minister, my 
question is . . . And maybe it's clear here. Now that I look at it a 
second time, I think it is. This is not the accumulated cost. This is 
your budget for '85 - 86, $3.2 million; '86 - 87, $4.1 million; that's 
just for this year. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well my quick calculation here, and I don't 
have a calculator, is about $9 million is what it's costing you to 
implement this automated system. That's a considerable amount of 
money. What kind of efficiencies do you estimate that this project, 
when completed, is going to bring about that will be able to justify 
this kind of expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The estimated overpayment savings resulting 
from the SAP system in '86 - 87 is $2.2 million. But the system 
will not be in full operation until late in the fiscal year, so the 
growth in savings for a full operating year are less than 
proportional. The average usage during '86 - 87, in other words, 
won't be complete. Some time during the year it will be around 45 
or 50 per cent average usage. So the savings in a full operating 
year just in overpayments will be substantial. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What does your department base that 
calculation on? Is it something that comes out of the air, or do you 
have some scientific or research data, or are you just guessing 
because it's good to guess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the feasibility studies and the pilot 
project testings. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'm 
interested in exploring something in the area of  

prevention, and I'm only going to deal with one item on that 
because I think it's an item that is of some significance. Do you 
have in your department a program called a parent-aid program or 
do you fund such a program with a non-government organization, 
an NGO? It's a parent-aid program which provides assistance to 
parents who may be finding difficulties with their children and 
other related difficulties. Do you have such a program, and what 
kind of funding is in it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, we certainly do operate such a program. 
It's an important program in the province. The funding is split in 
various ways, and we'll get that information to you as soon as my 
officials can pull it together. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is there a budget for about — I'm not sure 
— is it 500 million? Give me a rough figure; it might be 
satisfactory. 
 
I can pursue another aspect to this question, Mr. Minister, I am 
told that there was some consideration being given to transferring 
this program out of the department to a non-government 
organization. Was that consideration made? Have you decided to 
do that? Or what is the status of that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The parent-aid program has always been 
delivered by non-government organizations — Peyakowak in 
Regina, for example; an organization in Saskatoon that is a 
non-government organization that delivers the parent-aid program. 
So one can't talk about it being transferred from government to the 
NGO sector. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Maybe I have misunderstood some of the 
operation. Did not some aspect of this program — was not some 
of it delivered by the department itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Very early on back in 1982 when the 
program was first developed, it commenced in the department and 
then was devolved to non-government organizations — the 
society for the protection of children in Saskatoon. And I believe 
the program commenced in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you provide me information, and 
maybe you have it handy, the names of the organizations that are 
funded through this parent-aid program and provide that kind of 
services, as well as your appropriation this year for these 
organizations and the increase over last year? Or give me last 
year's number and this year's number, and I'll work out my own 
percentage. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if just while the 
minister is looking for that answer, if I might have leave to 
introduce some students. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's my pleasure 
today to introduce some students to yourself, Mr. Chairman, and 
to other members of the Assembly, on behalf of the member for 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I understand that there are some 24 in 
number, grade 6 students, seated in the Speaker's gallery. They 
have been on a tour of the legislature which I'm sure they enjoyed  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1774 
 
 

and, likely, I would think that they're going to be touring other 
facilities in the capital city. 
 
I want to welcome you here, and I trust that you'll enjoy the 
proceedings of the House. We're in committee of finance right 
now, doing estimates. And I will be meeting with the group later 
today and having a discussion with them and making sure that 
they have pictures taken, and so on. So I'd ask members to join 
with me in welcoming them here on behalf of the member for Cut 
Knife - Lloydminster. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 36 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — My apologies for taking so long. The 
problem is that the organizations that provide the parent-aid 
program, they also deliver other services, and to actually, you 
know, pick out the appropriated dollars going just to parent aid — 
we can do that for you, but it will take some time, unfortunately. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate that. Just to simplify your 
work, because what I'm really wanting to find out is: one, who the 
organizations are — and part of that is because I would like to 
know, and part of it is because it gives me and others an 
opportunity to refer people who ask. So I want to know who they 
are. 
 
And for the purposes of budget and the funding, if you give me the 
global figure of how much . . . and if you don't have it right now, 
you can give that to me later today so we can go on to the next 
item here. But if you give me the amount of budget provided for 
parent-aid program, the global budget for '86 - 87 and what it was 
for '85 - 86, that would be sufficient, and if you will give me an 
undertaking that you will give that to me some time later today, 
that would be okay. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Are you just talking about parent aid or are 
you also talking about crisis intervention; are you talking about 
parent therapists. There are a number of things that are closely 
related here, and if we just try and give you parent aid, it'll take 
some — I don't know if we can get that by 5 o'clock. What we 
could give you is crisis intervention dollars, preventive dollars for 
families and organizations, and they will include things like 
Peyakowak; like the Riel Local No. 33 in Regina; like the society 
for the protection of children in Saskatoon, those kinds of 
organizations. We will try and be as specific as we can, and I hope 
that's adequate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's be adequate. I'm assuming you will 
include in that — part of what you describe includes counselling 
as provided to parents and families and so on and if it includes 
that, that would be sufficient for my purpose. 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I think we're talking about those kinds of 
things, the Dene Kwan in La Loche, for example, that provides 
counselling; it's not just parent aid, there's a spectrum of services 
provided, and we'll get that to you as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, let me refer to 
another item here. For several years now your government has 
been working on a new family services Act. I know that a number 
of people have approached me about it and have expressed various 
concerns and in fact last year you reported — and I'm looking at a 
quote from Hansard here — that the introduction might be in the 
fall of 1985 or the spring of 1986 which we're in now. Because, in 
your words, there was a lot of work and consultation that had to be 
done. Are you proposing, or are you planning, to introduce a new 
family services Act in this session as you indicated last year you 
might do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No, it's not my intention to introduce a new 
family services Act this particular session. It may be possible that 
that will come about this fall. We are dealing with some very 
complex kinds of issues — consultation still continues. We do 
receive communication from individuals. This past year I have 
been involved in consultation with people. 
 
The issues are very complex and if the member wants to take 
some time, I certainly would be prepared to discuss some of those 
particular issues with him. I'm hopeful that we can have an 
updated Act that balances off the rights of parents with the need to 
protect children who really are in need of protection, as soon as 
possible. I think there's a general concurrence within 
Saskatchewan's society that the present Family Services Act is in 
need of reform. And as I indicated, it will not be in the next two or 
three weeks, but it may be later this fall. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree that the present Act is a very old 
Act, but I also agree with you that in its restructuring, a lot of, I 
guess we could call, sensitive issues have to be considered. And I 
don't mean sensitive in a pejorative sense in any way, and I'm sure 
you're aware of that. Can you inform the committee, Mr. Minister, 
do you have any formal process by which you are carrying out 
these consultative processes or are you just . . . if people happen to 
hear that you're planning to introduce some legislation, they have 
to come to see you, or have you structured any formal process by 
which people are able to find out what it is you're intending to do 
and in which they can respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The formal consultation process commenced 
some time back and went on for a good period of time. And that of 
course was related to the ministerial advisory council on child 
protection. As a consequence of their report being released, there 
was a large number of groups and organizations that I met with 
personally to discuss possible changes. There was a paper that was 
issued, and as a consequence of that paper there were other 
organizations that wrote in suggesting additional changes. There 
were some organizations that requested meeting with me 
personally. 
 
We have been through what you could call, I suppose,  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1775 
 

the formal consultation phase. However, I am still in a position of 
being willing to, and indeed wanting to, meet with any particular 
organization that does want to provide some input into this very 
important piece of legislation. And I know there are native 
organizations that have obvious concerns in this particular regard, 
and there are others besides those particular groups. 
 
So the formal consultation process, while it has come to an end in 
terms of public hearings and reports and white papers being 
released, that doesn't mean that the consultation process itself has 
come to an end. And if you're aware of any particular group or 
individual who wishes to meet, I would certainly be prepared to 
accommodate them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'll move on. 
I'm satisfied that you've answered what I wanted to know there. 
And indeed, as people come to me I will discuss it with them and 
in fact refer them to you. 
 
I want to ask you some questions about the Saskatchewan 
assistance plan program which is jointly funded by both the 
provincial and federal governments. Can you tell the committee, 
Mr. Minister, how much was spent under the Saskatchewan 
assistance plan for 1985 - 1986? 
 
I ask that because you budgeted 192.894 million, but I think there 
was a supplementary also. Can you give me the total figure that 
was spent in 1985 - 1986? I think it was more than what you had 
budgeted for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, there was a special warrant, and the 
expenditure was in the order of 196.5 million. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It seems that something changed during the 
year. There obviously was an increase in the number of people 
who had to apply for the Saskatchewan assistance plan. What 
were you able to attribute this very substantial increase, Mr. 
Minister? What went wrong between the time when the budget 
expenditures were finally completed and the time when you were 
planning your initial estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the information of the member opposite, 
the average case-load per month actually went down in '85 - 86 by 
a 2.7 per cent decrease. The average cost per case went up, so that 
there was an increase overall in budget of 1.9 per cent, but the 
average case-load per month went down during the year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, those are somewhat 
misleading figures. Your average case-load may have gone down, 
but the number of people who became dependent on welfare, or 
SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan), actually increased, and you 
know that, Mr. Minister, over that period of the year. 
 
Mr. Minister, you spent $196.7 million on SAP in 1985 - 1986. In 
1981 - 1982, $105.2 million was spent on SAP. You have had a n 
increase — a very substantial increase over that period of time. 
You budgeting now . . Let me carry it further. In '81 - 82, $105.2 
million was spent on SAP. In 1984 - 85, $187.8 million was spent 
on SAP because your number of people dependent has been 
increasing, because certainly the amount of benefits you  

pay have not been increasing. In 1985 - 1986, $196.7 million was 
spent on SAP, a continuing increase in the amount you've 
expended. And yet, Mr. Minister, in the 1986 - 87 estimate, you 
only estimate $190.8 million. 
 
Can you explain how you can be budgeting for only $190.8 
million when over the term of your government there's been a 
continuing increase? Are you planning already that you're going to 
have to go and get a supplementary estimate to pay for money that 
you have not budgeted for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well over a period of four or five years, since 
we pay actual utility costs in the province and utilities increase 
over a period of time, then naturally the expenditures for utilities 
are going to increase as well under the SAP system. 
 
In addition to that, special needs items, they naturally increase in 
cost per item over time. And so you're going to spend more today, 
in 1985, to buy a stove or a fridge or who knows what, for a 
particular client, than you would have back in 1982. So those 
kinds of items increase. 
 
In addition to that, there was a rate increase three years ago in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that rate increase naturally has to 
be factored in over a two- or three-year period of time. 
 
So all of those items naturally are going to increase your 
expenditures. And as well, there of course has been an increase in 
the case-load, as there has been right across Canada during the 
'82-83-84 period of time. 
 
But I'm pleased to inform the member and the people of 
Saskatchewan that we are showing a decrease in the number of 
people on social assistance today, in comparison to last year. And 
in addition we are spending far more money today on things like 
education and training initiatives than were ever spent before. 
 
So we're headed in the right direction. And the kinds of things that 
I indicated, in terms of increasing utility costs and special needs 
and rate increases, certainly have a significant bearing on the 
amount of money that you're going to spend over time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I might agree with you, Mr. Minister, 
that utility increases have been very dramatic under the term of 
your government and have affected not only people who are on 
SAP, but also others as well. I think everyone who may be 
watching this deliberation of these estimates will testify to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have just made the argument that I have been 
trying to make. The argument is that your estimate of the amount 
that you're proposing to spend on SAP is not an accurate estimate. 
You have said just now to the committee, utility costs have 
increases, special needs expenditures have increases — and I'm 
going to ask you about some of them in a moment or two. 
 
(1545) 
 
All of the things you have said, and you very conveniently forgot 
to say and tell the House how many people who  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1776 
 
 

are dependent on SAP, how much of an increase there has been 
there. But all of those comments you have just made show that 
your estimate of 190.8 million for this year, compared to the 196.7 
million you spent last year, is not an accurate estimate, and it's 
simply being used here as a cosmetic figure to help the Minister of 
Finance with his budget. How can you argue what you have just 
argued and still say that $190.8 million is going to be sufficient to 
meet the needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the case-load is dropping. I just 
indicated that, and I think that's very significant. I think that's 
something that we can all be very encouraged by. The case-load is 
dropping. The efficiencies that we have brought into the system in 
terms of welfare reform are having a significant impact. And I 
might add that, had we not taken the welfare reform initiatives that 
we did, I understand that we would have spent tens of millions of 
dollars more on social assistance than would have taken place 
previously. I think the public would be interested to know that. 
 
As well, I think it's important for the member to play fair ball 
when he's comparing statistics. I understand that in '81 - 82 the 
budgetary statistics that you referred to did not include the DNS 
appropriation, and there are some fairly significant dollars there 
which of course came into the global budget. 
 
So I'm encouraged by what we see in terms of the case-load 
reducing, in terms of the education and training initiatives that we 
are providing to people in Saskatchewan on a magnitude, I might 
add, that never took place previously. And I suspect that the 
members opposite never even thought about the possibility of 
providing that education and training. And I hope that you will 
stand in your place and say that you do support those education 
and training initiatives. 
 
I was speaking to a group of people today in Fillmore, 
Saskatchewan; in fact, that they were representative of a number 
of municipalities around the province who were very encouraged 
to hear of the kind of training initiatives — education, job 
opportunities, job training — which are being provided to people 
on social assistance today. 
 
And I think that's the way to go. I think, if you take a look at the 
record of governments across North America, regardless of the 
political stripe that they are characterized by, that they are all 
saying that we need a better approach to welfare rather than just 
handing out a cheque, and it has to include things like education 
and training, which we are doing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, let's talk about 
case-load because I think you're side-stepping the issue here, in 
spite of your well-often-stated efforts about education and training, 
all of which I'm prepared to support. But I'm going to qualify my 
support — and the qualification of my support that it's real training 
that you're providing and not simply trying to play with the 
statistics, which in fact you have done. 
 
And I will be asking you some questions in a little while about the 
kind of games you have been playing with these people who you 
supposedly have found jobs for, but only  

found them jobs long enough so that they could qualify for 
unemployment insurance. And then you drop them and you say: 
oh isn't this a great job we have done; we have reduced the 
number of people on SAP. But, Mr. Minister, you have not, in 
fact, reduced the number of people who are dependent on SAP. 
 
And let me tell you the sad story of what's happened since your 
government was elected. The total number of people on welfare in 
Saskatchewan in January of 1981 was 43,428. The total number of 
people dependent on welfare since your government has taken 
over has increased dramatically, so that in January of 1986 — and 
I'm using the same month in each term — but that total number is 
now 62,386, an increase from the 43,000 back in 1981. This is an 
increase, Mr. Minister, of 43 per cent. The total number of people 
on welfare in Saskatchewan due to unemployment in January of 
1981 was 5,868; the total number of people dependent on SAP in 
Saskatchewan due to unemployment in January of 1986 is now 
14,008. That's an increase of people who are on SAP because of 
unemployment of 1138 per cent. How in Heaven's name, Mr. 
Minister, you can be proud of that kind of a record, I really find it 
very difficult to understand. 
 
The total number of people who are dependent on SAP due to 
insufficient earning power by the family, because SAP also 
provides some assistance in that capacity, it was 3.717 in January 
of 1981; it has increased to 9,700 — again a reflection of the 
policies of your government which have increased the amount of 
poverty and the extent of poverty in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you stand in the House, Mr. Chairman, and you brag about 
this kind of effort on the part of your administration. Quite frankly, 
I would be ashamed to even stand up and try to defend that kind of 
record. That is not something to be proud of. 
 
Now you say, well, in this year we've had a decrease in the 
case-load. Well I have your own monthly statistical bulletin for 
March of 1986, Mr. Minister, and that temporary bubble you had 
is now gone, because in the month of March it is well known by 
that time the economy should be able to absorb some people in 
employment because of construction pick-up and so on. Well, 
what's happened, what's happened between February and March 
of this year? Fully employable people who are dependent on SAP 
has increased from February, 14,691 to 14,818. You have had an 
increase in dependency, Mr. Minister. Partially employable — and 
I'll only deal with those — the fully employable and the partially 
has increased from 6,641 to 6,697. So in the areas of fully 
employable people who are unemployed, and partially 
employable, you have seen, from February to March, an increase 
in the numbers of people who have had to become dependent on 
SAP. 
 
Now it's true you've had a modest decrease in the unemployable 
category. I will admit to that. But in your total figures, Mr. 
Minister, according to your own statistics from which I am 
reading, between February and March of this year you have had an 
increase from 30,629 people who are dependent on SAP to 30,802 
who are dependent on SAP. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1777 
 

In light of those figures, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that 
your $190.8 million estimated budget, which is a decrease from 
what you spent last year, is an inaccurate budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, for October '85, the case-load 
was lower than October '84, and for every month thereafter, 
November '85, lower; December, '85, lower; January '86, lower; 
February '86, lower; March '86, lower; and it is on that basis that 
we project what we do. 
 
But the member opposite talked about the particular training 
initiatives as somehow being a scam. And that's the question you 
asked first. That's the question you asked first. You said you 
wanted real training — real training. Well the SEDP 
(Saskatchewan skills development program) program certainly 
have provided a substantial degree of education and training that 
was not there previously. Now some of the SEDP programs of 
course are with municipalities and with non-profit corporations, as 
you funded. AS we fund . . and of course your organization, your 
government, had some of those particular projects as well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You'd never admit it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well governments everywhere do. And I 
have before me here a list of a large number of letters that I would 
be happy to read into the record — but I don't think we want to 
take the time to do that — from organizations that have indicated 
how pleased they are that they have received this particular kind of 
funding. 
 
But what the member opposite does not seem to want to admit is 
that for a good number of social assistance clients, that particular 
job experience has not only enhanced their self-esteem, has not 
only increased their skill level and therefore enhanced their 
competitiveness in the job market, but it has in fact created 
permanent employment for them. 
 
And I would only refer the member to the project on south Albert 
here in the city of Regina, at Mr. Lube at south Albert. And I think 
the member is familiar with that particular kind of an operation, an 
operation where people drive in and have their oil changed by 
competent individuals who have been trained to change the oil in 
vehicles, something which the public wants, a service that they're 
very happy to have. And through part of our program, we were 
able to provide employment for, I believe, six individuals who 
previously were on social assistance. And it wasn't that long ago 
that I talked to the manager at Mr. Lube on south Albert, and he 
indicated to me that a significant number of those former social 
assistance clients are still working today, permanently, at that 
particular job. 
 
Now I think that's — for me anyway — an indication that welfare 
reform is successful, that it does provide people with the kind of 
opportunities that they want. It enables them to become more 
competitive in the job market, to secure gainful employment. And 
I think all members, regardless of which political party we belong 
to, would agree that is the kind of thing that governments  

should be doing. 
 
Now not every job is going to be a permanent or long-term. There 
are going to be some kinds of short-term jobs. But we find that the 
people that are involved in those are very pleased to have the 
opportunity to be working. We naturally wished that everyone had 
a permanent job, and that is the ideal. Unfortunately that is not the 
case in Canada today, and consequently governments do believe 
that it is important to provide short-term employment. 
 
We believe that very strongly and are so doing today on a 
magnitude that is very, very significant in the province. So 
whether it's the Crisis Nursery in Saskatoon that was able to staff 
up; or whether it is some organization in northern Saskatchewan 
that is providing employment for native people; or whether it's Mr. 
Lube on south Albert; or, I would draw to the attention of the 
member opposite, the Supercart manufacturing firm here in 
Regina that is going to be providing employment for a large 
number of people on social assistance — and a good number of 
those jobs will likely become permanent as the manufacturing 
process gears up. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now with every initiative of government there are going to be 
some deficiencies, there are going to be some things that one could 
wish could be done better. But I think when you compare the 
training record of this government to the training record of the 
former government, then certainly there has been a substantial 
increase in initiative and forward-looking thinking on the part of 
efforts to get people off of social assistance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you have now performed 
your usual trick. You totally avoid the issue here. Nobody's 
arguing about training programs. Most people would support the 
idea of providing education and training and indeed providing 
on-the-job training. 
 
The point we're making here today, Mr. Minister, is that the 
policies of your government have increased the number of people 
who are dependent on SAP, or welfare, from 43,000 back in 1981 
of January to well over 60,000. Especially since you have been 
making all these arguments about how well your economic 
policies has been doing, those figures, Mr. Minister, are really 
devastating. They prove one thing. They prove that your policies 
have been a failure. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, after having finished your speech totally 
unrelated to this issue, you forgot to answer the question. And the 
question was that, in light of the fact that there is such a dramatic 
increase during your administration in the number of people 
dependent on SAP, how can you justify your budget for SAP 
which is only $190.8 million compared to $196.7 million which 
you spent last year? 
 
The number of people on SAP is increasing — already it shows a 
trend between February and March — and yet you have reduced 
your budget. I submit, Mr. Minister, that this is simply another 
way that you and your Minister of Finance play games with the 
people's money, putting one set of figures in your estimate and 
knowing full well  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1778 
 
 

that you're going to spend something else. You are misleading the 
taxpayers of this province of Saskatchewan, and that's really quite 
unacceptable. 
 
Now will you answer the question? And it's an important question 
because the amount you spend on welfare has increased by $91 
million in the last four years, or 86 per cent. And I'll tell you, Mr. 
Minister, it's not because you've been much more generous. It's 
because of the increased numbers of people who've become 
dependants. 
 
Now will you answer the question: how you can justify your 
estimate under the subvote of Saskatchewan assistance plan when 
it's substantially less than what you spent last year, especially in 
light of the fact that the number of people that are on SAP is now 
beginning to increase again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I did answer that question 
partially before, but there are a number of things that need to be 
mentioned in response to that particular question. 
 
We are in the process of finalizing negotiations with the federal 
government to make it possible for a much higher percentage of 
our social assistance clients to be involved in direct job 
experiences under the federal government job program. And that 
is something that didn't happen previously, and it's this 
government which I believe has been very successful as we 
anticipate finalizing those negotiations and reaching an agreement. 
 
The second thing is, of course, we have instituted a number of 
efficiency measures and welfare reform measures, for example, 
our mandatory cheque pick-up and our mandatory self-declaration 
forms. And we, of course, want to ensure that those people who 
truly are eligible for social assistance receive it. But I certainly 
make no apology to anyone for also taking initiatives to ensure 
that if someone is not eligible for social assistance that they don't 
receive it. That, of course, will save dollars. 
 
In addition, I indicated to the member opposite that since October 
'85, every month since then, the case-load has been lower than the 
year previous. So when you roll all of those things together, I think 
you have a very adequate rationale for the budget figure that we 
have taken. 
 
I would also inform the member that the follow-up study on our 
pre- and post-employment dependency I think will be of interest. 
Initial results show that the average length of time on assistance 
prior to placement was 6.5 out of 12 months, or 11.2 months over 
a 24-month period. This indicates that the job program is 
providing a job placement to those individuals that did have a 
marginal attachment to the labour force and had established a 
social assistance dependency. 
 
During the nine months following job placement, 60 per cent did 
not return to social assistance at all, and of those returning to 
social assistance the average time on assistance was two months or 
less. 
 
So the greatest impact regarding the break in dependency  

we found was in the singles group of whom 85 per cent did not 
return for assistance. So I think the efforts that we have taken to 
provide direct job experiences, whether they are short-term, 
medium-term, long-term permanent jobs are, in fact, paying off; 
and that attachment to the labour force, whether it's engendered 
through that short-term job creation programs or through 
long-term programs such as what we see at Mr. Lube on Regina 
South, or Supercart here in Regina, those things are very positive. 
And I'm certainly pleased to hear the members opposite stand in 
their place and say, yes, we applaud the members of the 
government in their efforts to move people off of social assistance, 
although I must confess I didn't hear much applause from the 
member from Regina North East, although I'm sure in his heart of 
hearts he is encouraged by what he sees taking place in the 
province of Saskatchewan today compared to what took place in 
terms of education and training four or five years ago when his 
government was in power. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to pick up a related 
theme. Mr. Minister, I note in going through the monthly 
statistical bulletin from the Saskatchewan Social Services that over 
the last three years — two years — the growth in those on 
unemployment has been almost all in the employable sector. It 
appears that the number of unemployable people has gone down; 
the number of partially employable people has gone down; the 
huge increase in the number of those on welfare, Mr. Minister, has 
been in the category of fully employable. I refer you to page 2 of 
the March edition. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think members of this caucus would dearly love 
the opportunity to applaud your job creation efforts. The problem 
is there's not much to applaud, and not much that's been very 
effective, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have mentioned a couple of projects. Overall 
though, I think the vast majority of Saskatchewan people, while 
they don't fault you for creating this recession, they do fault this 
government for having done nothing effective about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, with the growth in the welfare rate being almost 
entirely in the category of employable, how is it that the minister 
can claim such a runaway success with respect to job creation? I 
would have thought that this would have suggested to you that a 
little something more might have been in order. But to listen to the 
minister talk, the economy's just run away with itself. Somehow or 
other, Mr. Minister, I think the 40,000-odd unemployed don't 
share your unbridled enthusiasm for the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you will not admit that your job-creation 
efforts have not made much of a dint in the welfare roles. Since we 
cannot get into the rolls of the unemployed, but we can spend 
some time on the welfare rolls, I wonder if you'd not be prepared 
to admit, Mr. Minister, that your efforts with respect to job 
creation have not made much of a dint in the welfare rates. The 
welfare rates have increased precisely because it is the 
employable, the number of employables, which has gone up so 
dramatically. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that we are all  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1779 
 

most interested in seeing more and more people secure 
employment. I think that's a goal that all governments share, 
regardless of their political stripe. And I think that it is significant, 
for example, that the single employable case-load, 1984 - '85 
compared to '85 - 86, saw a reduction each month compared to the 
year previous, whether it was in April when there were 536 fewer; 
in May there were 1,004 fewer. You come down to recently: 
January, 579 fewer; February, 614 fewer; March, 678 fewer, with 
the average, over the last year, 603 fewer. 
 
So clearly we're moving in the right direction. When you take a 
look at the labour force statistics in the province of Saskatchewan 
and you see that the number of people who are employed today 
. . . I have the April '86 figure here, 452,000, and when you 
compare that back to April, 1982, and you see the substantial 
increase in the number of people that are working in the province 
today, then clearly, I think, there has been a significant increase in 
the number of people that have jobs, the number of people who 
are working. 
 
I think we can all be encouraged that Saskatchewan continues to 
have the second lowest unemployment rate in the country. We're 
naturally not encouraged, I'm not personally encouraged when I 
see any individual that is out of work that would like to work. And 
so the kinds of things that we have been doing here in 
Saskatchewan recently over the last year or two to enhance 
employment opportunities, I think, are very significant, whether 
it's the oil upgrader here in Regina, the new rehabilitation hospital 
here in Regina, the additions at the Regina General Hospital, the 
Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford, the new pulp-mill, 
paper-mill in Prince Albert — all of those kinds of things are 
projects that are very significant that will certainly provide a lot of 
long-term employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And of course not all of the significant increase in the number of 
people working can be attributed to government projects. On the 
contrary. The small-business sector in Saskatchewan is the single 
most important sector that is going to create jobs. And when you 
take a look at the number of people that are working there today in 
various aspects of that particular sector, we find a significant 
increase. 
 
So I think people in Saskatchewan are going to, of course, decide 
whether or not they want the big-government approach of the 
NDP, which was to spend my dollar and their tax dollar to buy 
uranium mines, even though that didn't crate one new job; or to 
buy potash mines, we even thought that didn't create one new job; 
or to buy land for their government-owned land bank, even though 
that didn't create one new job; or whether or not they want the 
kind of forward-looking initiatives which this particular 
government has adopted. 
 
And I think that they will see that we have a vision for the future 
of Saskatchewan which is building on our strengths, whether it's 
pulp- and paper-mills, or whether it's the bacon plant, or whether 
it's the oil upgrader here in Regina, whether it's the ammonia plant 
that's going to be attached to it. There are all sorts of things that 
indicate that this particular government does have a plan for the 
future which will provide employment opportunities for  

Saskatchewan people. 
 
And when I ask people: well, what do you think the NDP would 
do if they were in power in terms of providing jobs? there's this 
deadly silence, and they're not too sure exactly what would 
happen. Because they remember the buying of potash mines and 
the buying of land bank land and the buying of uranium mines, 
and they remember that those things, in fact, don't create jobs. 
 
I can recall, Mr. Chairman, the candidate who's running against 
me in my particular constituency for the NDP party. His approach 
to job creation is for the government to nationalize all the potash 
mines. Now if anyone can explain to me how in the world we're 
going to create one new job by taking millions of taxpayers' 
dollars to buy out all of the rest of the potash mines that presently 
aren't owned by the government, then I would remain 
unconvinced. I don't think that spending taxpayers' dollars to 
nationalize off of the potash mines is going to create any jobs at 
all. 
 
The NDP candidate running against me wants the government to 
set up a government-owned construction company — a 
government-owned construction company which would bid 
against all of the privately owned construction companies in the 
province. Now how in the world setting up a government-owned 
construction company is going to create jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan is beyond me. 
 
(1615) 
 
I suppose I shouldn't be surprised, however, that this is the 
approach that people in the NDP party want to use to create jobs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He's off the topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — He's not off the topic; this is right on the 
topic. We're talking about job creation; we're talking about getting 
people off of social assistance into the employment market. And 
that particular NDP candidate is a founding member of the 
committee for an independent socialist Canada. 
 
Well we shouldn't be surprised that a founding member of the 
committee for an independent socialist Canada wants to 
nationalize all the potash mines, wants to set up a 
government-owned construction company. That's not the way to 
create jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to know, Mr. Chairman, if we're 
all going to have the latitude to talk about the idiosyncrasies of our 
opponents. I just want to know if the same rules are going to be 
applied to the opposition as to the government. 
 
If they are, I'm prepared to sit silent and let the minister talk as 
long as he wants about his opponent's views with respect to potash 
mines and uranium. But if the same rules aren't to be applied, then 
I would suggest that you call the minister to order. He has been out 
of order, I  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1780 
 
 

suggest, for the last five minutes. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The minister, in his remarks, was attempting 
to show how employment opportunities would perhaps alleviate 
the welfare situation in the province. I would agree that, in talking 
about that, I believe he was straying from the rules of debate when 
he brought into it the candidate opposing him. But other than that, 
I believe he was on the topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Certainly the 
issue of creating employment in Saskatchewan is a very 
broad-ranging issue. And I think that the people of Saskatchewan 
are going to want to know what the strategies of the provincial 
government are concerning job creation, and I have indicated 
those. 
 
And the public will want to compare those strategies to those of 
the members opposite. And they will want to know which of those 
particular strategies are going to be most successful to see the 
numbers of people on social assistance decline in the future. 
 
And I think the case I made, that bigger government, nationalizing 
potash mine and uranium mines and setting up government-owned 
construction companies, is not the way to get people off the social 
assistance. And I certainly stick by that. 
 
And I think, when I talk to people in my constituency about those 
kinds of initiatives coming from an NDP government, they sort of 
shake their head, and they're a little concerned about the kinds of 
things that are being proposed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, indeed the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to be, and are, more than 
interested in the strategies because . . . And I'm sure that they will 
compare. And they're comparing now. 
 
As a matter of fact, because they've been comparing now for the 
last year, and more than the year — two, three years — this 
government has known what their decision has been, and it has 
refused to call an election. That's how ashamed, Mr. Chairman, are 
that minister and his colleagues are about their failure to create 
work for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Yes, people will compare. People will compare this 
open-for-business rhetoric, which is what they call a strategy, 
which has become a dismal failure in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to the kind of levels of unemployment that existed 
prior to the election of this government in 1982. 
 
Since this government was elected, unemployment has more than 
doubled in Saskatchewan. That is what people of Saskatchewan 
are going to compare. Since the election of this government, Mr. 
Chairman, the number of people who have been forced to become 
dependent on welfare has increased by 43 per cent. 
 
Now that is what has happened because of the employment 
strategies of this government. And even of more particular 
importance, Mr. Chairman, the number of people, who are 
employable, has increased by 138 per  

cent because of this employment strategies of this government. 
And the number of people who had to not only work but have to 
rely on Saskatchewan assistance to supplement their income, you 
know, Mr. Chairman, that has increased by 162 per cent under the 
term of this government. Now that, Mr. Chairman, is what has 
resulted from the open-for-business employment strategy of this 
government. 
 
Now on the even of an election, all of a sudden we hear 
announcements about this project and that project and another 
project. My question would be: why has it taken four years to get 
around to those announcements, except that indeed there is about 
to be an election and the government knowing that the public, the 
tax-paying public of Saskatchewan, have caught on to their kind of 
trickery and deception and is ready to turf them out of office. And 
in order to try to save their political hide, they now, on the eve of 
an election, are making announcements which no one can be sure 
whether they'll ever see the light of day because when they're 
asked in this House to provide information, they continuously, day 
after day, refuse to table it and provide any information. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, the public will not be fooled by that 
kind of political nonsense which you are trying to perpetrate on 
the process of government in Saskatchewan. How you can boast 
about your record in light of all of these statistics, which are 
completely contradictory of what you say, I don't know. And I 
suppose it doesn't matter whether I know or not, the fact is that the 
public knows and they're ready to pass judgement. 
 
If you were not concerned about your dismal record, I would 
submit you would have had the election, and the only reason your 
government hasn't called it is because you know you're in trouble, 
otherwise you would have called it by now. And if you wanted to 
do it on the basis of the jobs that you have created, you know very 
well that you will elect very few members because nobody will 
believe you, because everyone in Saskatchewan knows somebody 
who's been laid off, someone who is in their family somewhere 
who has been laid off or has lost a job. And when you look at 
some of these, Mr. Minister, it is difficult to really understand how 
you would even dare to try to defend what you have been saying. 
 
I give you another figure — and I'm going to deal with March of 
1985, and there's been an increase since then. But the total number 
of beneficiaries of income assistance programs in Saskatchewan 
— 
that's people who have had to be assisted in their income because 
they either don't make sufficient income or don't make any —is 
231,000 people. Now that is an increase of over 50,000 since 
March of 1981. That is the result of your job creation program, 
Mr. Minister, and it really has been a program of failure and you 
know it. These aren't statistics that I have dug out of the air. They 
come out of your own documents and they come out of Statistics 
Canada. 
 
Let me look at another aspect of your dismal record, Mr. Minister. 
Between March of 1985, and last month, and the month before, 
Saskatchewan's job creation record was eighth in all of Canada. 
And the only two other  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1781 
 

provinces that had a worse job creation record were those of 
Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island, and you know the kind 
of circumstances economically that they face. We have now had a 
net out-migration of people out of Saskatchewan in the last half a 
year. 
 
All of those indicators show that in spite of your well-sounding 
rhetoric you have accomplished nothing. The only thing you have 
accomplished is cause more people in this province to become 
poor and have less income that they need to have to support their 
families. The only thing you have accomplished is cause more 
people to go on welfare because there are no jobs for them. And 
then some of your programs for training have been good, but 
others, Mr. Minister, you simply use — you simply use — to try 
to hide your dismal figures on the SAP rolls. You cannot tell this 
committee that by creating a job creation program that lasts 22 to 
26 weeks, which you were kind enough to provide me in response 
to a letter which I wrote to you, that that is nothing more than 
simply an attempt to get people working long enough on 
minimum so they get unemployment insurance, so the federal 
government looks after them, and you can say, we help people get 
off welfare. 
 
If you help them, fine, but please, Mr. Minister, show some 
compassion and don't punish them for the failure of your 
government's economic policies, because that's what you're doing. 
You're trying to generalize publicly and scapegoat people, because 
you know it may be popular in some of your red-necked circles. 
And we object to that, and I certainly object to that. That is not the 
way for a caring society to look after its poor. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said, in an earlier response to a question which I 
asked, that one of the reasons why the costs of paying out SAP 
have increased is because many of the personal and household or 
personal allowances that you have made have increased. Mr. 
Minister, can I ask you: when were last the personal and 
household allowances changed or increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite made a 
number of points that deserve a response, and I would first of all 
deal with the welfare reform initiatives. 
 
I'm surprised — and I suppose I shouldn't be surprised, but I guess 
in one sense I am - that I have yet to hear a public statement from 
any of the members opposite. I do recall that the Leader of the 
Opposition, when he was pushed on budget night, he indicated 
that yes, welfare reform was a good idea. But he sure wasn't going 
to advance it himself unless he was forced into a corner. And then 
he admitted it and he scurried away from the issue quickly, not 
wanting to deal with welfare reform, I suspect, because he knew 
that somehow a traditional constituency of voters that support the 
NDP party were affected by welfare reform and he in some way 
did not want to enrage them or upset them. 
 
Well I don't think that's what should determine social policy in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I think it's the soundness of the policy 
that should be looked at, not which particular electoral group is 
going to be favoured or not favoured by a particular policy. 
 

We increased taxes on big corporations, and today they are the 
highest in Canada in Saskatchewan, not because we favour them 
but because we think they deserve to be taxed appropriately. 
And we also increased welfare reform initiatives in the province of 
Saskatchewan because we think it's appropriate to provide people 
with education and training opportunities to get off of welfare, 
which you people did not do to any significant degree, and at the 
same time we think it's appropriate to also ensure that people that 
are not eligible for social assistance don't receive it. And if you 
want to call that red-neck, if you want to call that not 
compassionate, if you want to call that not sound social policy, 
you go right ahead. I quite frankly aren't going to lose one night's 
sleep over that kind of an accusation. 
 
I know that that's sound policy. You know that it's sound social 
policy as well. And if you had any kind of political courage you'd 
stand to your feet and you would support it. And you would say, 
yes, we should have implemented some of these things, but we 
never did. So I'm not surprised that you take the position on 
welfare reform that you do. 
 
(1630) 
 
As it relates to job creation projects in Saskatchewan, I want to list 
for the member opposite some of the things that this government is 
doing, some of the things that we began negotiations on two or 
three years ago that are now beginning to bear fruit, which your 
administration and the Leader of the Opposition, the former 
premier at that time, never even considered at all — never even 
dreamt about. 
 
For example, the new paper-mill in Prince Albert. Was that 
proposed by an NDP government? Certainly not. What about the 
new Regina upgrader? Not proposed at all. The new Shand power 
project in Estevan, the new Rafferty and Alameda dams, the new 
fertilizer manufacturing plant in Regina which will be attached to 
the upgrader, the new technical school in Prince Albert, the new 
agriculture college complex in Saskatoon, the new MacKenzie art 
gallery and museum in Regina. 
 
What about individual line service which will create hundreds of 
jobs in the province? What about the expansion of the rural gas 
distribution system? What about burying the power lines in rural 
Saskatchewan? What about the new health facilities across 
Saskatchewan — the new 1,500 new nursing home beds? What 
about the new rehab hospital? Many of these projects you people 
did not even consider. Others you considered and talked about, but 
you did not move on. 
 
And I think the best example that I can think of was your talk, year 
after year after year, to somehow fix Regina's water situation, 
which would have created jobs for people. It took 11 years and 
nothing was done under your administration. Today, people in 
Regina have good drinking water, and jobs were created during 
the construction phase of that particular process. 
 
What about the new meat processing facilities in North  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1782 
 
 

Battleford and Saskatoon? A large array of projects that the NDP 
never thought about that today they are negative about, but they 
know full well that they should be supporting because they will 
create jobs for literally hundreds and hundreds of people here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The welfare rates here in the province remain the highest in 
Canada for families. There was the 6.5 per cent increase in 1983 
here in Saskatchewan, and when you take a look at the rates in 
Saskatchewan, we certainly compare favourably. And when you 
take a look at the large amount of money — the large amount of 
money, the millions of dollars — that we are spending today to get 
people off of social assistance, whether it's through education or 
training, job preparation, or direct job experiences, I think we're 
adopting the appropriate line that we should be taking. 
 
In addition, there's the implementation of a $20-per-month training 
allowance which will be taking effect later on this year for people 
who are on social assistance; and an increase in the maximum 
shelter guide-line in the various parts of the province. 
 
So I think when you take a look at the overall record, you may 
want to increase social assistance rates in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that's fine. You can make that 
recommendation. Some make that recommendation; others say, 
leave it where it is; others say, it's too high already. I think we 
need to find a reasonable balance. That's been my approach, and I 
think it's a reasonable and prudent approach of any government at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, once again you didn't answer 
the question, in your usual and true tradition. Let me ask you this. 
If you are so convinced that your job creation has worked so well, 
and if you are so convinced that your so-called reform has worked 
so well, can you explain therefore why unemployment has more 
than doubled so it's well above 47,000; why the number of people 
who are employable has increased from 5,800 to 14,000 in the last 
four years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, the member knows that increases in 
social assistance cases in fact began to take place in the late '70s 
and early '80s; indeed under your administration, there were 
increases in the social assistance case-load. There have been 
increases in the last four or five years right across the country. I 
think we have to take a look at the large picture and see where 
Saskatchewan sits in comparison to the rest of the country. 
 
When you take a look at the things that are happening in 
agriculture and in oil and potash and you take a look at the 
reductions in revenues there, and you take a look at the fact that 
Saskatchewan has still maintained its position as having among 
one of the lowest unemployment rates in the country, then I think 
what you see is that the kinds of initiatives that we have taken are 
in fact appropriate for this particular time. Some of those 
initiatives are now beginning to bear fruit, and I've indicated that 
already in terms of single employables being reduced on the 
case-load. 
 

Others of these initiatives will bear fruit as time goes by, whether 
it's the oil upgrader, or whether it's the paper-mill in Prince Albert, 
or the bacon plant in North Battleford, or whether it's the rehab 
hospital which is beginning to come on stream here in terms of 
significant construction activity in Regina. Certainly all of those 
initiatives are going to be significant in terms of providing 
employment for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the total of employables has 
not been reduced. You're misleading the committee here. The total 
number of employables between February and March has 
increased. I'm reading . . . Would you please pick up a coy of your 
own publication which I have here — from March of 1986, the 
total number of employables have increased from 14,691 to 
14,818. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, having stated that, I won't argue it. I simply 
want to ask you again because you didn't answer the question. If 
you have been so successful with all your so-called announced 
projects and other things which you are talking about in this 
committee, will you please try to explain why the unemployment 
has gone to around 47,000 in Saskatchewan, and why the number 
of people who are employable but instead of working are 
dependent on welfare, has increased by 138 per cent? 
 
Wouldn't you say, Mr. Minister, that all of your efforts, or lack of 
them, in the last four years have been a dismal failure to cause this 
to happen? Because if you had been successful, these would not be 
the facts of life out there today; you wouldn't have over 260,000 
people dependent in some way on assistance programs because of 
either having no work or because of having inadequate income 
because of low-paying jobs; or even more so because of more of 
the jobs becoming part time so that people can't make a living by 
the work that they do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the number of people 
working in Saskatchewan in 1982 was 427,000 in the summer of 
1982. Today it's 452,000, so we have an increase of 35,000 people 
— 35,000 more people working today in Saskatchewan than in 
1982. 
 
So when you talk a look at the increase in the number of people 
who are working today; when you take a look at the reduction in 
terms of people who are on social assistance; when you take a 
look at the drought which has hit Saskatchewan over the last two 
years; when you take a look at the reduction in commodity prices 
here in the province and throughout the world that this province 
has to deal with; when you put all of that together and you 
consider that Saskatchewan still has the second-lowest 
unemployment rate in the country, and among the highest benefits 
in terms of social assistance for people with families in Canada, 
then I think we're on the right track. 
 
And when you go through the list of projects that I just read out 
for the member opposite, of the kind of things that we would be 
doing here in the province in the years to come, I think that any 
sound-thinking individual would say that yes, we are on the right 
track here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1783 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again you make 
my own argument for me. You suggest that there are 35,000 more 
people working, but you fail to mention that there are 40,000 more 
people who are unemployed or are dependent on welfare. Even 
using your own statistics, Mr. Minister, there is a net decline in the 
number of people who should be working. The people who 
become either unemployed or who will become dependent on the 
welfare system has increased over 40,000, even though you say 
the number of jobs people are working at has increased by 35,000. 
The other thing you failed to say, in your usual way, is that a lot of 
those 35,000 jobs are part-time jobs — part-time jobs where 
people cannot make a living. And so once again you're simply 
trying to solve your political problem with askewing of statistics 
and not dealing with the issue that's there. 
 
Mr. Minister, even your own constituents disagree with you. I 
have here a letter which you received not too long ago from the 
outreach committee of the Rosemont United Church. And this 
committee refers to a report submitted — prepared for you by a 
former employee of your department. It was called, "A Duane 
Adams report of productive welfare system for the 80's." And this 
group of people who are, I know, very well-meaning and 
concerned, asked you to consider these kinds of things that I have 
been speaking about in this committee. I ask you, Mr. Minister: 
how many of these recommendations of this Mr. Adams report of 
1983 have you implemented since that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There were a large number of 
recommendations that the Adams report put forward. We have 
responded to a good number of those recommendations. For 
example, the automation of the SAP system was one of the very 
significant recommendations brought forward by the Adams 
report. And we are carrying on with the implementation of a SAP 
automation system. 
 
The availability and delivery of a much enhanced education and 
training program for welfare clients was one of the things that the 
Adams report recommended, which we have responded to. An 
increase in rates at that particular time was another example. So 
certainly we have responded to a number of the major 
recommendations of the Adams report. 
 
The member opposite though, talks about part-time and full-time 
jobs. And I would simply remind him, if he does want to talk 
about part-time jobs, that he will want to compare the record— the 
three-year record; the NDP from October' 79 to October '81 — 
10,000 part-time jobs created under your administration and only 
4,000 full-time jobs. 
 
The same period of time for the Progressive Conservative 
government — 4,000 part-time jobs and 21,000 new, full-time, 
permanent jobs. So any way you want to cut it, any way you want 
to cut it, you see a significant difference — 4,000 full-time jobs 
there, 21,000 here; 10,000 part-time jobs over there and 4,000 
here. 
 
Now if you want to brag about part-time jobs, go ahead. You had 
the most — 10,000. We will rather focus in on  

permanent full-time jobs, and there there's a significant difference, 
a very significant difference. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, your so-called job 
creation program has resulted . . . It's difficult for you to 
understand, so let me draw you a bit of an analogy that should be 
easy to understand. 
 
Mr. Minister, there, as a result of your job creation efforts, now are 
over 60,000 people who are SAP recipients or dependent on SAP. 
Over 60,000. That's more, Mr. Minister, than the combined 
population of men, women, and children of the city of Estevan, 
Lloydminster, Melfort, Melville, North Battleford, Swift Current, 
Assiniboia, and Canora. That is the extent of the problem which 
you have created with your misguided policies. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again, and I won't make a long speech 
because maybe that'll make you stop making a speech and instead 
get you around to answering the question: how can you say that 
your job creation program has been so successful when 
unemployment has more than doubled, and with the number of 
people dependent on assistance programs is now at 261,000 in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we're simply covering 
the same ground here, and I guess we're going to have to agree to 
disagree in some measure. I indicated that four years ago there 
were 427,000 people working in the province; today, 452,000 
people working. that's an increase of 35,000 people and that's a 
very significant increase — 35,000 more people working today. 
And that is much in excess of the additional people who, for one 
unfortunate reason or another, were added to the unemployment 
rolls — much in excess. In fact it's almost three time as high. 
 
So the kinds of things that I have been talking about that we will 
do in the future, that we are doing today, that we have done in the 
past, I think, are bearing fruit for Saskatchewan. And we look 
forward to continuing to have among the lowest unemployment 
rates in the country. We look forward to seeing the upgrader 
constructed here in Regina, and the bacon plant in North 
Battleford, and the rehab hospital here in Regina, and a number of 
other kinds of things that I have listed off for the member opposite. 
The kinds of things that we are doing, I think, are appropriate, and 
we will continue on with them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I won't pursue this at a 
great deal of time longer except to state this: you may want to talk 
about all of what you pretend to be jobs created and ignore all of 
these other people who are hurting, which you are doing now all 
afternoon. You refuse to address the big issue here. 
 
The issue is: that there are over 40,000 unemployed in 
Saskatchewan; that there has been an increase in the number of 
people who you are paying Saskatchewan assistance to from 
43,000 to 62,000; that there has been an increase in the number of 
employables on the welfare rolls since January of 1981 from 5,800 
to over 14,000;  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1784 
 
 

that the number of people who in one form or another rely on 
assistance to supplement their incomes, assistance from the 
government, has increased to over 231,000 — I think I once said 
261; I will correct that — 231,000. 
 
You go off on your tangent and you refuse, in the true and tried 
and traditional way of all Conservative governments, totally 
ignore these people on the lower end of income scales, these 
people who are poor, and these people who in many ways are 
unable to defend themselves. You spent so much time worrying 
about the wealthy and the established and the powerful that even 
when you answer and respond to these kinds of questions, you 
ignore the needs of these unfortunate type of people. 
 
Now I am not surprised, I am not surprised to hear you use that 
approach because that is the approach of all Conservative 
governments as long as history will record back — and the last 
one was in 1929, and that was their approach. Your approach in 
1986 is not one single bit different than the Conservative 
government of 1929, and I want you to consider, Mr. Minister, 
what happened to that government, and consider whether, indeed, 
that may not happen to your government because of your callous 
approach. 
 
Some people who have made representations to the city council of 
Regina have talked about the need for a declaration of war against 
poverty. And their comment simply was that the growing number 
of people under the Saskatchewan assistance plan indicates that 
the size of the war we, too, are fighting against poverty. You 
refuse to fight that war because you have other agenda. You're 
more concerned about the rhetoric of open for business than you 
are about the people in need, and I'm sure you'll agree with me, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you talk about how the welfare rates in 
Saskatchewan are the highest, and in some categories, they may 
be. I want to ask you another specific question. Is Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Minister, the only province in which . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I'll wait until . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That 
was last time, member from Moosomin. I'm not sure I've got the 
minister's attention. In order that I don't have to repeat my 
question, I'll wait until he's ready. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you're listening, can you tell me if 
Saskatchewan is the only province which does not allow people 
who are on SAP to retain their family allowance in the calculation 
of their benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the increase in the number of 
beneficiaries receiving assistance under the NDP, the last year that 
they were in power, from March '81 to March '82, was in the order 
of 5,000 people in one year that received an increase in, or were an 
increased part of the welfare rolls — 5,000 people one year. So 
when you compare that to March '83 to March '86, in fact we see 
not as many per year on average being added to the welfare rolls 
as were added the last year that your particular government was in 
power. So I think certainly we're moving in the right direction — 
fewer people on assistance today, jobs being created. 
 

And I've given you the list of the kinds of projects that we are 
bringing forward in Saskatchewan, now and in the future, that will 
benefit people that are on social assistance today who want to get 
off. And it's beyond me why you won't stand in your place and 
say, yes, we support the paper-mill in Prince Albert. One day one 
of your members stands up and says, it's the blackest day for the 
paper industry in the province. And the next day the Leader of the 
Opposition travels into northern Saskatchewan and he says, well, 
maybe it's a good thing. You have to be consistent. 
 
And what I have consistently heard in this particular Assembly is 
that you're not in favour of that particular project which is going to 
help get people off of social assistance. And whether it's that 
project, or the Regina upgrader, or the new Shand power project, 
or the Rafferty and Alameda dams, or the fertilizing 
manufacturing plant, or the irrigation projects, or the individual 
line service, or buying of the power lines, or the health facilities 
here in Saskatchewan, the rehab hospital which you people talked 
about for a long time but never delivered on, whether it's the meat 
processing facilities in North Battleford which you do not want to 
support — all of those kinds of projects are going to provide jobs 
for people that are unemployed today and that are on social 
assistance. 
 
That's a very compassionate approach, and I wish the members 
opposite would have the political courage to stand in their place 
and say, yes, we support those kinds of things. And I wish you 
would have the political courage to stand in your place and say, I 
don't want to see the government use taxpayers' dollars, or 
nationalize another potash mine because it won't create another 
job. And I wish you'd have the political courage to stand in your 
place and say, I don't want to see taxpayers' jobs used to set up a 
government-owned construction company which will bid against 
private contractors and force them out of business because I know 
that's not sound economic policy; and even though I'm a member 
of the NDP party, and even though one of my NDP candidate 
colleagues may support that, I don't. I wish you would have the 
political courage to stand in your place and say that. 
 
I certainly support the kind of things that this government has been 
doing, is doing today, and will do in the future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will you answer the question? 
I asked you: is Saskatchewan the only province that deducts 
family allowance from the benefits; and if so, Mr. Minister, how 
can you make the argument that, for example, someone who has 
got two children, and a single parent, has still got the highest 
benefits in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It's factored in. Even though that deduction 
does take place, we still are the highest in Canada for families. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You still didn't answer the question. Is 
Saskatchewan the only province that deducts it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, we are the only province that does that. 
That was your particular policy when you were  
  



 
June 9, 1986 

1785 
 

in government under the NDP. We haven't changed that particular 
policy. The reason why we haven't changed it is because, even 
though you take that deduction into account, the welfare rates that 
we provide to families are still the highest in the country. 
 
So if you would like us to change from the policy that you had 
when you were in power, then please make that recommendation. 
I understand that would cost the taxpayer in the order of some . . . 
I forget exactly how many millions of dollars more it would cost 
the taxpayer, and I'll get that for the member immediately — $14 
million more that the taxpayer would have to assume. 
 
Now I suspect the taxpayer would rather see that $14 million spent 
on the kinds of projects that we are talking about here, the kinds of 
project that I have just listed for you today, rather than to increase 
welfare rates for families which are already the highest in the 
country. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Here we go. Here we have a vivid example 
of your government's priorities. You don't have $14 million for 
mothers . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Look it, it's your policy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It may have been our policy, Mr. Member 
from Moosomin. Times change, and this government was 
supposed to do things so much better. What's gone wrong? It 
seems that we have gone the other way. 
 
Mr. Minister, you cannot find $14 million for mothers who are 
trying to raise their children based on the principle of the family 
allowance — you know what that family allowance is all about — 
but you can so easily find $20 million for Peter Pocklington. That 
is the kind of priorities that you have, Mr. Minister, that the public 
of Saskatchewan is beginning to question. 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, do you continue this policy when nowhere 
else in Canada is this policy in place? There must be a reason. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member talks about $14 
million not being available to mothers. Well I want to remind the 
member opposite that that was the policy under your 
administration, and instead of deciding to spend that money on 
welfare or somewhere else, you spent it nationalizing potash 
mines and uranium mines and buying land for the land bank, 
which certainly didn't help one mother in this province. 
 
Now what has this government done? Well, we've taken the tax 
off of clothing, and I don't know why you didn't do that. We took 
the tax off gasoline, and there are a lot of mothers that drive a lot 
of kids a lot of miles in this province, and that has certainly 
reduced their costs. We took the tax off power bills and that has 
reduced the cost to families in this province. So if you want to talk 
about reductions and costs to families, then we can stand here for a 
long time and compare the spending priorities of your government 
as it related to families. 
 
What about those families that were suffering with high interest 
rates — 18, 19, 20, 21 per cent? Did you lend a  

helping hand at that time? Not one twit of money came out of the 
federal treasury to help mothers and families that were in difficulty 
then. Not one dime came out — not one. 
 
Well it was this government that provided mortgage assistance to 
families to ensure that they had dollars in their pockets during that 
difficult time, and it's this particular government today that will 
continue to provide the kind of assistance to families that we 
believe in. We support families; you people supported Crown 
corporations, and there's a big difference. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


