


















































May 26, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 26, 1986 
  
 
 

1517 
 
 

  
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Co-operation and Co-operative Development 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 6 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want 
to inquire a little bit about the credit union system and particularly 
the inspection procedure, which were raised by my colleague, the 
member for Regina Centre, when this estimate was last before us. 
The question that I think is faced by the government, the 
department, is the extent to which you rely upon inspections 
conducted by the credit union movement, using the term broadly 
— particularly Credit Union Central — but the audits of the 
external auditors employed by the credit unions, and then the 
inspections and general supervision that is carried out by Credit 
Union Central, as opposed to the inspection system which is 
operated from the department. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you satisfied with the inspection systems as they 
now operate, and do you feel that they provide a reasonable 
measure of protection against substantial failures on the part of 
credit unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what 
credit union . . . Let me put it this way. What credit unions have 
experienced financial difficulties in the last 12 months, let us say, 
such that your department or — I'm reaching for a name — the 
mutual aid board, under its new name, or Credit Union Central, 
has had to step in and either provide auxiliary management or 
otherwise had to step in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there's six credit unions that 
have had some supervision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate the 
approximate size of these credit unions? It is obviously one thing 
if the parish credit union at Wakaw gets into some measure of 
difficulty, and I'm not for one moment suggesting it is, and quite 
another thing if the . . .to pick one out — and again understand, 
I'm not for one moment suggesting any difficulty — say, the 
Prince Albert Credit Union or some larger credit union. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand in the six, 
there's one with total assets of about $90 million, and the smallest 
one is about $1 million or a little better. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Clearly, Mr. Minister, at least one of 
them is a major credit union. 
 
With respect to the potential exposure of the deposit insurance 
corporation — I think I've got the right name now; that which was 
once known as the mutual aid board — approximately what 
exposure do you think that the deposit insurance corporation has 
now with respect to deposits which are guaranteed in the six credit 
unions which you have indicated? And now I'm talking  

maximum exposure and we should, I suppose, preface that by 
saying that it's the highest degree unlikely that the maximum 
would ever be reached. But in order to have a bench-mark, what is 
the maximum exposure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is, Mr. Chairman, that the 
deposit guarantee corporation would have about 22 million in 
guarantees that would be of some concern. but all the credit unions 
make it really clear that of the six, they're all in rehabilitation and 
they're all coming along really well. And we see and don't predict 
any problem at all with any of the six. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just to 
move along on this line of questioning: could you make a 
comment on the state of arrears that is being experienced by credit 
unions, more particularly the rural credit unions? Are they facing 
substantial arrears in outstanding loan payments, or are they not? 
 
My own experience in going about the province and asking credit 
union managers what their position is indicates that in general 
things are not too bad. But in certain pockets of the province, 
arrears are substantial with respect to credit unions. Would you 
care to make a comment on the state of arrears that is being faced 
by credit unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I understand that there 
has been a slight increase in delinquencies in some pockets, as the 
hon. member mentioned. But deposit guarantee corporation feel 
that there's no problem there, that they feel quite satisfied that it's 
come along quite well. And, in fact, in some areas they're doing 
exceptionally well. So there's pockets where they're not doing 
quite as well; in other areas they're doing quite well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, some 
time ago your predecessor expressed the view publicly that co-op 
activity could be significantly increased in the province by 
applying concepts utilized by the national consumer co-op 
development bank in Washington, and he indicated that he was 
taking some steps to see whether this model was applicable in 
Saskatchewan. And he indicated that in his trip to Washington he 
had been accompanied by Mr. Turner, the president of the wheat 
pool; and Mr. Leland, the president of Federated Co-ops; and the 
chief executive officer of the Co-op Trust Company, Ed Gebert; 
and the deputy minister. I wonder if you could give us any report 
on developments which may have ensued following this visit to 
Washington, D.C., about a year and a half ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the 
Washington model, as it was looked at, didn't quite fit 
Saskatchewan. But we've now worked with the major players in 
the co-operative movement, such as the wheat pool and the credit 
unions and Federated Co-op, and they've come up with a 
development corporation for Saskatchewan. In fact it's been 
ongoing for the last . . . well since we looked at the other model. 
And it's come a long ways. In fact, they're almost ready to 
announce a development corporation using the three or four major 
co-operators in Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1518 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, asking a 
few more questions along this line — and I'm now dealing with 
consumer co-ops as opposed to credit unions, as I think was the 
thrust of the Washington visit. My question really is this: there 
seems to be a fair amount of trouble in the consumer co-op area in 
Saskatchewan, in the sense that a number of the consumer co-ops 
are not being effectively directed by their board of directors, but 
rather pursuant to agreements with Federated Co-operatives 
Limited. And can you tell me which major co-ops are being 
operated pursuant to effective management contracts between the 
co-op and Federated, and which ones are operating in the standard 
way of management, reporting to their board and dismissable by 
their board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that 
there is only two that's working under a management agreement 
with Federated. I think you're aware of them both, one at the 
Saskatoon Co-op and the Sherwood Co-op here in Regina. 
 
But one thing we should say is that retail co-ops last year, 1985, 
had an excellent year in general, and that they feel very good 
about it. In fact it's the best year they've had in a few years. So as 
far as we know, that's the only two that has management . . . or is 
under management agreement with the Federated Co-op. And 
retail co-ops did last year have a really good year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister, I think you could have fooled the co-op members in 
Regina and Saskatoon about how good a year it was. And since 
they are the two largest consumer co-ops in Saskatchewan — I 
believe that to be accurate; I think each of them is larger at least in 
volume than Pioneer — can you tell me in general terms how 
those two very large co-ops fared, and can you give an indication 
of why they are experiencing the difficulties they are? And I don't 
think there's any point in denying it, when other co-opers are 
enjoying, as you say, a very good year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, the reason, or I'm told the reason that 
. . . The reason that the two major co-ops have problems is in the 
late 1970s and early '80s, they did some major renovations and 
changes to both retail outlets. At the same time their cost of 
borrowing and their cost of operating went up, and they also ran 
into the very highly competitive market out there. When things 
sort of started going down, the market was very, very competitive. 
And I'm sure you're aware that companies such as Eaton's and 
MacLeods, and some of them have had the same problems in 
some of the areas where they either didn't move into the 
competitive type market, or got caught by very highly competitive 
pricing out there. 
 
(1915) 
 
So these two, in our view anyway, run into the problem, not 
necessarily due to poor management or anything, but due to an 
expansion in the late '70s and early '80s. They then run into very 
highly competitive pricing, and at the same time interest rates in 
late 70s and early '80s. They then run into very highly competitive 
pricing, and at the same time interest rates in late '70s and early 
'80s were fairly high, and that hurt them quite a bit too because 
they  

do borrow to expand and build. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
wondering if you had any explanation for the fact that a number of 
my co-ops have either closed down their lumber yards or cut back 
an awful lot in my riding. 
 
Before you formed the government we had a good lumber outlet 
in Gravelbourg that was doing a good business; we had a good 
lumber outlet and a co-op in Lafleche that was doing a good 
business. Assiniboia built a very beautiful plant and home service 
centre that was selling lumber out of a big building that burnt 
down. When they rebuilt, they moved into much, much smaller 
quarters. The lumber yard in Coronach decided to go out of 
business. 
 
I wonder what you would give as a reason for this happening in 
one constituency, you know. Surely there's got to be, there's got to 
be some reason, there's got to be some reason and some . . .Now, 
now, some of your colleagues, particular members of the cabinet 
that are sitting around you, think it's funny — think it's funny. 
Saskatoon Sutherland and the furrier man thinks it's a joke. But I 
think it's a reflection — it's reflection on your government's 
direction and your government's policy. And I was wondering if 
you would want to just enlighten the Assembly and give us your 
view why Assiniboia didn't rebuild to the extent they were in and 
moved into a smaller quonset; why Lafleche decided to get right 
out of it and sell their building to a couple of private contractors 
that are selling a little bit of supply out of there; and why 
Gravelbourg decided to get right out of it, and Coronach decided 
to get right out of the lumber business. And I was wondering what 
you would give as a reason why something like that should 
happen during your administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a question, I'm 
sure, that only the membership of your co-ops in your 
constituency can answer. In regards to . . . They rationalize 
whether it's a good investment or not. A lot of those people, you're 
aware, probably know all the members or board of directors; they 
make a business decision and it's a business decision by the local 
board of directors for that co-op area. And if it's in your 
constituency I can't speak for that, because I don't really know. 
co-ops make their own decision. It's an internal decision that they 
make — a local decision by the local directors. And I suppose if 
it's in your constituency I would be talking to them and asking 
them that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, do you not relate the ability for 
lumber yards to be successful to a government's housing policy? 
Do you see any connection there at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the government's 
housing policy doesn't necessarily in any way reflect directly in 
rural Saskatchewan. We did back in 1983, Mr. Chairman, had a 
build-a-home program, and it did at that time stimulate in rural 
Saskatchewan, the small towns, quite a large number of new 
homes. But you know, new homes are built as the farmers and the 
area residents need them. But there is a lot of renovations or 
whatever goes on. Directly the government can only in one way or 
another stimulate so much. They did in 1983. They had a $3,000 
grant that was available. And now in  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1519 
 
 

1986, it's there available again. But I suppose farmers, like the rest 
of us, rationalize and say, should I build a new home this year, or 
should I make sure what the price of wheat is or what my job's 
going to do? And I think that's very important to recognize. Most 
farmers are very, very good business men. They take a look at it. 
They say, let's make sure — it looks like a great spring but let's 
make sure the crop's going to be there; let's make sure that I'm 
going to get a decent price for my grain — and then we'll take it 
from there. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Has that only happened, Mr. Minister, in the 
south-west or the south-central part of the province, or are there 
more? How many lumber yards did the co-op decide to go out of 
business? How many areas other than those in my area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, we don't 
have any number and if there's two lumber yards or 10 lumber 
yards, or how many has been added, new lumber yards been 
added, to the co-op retail outlet. They're registered as a co-op for 
an area, whether it's Assiniboia or whether it's Gravelbourg or 
wherever it is. And they make those decisions internally 
themselves, and they work, I'm sure, with Federated Co-op to help 
make some of those decisions. 
 
I can speak only for my own area, but I could think of my own 
area where the co-op has both expanded the lumber yard in 
Tisdale; they put a new home centre in Hudson Bay; they've go to 
a new home centre in Porcupine; and in Archerwill they rebuilt the 
whole lumber yard — and we're right in the midst of forest up 
there. 
 
So I can't speak for your area particularly nor any other area. But I 
do know that co-ops in fact are putting up or renovating new areas, 
or new lumber yards. And certainly some would be closing — and 
businesses close and change around. But I can't speak for them; 
they'd have to make that decision themselves. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, I'm not saying that that decision came from 
your department. But I'm wondering: as Minister of Co-ops, are 
you aware of lumber yards, in particular in the building industry 
like that, that have consolidated, decided to move to smaller 
premises, or decided to discontinue selling lumber for a while? 
Are you aware? Do you keep a catalogue, or do you know how 
many co-ops there are? As the Minister of Co-ops do you have so 
little concern for the co-op movement that you don't even know 
how many co-ops have built new lumber yards, or how many have 
stayed pat, and how many have moved out of the business? 
 
And I think that's one area that the minister should know what's 
going on. And I'm wondering if you have a number of the ones . . . 
of how many that decided to pack it in; and that under your 
administration it's not worth stocking lumber and trying to sell it 
because the people aren't going to make enough money to build 
houses. And I think that's a reflection on your government. Now 
as a department and as Minister of Co-ops, surely you know. You 
didn't know how much money your guys in Sask Forest Products 
were getting; you didn't know quite a few answers yesterday; and 
I'm wondering if you at least know how many lumber yards closed 
down in  

Saskatchewan last year or during the last term of office. And I 
think that isn't asking too much for the Minister of Co-ops. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't know and we 
don't keep track of how many lumber yards have closed or if 
they've opened new ones in the province. We could probably get 
that information in he'd like, and I'm sure if he asked the Federated 
Co-op over here as member, they would probably give him the 
information, too. I don't believe it's a secret in any way. That's up 
to the co-ops. 
 
They run their own business. We don't run them. We're only out 
there just to assist and to help set one up; or if they have problems, 
to advise them. We don't necessarily in any way have anything to 
do with it, period. We don't have anything to do with the retail 
outlets in this province that's run by Federated Co-op or any other 
co-operative movement, in that regards of running the operation. 
 
There's 1,313 co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan as of 
March 31, 1986. Of that, 217 are credit unions; 1,060 are 
provincially incorporated co-operatives; 29 are registered 
co-operatives under the credit unions; and incorporated 
co-operatives under special legislation is 7: to make a total of 
1,313. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Out of those 1,313, how many of the co-ops that 
are organized were selling lumber as of 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 
particularly, and I'm sure that if he asked Federated Co-op, they'd 
give it to him. We'll get it for him if he likes. Like I say, it's no 
secret. We don't have it because we don't run the co-ops. Let's 
make that really clear. We do not run the Federated Co-op or any 
local co-operative. We're only there at an advisory level, if there's 
some problems. The only thing that we do, we do the inspection of 
the credit unions. That's basically all we do and an inspection of 
the co-op audits. And basically, that's all. And we don't have 
nothing to do with the operating of the retail outlets in this 
province. That's run by the local co-operative, and sometimes with 
management assistance form Federated Co-ops, but certainly not 
from this government. Nor should we. That's run . . . They've got 
the membership out there; it's almost 500,000 on the membership 
list. They also have very good board of directors in most cases. 
They hire usually very competent managers. And why should the 
government in any way at all, interfere with them? I think they're 
doing an excellent job. They've come through some pretty tough 
times. They look really good, and I just think they're doing well. 
And they do not need or do not want government interference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — I can see the member for Yorkton clapping and I 
can see the member for Weyburn clapping and they think it's 
great. They think it's great to respond and clap to the Minister of 
Co-ops that says, here's a business; we're the Department of 
Co-ops, but you guys, you're on your own; you go in this rough 
world of economics and you make it go. And I want to tell you, 
Mr. Minister, that's about as much as you did for the Department 
of Co-ops. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1520 
 
 

And I'd wager that if you'd ever get another term to serve as 
Minister of Co-ops, you'd even do less for them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What would you do? 
 
Mr. Engel: — What would I do, I was asked. Well I'll tell you, 
Mr. Minister. I'd know how many co-op lumbers were in enough 
trouble that they had to close. I'd know that much. I'd know how 
many had closed under our administration. And I'd know why they 
were in trouble. 
 
As Minister of Co-ops . . . And I don't know, Mr. Chairman. If 
you're not going to keep the member from Weyburn from 
hollering from his seat that I have to keep raising my voice louder 
and louder to try and drown him out . . but if you aren't going to 
tell him to be quiet, I will. So would the member for Weyburn 
please keep his trap . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I think that members on both 
sides have considerable trouble listening to . . . Order! Order! I can 
hear you very plainly now. Order! Order! The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, my colleagues were quietly 
supporting me. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I said the debate continues. That 
subject is over; the debate continues. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'm certainly not agreed to the attitude this 
government has towards co-ops in Saskatchewan. I'm not agreed 
to say that I would sit by and let all those guys hoot and holler 
about co-op lumber yards closing down and thinking it s a big joke 
and that the minister has no responsibility and doesn't offer any 
advice or any consideration or any help or advise his caucus for 
programs saying, look, there's lumber yards failing across 
Saskatchewan; there's got to be a reason for it — there's got to be a 
reason for it. There's got to be a reason why four neighbouring 
lumber yards in four towns across southern Saskatchewan had to 
close their doors. There's a reason for that. 
 
That's not the local management, because I know every manager; I 
could name them for you. Every manager of those lumber yards 
were the best of guys. They knew how to run a lumber yard; they 
were doing a good job. But there's a reason why those fellows had 
to close their doors. 
 
There was a fire in a brand-new plant in Assiniboia. The home 
centre in Assiniboia burned. And when they rebuilt, instead of 
building a $200,000 plant like they had, they moved into a 
quonset. They consolidated their program to keep the lumber yard 
from . . . and keep the co-op from losing money. There's a reason 
for that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now if you think that you have no responsibility at all, that shows 
where you're coming from. Like I talked to some young kids from 
Assiniboia today; there's a difference between our basic 
philosophy, between what you stand for, and what you and what 
we do. We have a different philosophy towards the co-op 
movement, and I am sure there's never been an administration 
under my  

leader's administration in 11 years of government where the 
minister of co-ops wasn't aware of co-op lumber yards shutting 
down, wouldn't know how many shut down. It wouldn't be heard 
of — it wouldn't be heard of. It's a disgrace that the minister 
doesn't know what's going on in the co-op movement. 
 
Surely you let them go. That's like father saying, my kids have a 
chance to go and run and do what they want; I'm not interested. 
Mr. Minister, you're the father of co-ops. You should be 
concerned about the co-op movement. And when the co-op 
movement's in trouble . . . And I know the member for P.A.-duck 
Lake's hollering louder, louder, and he can't keep his mouth shut 
during this debate. But I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that there's 
going to be a lot of your colleagues in big trouble because you 
didn't know what's happening in the co-op movement and you 
didn't care. 
 
(1930) 
 
You created an environment where the co-ops decided it's better to 
close their doors; it's better to walk out of our lumber yards and 
leave them sit empty than to continue operating. And that's a 
serious decision, but that's a reflection on the mood in 
Saskatchewan today. It's better to fold up and close up than to stay 
open with this administration, and I think it's a reflection on you 
that you don't even care and haven't got the numbers. 
 
Now I asked you: out of 1,313 co-op movements in 
Saskatchewan, how many of those sold lumber? Can't you tell me 
that much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't resist thinking 
that the hon. member is suggesting that governments should be big 
daddy to co-ops and they should be out there running them. That is 
absolutely . . . I just can't believe anybody would suggest that. I 
believe — sincerely believe — that the co-operative movement in 
this province can run their own business. I don't think they need us 
or anybody else to tell them how to run it. They live by the rules 
and they abide by the rules. 
 
And just to inform the legislature here and the people of 
Saskatchewan how we have worked with the co-operative 
movement over the last four years, and just to tell you some of the 
things that we did that was never done before, something they 
have been asking for many years — you know, a new co-op Act 
was brought in here — in fact enacted here just about six months 
ago — and it combined three outdated Acts. The Acts were put 
together over the last years and was brought in, I believe, effective 
January 1, '86 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, October. Then 
we brought in the new credit union Act. It replaced the 1937 Act. 
 
And they have been asking, both the members opposite when they 
were government and us, to bring forward a new Act. We brought 
it forward with all their consultation. We worked with them over 
the last three years. And in fact that was January 1, 1986. That's 
the date that became law. I believe it's a good Act, and I believe 
that the credit union people are very happy with it. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1521 
 
 

The co-op upgrader, working with the Federated Co-op over here 
. . . And now we're in the process of building a brand-new 
upgrader for this province using heavy oil. Up till then 98 per cent 
of all the oil used in the refinery here, or still is in the refinery 
down here, came from Alberta. They couldn't use our own oil in 
Saskatchewan. When this is put into place they'll be able to use the 
oil from Saskatchewan. That's important. That's jobs for this 
province. 
 
So that's just a few. Also they should know that there's 18 district 
representatives around this province who work with small 
co-operative movements, whether it be setting up a day care for 
children where women are working, and they need a place, a small 
day care, in a small town; whether it be a small co-operative 
movement; whether it be an agricultural small co-operative 
movement; whether it be a seed cleaning plant. I'm sure there's 
many of them been set up, just to list a few — what we've been 
doing out there during the last four years. And we've worked very 
closely with them. We ask them for their advice. They give us lots 
of help, and I mean lots of help. They give us lots of direction, and 
I believe that it's working really well. And they're very satisfied 
with the way we have worked with them to put in place some of 
the things they would have liked to have seen over the last few 
years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — It's interesting that the minister would want to talk 
about day cares when we're talking about lumber yards. That's 
really interesting, Mr. Minister. And I have no problem with day 
care co-ops, but the problem I have is what attitude and what 
position you have taken as far as some lumber yards that were in 
trouble is concerned. 
 
You mentioned the heavy oil upgrader. Are you saying you 
weren't big daddy in that operation? Are you saying you weren't 
the daddy involved, like I'd be starting my son in a business and 
helping him — putting up some cash? Are you saying you weren't 
fulfilling that role in the upgrader? That's an example you use. 
 
All I'm asking you, Mr. Minister is: of those 1,313 co-ops, how 
many were selling lumber? Can't you give me that answer? Aren't 
you going to talk about that? And I'd like to know how many were 
in the lumber business in '86 and how many were in the lumber 
business in '82, and let's do some comparisons. Let's see when we 
can get these numbers out before the people so they know the kind 
of environment you've created; so they know the kind of 
environment you've created for co-op movements and for the 
co-op movement to succeed and to get ahead. And you know it, 
and I know it; that we never interfered or influenced co-ops in any 
way, shape or form as far as either aggressively promoting or 
dictating policies, or directions, or dragging our feet the other way. 
 
I think there's a role the Department of Co-ops should play, and 
one of those roles is: at least the minister and his officials around 
him here tonight would be aware if there's a certain, serious 
problem in one aspect of the co-op movement. I'm suggesting in 
southern Saskatchewan there's a problem in the lumber industry. 
That problem is created by the decisive plans of this government; 
the decisive plans of this government have made it impossible for 
lumber yards to survive. And I'm  

wondering what kind of advice you gave them. 
 
You said your role is one of an advisory role. What kind of advice 
did you give either Federated or Gravelbourg Co-op, or Coronach 
Co-op, or Lafleche Co-op? What kind of advice did you give those 
people as far as their lumber businesses were concerned? What 
role did you play, and why did you tell them, fold your tents and 
silently steal away? Why did you give them that direction? Why 
didn't you tell them, there will be a brighter day? Why didn't you 
tell them what your housing plans are going to be so that these 
people could sell some housing units? 
 
I think what this demonstrates clearly is that you likely have 
friends in the lumber business. You have friends like 
Weyerhaeuser. You decided to interfere there. You decided to put 
up a pulp-mill for them, and give them the timber industry and 
one-quarter of Saskatchewan's timber, with nothing down and 
don't pay unless you make a profit. That's the kind of deal you 
make for them. What kind of a deal did you have for . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order! I'm certain that that 
pulp-or paper-mill, or whatever has to do with that, has absolutely 
nothing to do with the subject we're on. And let's get on with the 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I have a hard time stretching my 
imagination to see where you're coming from. How we can have 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! I have made my ruling. That is 
final, and it has no place in this discussion. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, I will tell you how I 
related Weyerhaeuser's deal to the co-op lumber. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! I am determined that this is not 
part of this discussion and will not tolerate it. So let's get on with 
the estimates. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, we can set up some rules, what 
we'll discuss, and I'll abide by your ruling. I'll abide by your ruling. 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Minister: how much local timber does 
the Federated Co-op lumber market and distribute in 
Saskatchewan? How much of their timber that they're selling . . . 
How much of the lumber they sell comes from local timber? What 
percentage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The first part of your question there, when 
you asked about why they would close lumber yards in the area — 
one of the reasons they may have been closing some retail outlets 
in the area, and I only say maybe, is that the co-operatives have 
went into what they call area development. And certainly we hear 
very much of what the wheat pool has done — exactly the same 
thing with their retail outlet and their fertilizers and chemicals and 
their farm supplies. They have gone into area development where 
they have one outlet that services a trading area, they call it. 
 
That may be true in your area down there; I don't know. It's a 
decision made conscientiously by whether it be the wheat pool for 
their farm service, or for the co-operatives 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1522 
 
 

for their farm service. And you know, like, that's the decision they 
would make and we do not in any way have anything to say about 
that; and like I said earlier, nor should we. 
 
So just put it, maybe one of the reasons it happened . . . Now I 
don't know; in the areas that I'm familiar with it hasn't happened, 
although it did happen with Sask Wheat Pool. They did in fact 
consolidate all their farm supplies into one area that service a large 
trading area. But other than that, we just don't . . . And the answer 
to your last question, was: what percentage of lumber that is sold 
in Saskatchewan would co-operatives sell? I wouldn't know. We 
could probably ask Federated Co-op and they would maybe have 
some breakdown, but there's a large number, almost 1,000 retail 
outlets in the province. How many of them are lumber yards and 
what percentage of lumber they sell, I would have no idea. We 
could get it for you, but I'd have to go to Federated Co-op. It's their 
business; they run their own shops and they would give it to us; 
we would certainly pass it on to you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You represent an area that personally as a minister 
and as a local MLA that has a number of sawmills in your area. 
How much of the timber that is sawed and cut in Saskatchewan 
would you say is marketed through Saskatchewan's lumber yards, 
through the Saskatchewan co-op lumber yards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I couldn't answer that, but one thing I 
could mention while I'm answering your question is that Federated 
Co-ops have their own lumber mills in B.C. and they basically 
bring all their lumber from B.C. into Saskatchewan. We tried two 
or three times to sell to them from Sask Forest Products but 
because they have their own mills, although it was probably 
cheaper buying from Sask Forest Products, they felt they should at 
least keep their own mills operating out there. So it was a decision 
by Federated Co-op at that time to continue to operate their mills 
in B.C. and bring the lumber in from there. 
 
So I believe they sell very little of Saskatchewan lumber, except 
for maybe, say, a bit of plywood . . .or not even that, maybe. I 
don't know, maybe a bit of lumber where they run short in some of 
the areas. But basically, most of the lumber comes from B.C. to 
the Federated Co-ops. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'm aware of that, Mr. Minister. And I was just 
wondering if you at least knew that much about it. I'm pleased that 
you know what's going on. 
 
But the point I was making is that you were prepared to go to a 
company like Weyerhaeuser, assign to them a large bulk of timber 
in Saskatchewan, and yet you're not prepared to give the same 
kind of deal to Federated. If you would give to Federated the same 
kind of deal like you did to Weyerhaeuser. I'm sure they'd sell 
Saskatchewan timber — I'm sure they'd sell Saskatchewan timber, 
and they wouldn't have had to close down. They wouldn't have 
had to close down their lumber yards. 
 
And as far as taking and using this other argument that you're 
saying, that they're consolidating their lumber sales; they've 
consolidated to the place that . . . Where I live, if I'd want to buy 
lumber from a co-op lumber yard,  

I'd have to go a long ways because there just isn't one around. 
There just isn't one around. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, I'm personally very, very disappointed in 
the Department of Co-ops and the kind of advice and the kind of 
stability you give to the industry, that in an area . . . And you take 
and look at a map and you go from Gravelbourg down to 
Coronach. And you have a small lumber yard at Assiniboia, but all 
the others around that were there, that were selling lumber when 
we were government, are not selling lumber today. And I think 
that is a measure of the success of your Department of Co-ops. 
That is how you measure the Department of Co-ops and how 
effective they are. 
 
And the people around the constituency are going to know that 
that's the kind of opportunity and that's the kind of business 
climate you provide. So close them up; shut them down. If you 
can't make it, move out. That's the Co-ops' attitude when you're 
running a Department of Co-ops from a Conservative philosophy. 
When you have a Conservative right-wing philosophy like yours, 
you can stand up in this House and say, we're not going to 
interfere — we're not going to interfere. But you do with some 
other companies. 
 
If you want to process pork, give him a $20 million loan guarantee 
and a $10 million forgivable loan. If you want to saw off timber 
— if you want to saw off timber and grind it down to pulp, give it 
to them free of charge. No payments, unless you make a profit. 
 
But if you've got a co-op lumber yard, your answer to them is, shut 
her down. And, Mr. Minister, that is what this next election's 
going to be all about. And that's the millstone that's hanging 
around your head as Minister of Co-ops. You have done it to them 
— not for them — as minister. You've done it to them. And all the 
co-op lumber yards in my area that are not operating know the 
kind of deal you gave Weyerhaeuser. They know the kind of deal 
Pocklington got. They know the kind of deals you have for your 
other friends. But they know that when it comes to co-ops — go it 
alone; go it alone. 
 
You can bring all the goons in you want to do the hollering here, 
Mr. Chairman. I don't mind. But the minister has to answer for this 
one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all to make it 
absolutely clear that whoever cuts forests in northern 
Saskatchewan . . . And I can sure tell the hon. member has never 
been up where the forest is. I an tell you. He doesn't understand 
the forest industry, and I'm not going to go into a long related story 
about forest industry. But just to say that anybody that cuts forests 
on Crown lands pays stumpage, pays the due directly to the 
Consolidated Fund of this province. It always has and always will, 
I would assume. So anybody that cuts forest will do that, 
regardless of any other deals. 
 
But what he has said up there this evening sort of upsets me a little 
bit. What he is saying — that he doesn't believe that the co-op are 
good enough managers to compete with the private retail outlets. 
And I can tell you something — that's not true. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1523 
 
 

(1945) 
 
I compete actively in the town of Hudson Bay against the co-op, 
and they're my best competition I've got. They're excellent 
managers, run an excellent shop. And I have a great deal of respect 
for them. 
 
They are in fact as good as, or if not better than, a lot of private 
sector people in this province. And I believe that they're 
competent, that they can run their own business, and they don't 
need us in there telling them how to do it. In fact, in some cases 
they can run it better than we can. 
 
So I can see no . . . And I would wonder why the member would 
say . . . But that's what he really said. He said, I don't believe 
they're good enough managers in his areas to compete with the 
private sector. 
 
And that's just unbelievable, and I don't believe that at all. I 
believe he's mistaken; that he's got the wrong idea there. That 
probably was an area development, and the co-operative in my 
view anyway can run a very, very good shop — have for almost 
100 years now, will continue to do so for many, many more years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you know I didn't say 
that. 
 
You are putting words in my mouth that you're intentionally 
misleading this House tonight. Because I never said that. I told 
you that I'll put the managers in my co-op areas that I know that 
were the lumber managers up against any manager in 
Saskatchewan. I told you that at the start. They're the best 
managers around. 
 
And the thing is, Mr. Minister, I didn't raise with you — I didn't 
raise with you the private lumber yards that closed down. I never 
listed them because we're talking about the Department of Co-ops. 
We're not talking about the private sector. If you want a list of the 
private lumber yards that closed down, I can give you those too. 
 
You cannot — in a town of 1,200, the size of Coronach — you 
cannot buy a board. You can't buy a piece of plywood in Coronach 
today, thanks to your climate. It can't be done. There's nobody 
selling it, and there were two lumber yards selling lumber in 
Coronach. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, your government is a dismal 
failure in the co-op sector. It's a dismal failure in the private sector. 
It's a dismal failure when it comes to creating a climate where 
people will survive; where people will build houses; where people 
will buy lumber that'll make those things go. 
 
The point I'm making, in spite of all the hollering that the member 
for Kindersley and all the other members are doing — the point 
I'm making, Mr. Minister, loud and clear, Mr. Minister, is: don't 
tell people that I said the co-ops are poor managers because you 
know that is a dishonest statement that I never made in this House, 
and anybody listening tonight will know I never made that 
statement. 
 
The statement I'm making, Mr. Minister, is that you didn't provide 
the climate where these people could survive. 

And they decided to shut her down because they didn't get the 
direction from you as to what they should do. 
 
And I said they didn't get the kind of help that Weyerhaeuser got, 
or Peter Pocklington got. You didn't have any money for them, 
and your loan guarantees or any inexpensive money. You had . . . 
You know the words this man is using? Do you tolerate that kind 
of language in this Assembly? Do you really tolerate that? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I cannot hear what any other member 
is saying. I would ask that there be, or the House be . . . come to 
order, and carry on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, when the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena's hollering the obscenities like he is in this 
House, and you don't hear it — you don't hear it — you've got 
tunnel vision. You've got tunnel hearing. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Sit down. I said order. This 
sitting is not going to continue in this manner. I demand that this 
House come to order and get on with the proper order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. I want to ask 
whether we in the House here have to take the obscenities that are 
being thrown at us, as loud that can be totally heard from the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order! Order! Order! 
Order! I did not hear anything. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the 
comments of the member from Quill Lakes who rises on a point of 
order and suggests . . . Speaking to the point of order that he 
raised, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the 
member from Quill Lakes — you want to talk about the pot 
calling the kettle black! — when he talks about any other 
members in this House, that member from Quill Lakes to stand in 
the House and talk . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. A point of order is not debatable. 
We'll continue with the debate. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, in the middle of an argument, if 
somebody uses the kind of profanities . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! The debate will continue or we'll 
go on with another member's question. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate you calling 
order because I don't like it when profanities are called from my 
back from the member from . . . when the members are doing this. 
And I think I was debating a point of order and . . .I was not 
debating a point of order; I was debating a situation. I was 
debating a situation that talked about the business climate that is 
being created by this government. And the members have become 
very, very sensitive. All of a sudden members are starting to slur 
my remarks with profanities and I don't like it, Mr. Chairman. And 
I wish you would listen as these members are doing that. I wish 
you would listen. Because I think it's outrageous . . . 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1524 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! I have already ruled on that point of 
order, and I asked that the debate continue. And if you're not going 
to continue the debate, I'll take a question from another member. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I am talking about the environment 
in Saskatchewan that is conducive to lumber yards making some 
money and staying afloat. That hasn't happened during your term 
of office. This government's business climate is such that lumber 
yards haven't been able to survive on the private sector. And if you 
want the list of those that haven't survived on the private sector, I 
can give them to you. And if you want the list of those that 
survived and can't survive under co-ops, we'll talk about those — 
we'll talk about those that haven't been able to survive. 
 
And Mr. Minister, for you to interfere, for you to interfere and say 
that I'm saying that co-ops are not good managers, I think is 
despicable, because I didn't say that. I said that the managers in 
Gravelbourg, the manager in Lafleche, the manager at Coronach, 
were very good lumber managers. They knew their business. They 
knew their business. I've dealt with the managers from both 
Lafleche and Gravelbourg over my lifetime of living down there. 
Those guys were running a good business. They decided they had 
to close their lumber yards because of the business climate that's 
there. And I think it's a reflection, it's a reflection on your housing 
plans, and that's one of the reasons — that's one of the reasons, 
Mr. Chairman — why we came out with a housing package that's 
going to create an environment that lumber yards will survive, that 
people will have jobs. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Chairman, that in the lumber yard in 
Gravelbourg that there were five employees at one time? Five 
people! That's what we got, thanks to the environment you 
provided for the lumber yard there. 
 
In the lumber yard in Lafleche there weren't five; there were only 
four — there were only four. And you know, Mr. Chairman, I am 
depressed when I go to Lafleche and look at the business 
environment you've provided for that community. That 
community has tried everything and even mentioned in the budget 
how they have provided incentives so that the people don't have to 
pay their business tax. Anything to survive. Anything to survive 
and stay alive they've done to help their local businesses. But 
under this administration they weren't successful to keep a lumber 
yard going in the co-op movement. 
 
In Assiniboia there was a beautiful large plant on the corner; the 
nicest home service centre in Saskatchewan, as far as I'm 
concerned. It was a big plant. It was great. It was modern. It had 
good show facilities. It was a beautiful building, but you know, 
they had the misfortune of having a fire. They had a fire. And 
when it burnt down, Mr. Chairman, do you know what they did? 
They didn't rebuild the $200,000 plant like they had there; they 
built a quonset. And they put up a little quonset hut to store some 
lumber. And they're going to survive and operate under that 
quonset because of the business climate that you've created there. 
That's what they're doing in Assiniboia. 

Coronach built a new lumber yard since the town expanded. The 
co-op built a new lumber yard, a good building, a fabulous 
building. That building is empty. Today that building is standing 
empty as a sign of the times — a sign of the times. The times are 
this, that under a PC government, under a PC administration, times 
are tough. You don't build houses; you don't build buildings; you 
don't build garages. You don't expand and develop and fix things 
up. You sit tight and hope for a brighter day and hope for a better 
climate. 
 
And that's the kind of climate you have provided for 
Saskatchewan. And I think that it's typical, it's typical of Tory 
Saskatchewan where things are dismal. The guys that built are 
sorry they did because they're having trouble making their 
payments. And the guys that didn't build closed their facilities 
down because you haven't provided the business climate. And you 
haven't been able to generate the enthusiasm to keep those places 
alive. 
 
And it speaks well for the Minister of Co-ops that doesn't even 
know how many co-op lumber yards we've got in Saskatchewan. 
That's the sign of the interest the Department of Co-ops has in the 
co-operative movement. You don't want to give me how many 
lumber yards there are today compared to how many lumber yards 
there were in 1982 because it'll show you up. There's only one 
reason why you won't give me those numbers. I don't believe it for 
a minute that you don't know the answer. I don't believe it for a 
moment. 
 
When there are four to one, and one of those is half throttle in my 
riding, I know what it must be like right across Saskatchewan. I 
know what it must be like. And so I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, 
you don't know those answers and you don't care about those 
answers because, as far as you're concerned and like you said here 
before, they'll survive on their own. Well sure they will. They've 
been around for a long time, but they're also waiting for a brighter 
day when they can have a chance at a government that cares about 
the co-ops — cares about the co-ops. 
 
And I'll tell you, they will flourish again. And the day will come, 
those plants will reopen, and they will be booming, and people 
will be working, and jobs will be out there. And there won't only 
be five guys selling lumber in Gravelbourg; there will be another 
50 carpenters at work, nailing that lumber up. And I want to tell 
you, that's the kind of depressed economy we've got in 
Saskatchewan, thanks to the environment you've created. 
 
So I want to just close this portion of it, Mr. Chairman, by saying 
that that's the kind of Co-op minister we've got that doesn't even 
know how many lumber yards we've got in the co-op movement. I 
think it's an indication of a minister that didn't know what he was 
paying his manager of Sask Forest Products. And the story we've 
gone through over and over again — $10,000 a month, and he was 
getting paid for his grocery allowance; he was getting paid to fly 
back and forth to Vancouver. You know, Mr. Member for Wilkie, 
that you're in trouble. You know your . . . 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1525 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I think the last few minutes 
that the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was speaking, I think 
I should just outline for him some of the things that are happening 
in the co-operative movement and have happened over the last few 
years, just to bring him up to date so he understands what the 
co-operative movement in this province stands for and what they 
do for this province. I'm not sure he really understands the role 
they play here. 
 
Did you know that over 80 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers 
market all or some of their agricultural products through 
co-operatives; and in total co-operatives and credit unions 
employed 13,770 people in this province; and the total sales by 
Saskatchewan co-operatives exceeds $6.1 billion dollars during 
1984 - '85? 
 
And did you know the total assets of Saskatchewan co-operatives 
exceeds $6.4 billion; and that they have 200 retail co-operatives 
with 82 branches that had sales of 722 million in '84 and '85? This 
accounts for 16.3 per cent of the total retail sales in this province. 
That retail co-operatives employ 4,000 Saskatchewan people 
including both full-time and part-time employees, with the total 
salaries paid in excess of $60 million? 
 
That 47 co-operative day cares represent 55 per cent of all the 
licensed day cares in this province? 
 
That 90 per cent of all the fish is marketed through fish 
co-operatives in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
That 218 credit unions with 140 branches have total assets in 
excess of $3.9 billion and they have a membership of 566,867? 
That credit unions employ 2,450 Saskatchewan residents and they 
have total salaries of $53 million? That the total assets of credit 
unions account for 25 per cent of all the deposits combined 
financial institutions in Saskatchewan? That credit union loans 
account for 19 per cent of all the loans in Saskatchewan? 
 
That 30 per cent of all the residential mortgages in Saskatchewan 
and 17 per cent of all the farm loans are through credit unions? 
That 16 continued housing co-operatives have over 700 housing 
units? 
 
(2000) 
 
That 20 per cent of all the people employed by financial insurance 
and real estate industry in Saskatchewan are employed by the 
co-operative? That 10 per cent of all people employed by the 
transportation and storage industry in Saskatchewan are employed 
by co-operatives? 
 
That the Co-operators continue to rank as one of the top three life 
insurances in Saskatchewan amongst approximately 105 different 
life insurance companies; their total market share in terms of life 
insurance is approximately 10 per cent. The Co-operators also 
have a 10 per cent market share in terms of property insurance. 

That in 1985 listing of Saskatchewan top 100 firms, four of the top 
10 co-operatives in the total of 28 co-operatives are included in 
this top listings? The two largest industries with headquarters in 
the province of Saskatchewan are Saskatchewan Wheat pool and 
Federated Co-ops — just to give you an idea of what the 
co-operative movement in this province is all about. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary there, Mr. Chairman. It's interesting 
that you'd know how many day-care co-ops there are and you'd 
know some of those numbers, and you wouldn't know how many 
retail lumber yards there are. I still can't believe that with all the 
lists you've got there that you wouldn't know how many retail 
lumber yards are operating in 1986, January of this year. How 
many were selling boards? Surely you'd have that number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, a lumber yard is part of 
a retail outlet in Archerwill, Saskatchewan — Archerwill, 
Saskatchewan, if anybody happens to know where it is. They have 
a large co-op store with a lumber yard right attached to it, and 
that's part of the retail outlet in Archerwill, Saskatchewan. 
 
In Tisdale, Saskatchewan — if anybody's been to Tisdale, 
Saskatchewan — Federated Co-op, it's one retail outlet, the 
lumber yard and their food store. So that's how it's set up. 
 
So many, many places . . . I'm sure the hon. member knows that in 
his area many places — many places — are just one retail outlet. 
So I can tell him the number of retail outlets in this province. I 
don't know what those retail outlets sell. I don't know what the 
Federated Co-op buy or where they buy it from. We have tried to 
sell them some, as I said earlier, Saskatchewan Forest Products, 
some of the lumber, but they bring it in from B.C. I understand 
that Federated Co-op are trying to get out of the forest industry 
even in B.C. I understand that one of their mills out there they've 
already closed. 
 
But getting back to the retail outlets, I can't tell you how many 
lumber retail outlets the co-operatives have in this province. I can 
give you the total number of retail outlets that's under the 
co-operative movement in this province, and that's what I've done 
— there's 200 of them. And they sell $722 million worth of sales, 
and that's 16.3 of the total sales of this province. I can tell you that. 
That's lumber yard, that's farm supplies, that's all the stuff, 
anything that goes with it — groceries and hardware and all the 
other stuff that would ordinarily be sold in this province. 
 
So I can't tell you how many lumber yards. But, like I told the 
member earlier and I'll tell him again: if he wants to know, I'll ask 
Federated Co-op and we'll be sure and send it to him. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The point I'm making very clearly is that the 
Minister of Co-ops should have no problem — no problem — 
keeping an eye on the industry and knowing what's happening by 
watching how are our retail fuel sales going, how is our grocery 
sales going, and how is the lumber industry going, and how is the 
merchandising going as far as even clothing are concerned. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1526 
 
 

I'm aware, Mr. Minister, and I'm sure as you are from personal 
experience, that the co-op has decided for some reason or other to 
get out of many of their outlets where they're selling dry goods and 
clothing. They've decided that that aspect of the business isn't 
profitable. I don't know if it's because people want to be more 
selective or what, but there are less co-op outlets selling clothing 
today than there were, say, 10 years ago. 
 
One of the keys that have changed dramatically in the co-op 
movement is the changes that they've made as far as it reflects on 
lumber. And I think the Minister of Co-ops should know why 
that's happening, and especially somebody that is also the minister 
of Sask Forest Products. Somewhere along the line, like you're 
talking to them in the Federated for a heavy oil upgrader, the same 
kind of philosophy should be applying, and you should be using 
your technology and your experience, and your dual role is so 
effective right now. 
 
This is a tremendous opportunity you had, Mr. Minister, that you 
passed up in the longest term that we've ever had a government 
since the war. You've had the longest term — don't tell me you 
haven't had enough time. 
 
But here you've been, coming from the forest end of 
Saskatchewan where there's the sawmills and the timber industry, 
and everything's there — coming from that area and representing 
those people and those industries — and seeing in the movement, 
in the co-op movement, seeing there's trouble in the lumber 
industry, why you couldn't say to them, let's get this thing 
together? There's got to be a reason, there's got to be a reason, 
there's got to be a reason . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Chairman, are you going to keep order in here, or are you going to 
just let him bray away? 
 
Mr. Minister, there's got to be a reason, and you've got a solution. 
You have a solution at your disposal that you could be talking in 
your role as adviser and as Minister of Co-ops and as minister of 
Sask Forest Products. 
 
Why did you give it all away to Weyerhaeuser? Why did you give 
it all to him when you could have saved a little bit and given some 
to the area where you're minister of as far as the co-op movement 
is concerned and the co-op lumber movement is concerned? Why 
did you have to give it all to Weyerhaeuser, with no repayment 
unless there's a profit, when you could have given the lumber 
industry some of the sawmills and some of the lumber aspect of it? 
 
And here's where it demonstrates that you care more for your 
wealthy friends in big business than you do the co-op movement. 
It's a reflection on your government and your inability to help in a 
situation where there's some trouble —plus not providing a good 
climate for building houses. Plus that is the real — that is the real 
— measure of the success of the government. That's the real 
measure of success — you haven't provided the atmosphere and 
the climate for these people to survive and to get by. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, just stand up and tell us you've been a 
dismal failure when it comes to the lumber aspect  

of co-ops, and we know that then you'd finally be telling the truth 
and calling a spade a spade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to read 
everything that we've done, as I read earlier what we've done 
working with the co-op movement in this province over the last 
four years. But certainly the co-op Act and The Credit Union Act, 
I think, represent our care, and our working with, for the 
co-operative movement here. 
 
We have sat down and we've said, you are a group of people who 
can run a very competent business. And if they need us, if 
Federated Co-op needs our advice, they'll ask for it, I'm sure. 
They're very, very competent people. And if they need some 
advice or want some . . . if we can help them in any way, they'll 
certainly ask us. 
 
We meet with them on almost, the department does, on a daily 
basis. We have 18 district representatives all over the province 
meeting with local co-operatives. We have our office here in 
Regina, our department here in Regina, who meets at least on a 
monthly basis, weekly basis, even daily basis sometimes, in 
regards to things that needs to be done or could be done together 
or we could help them with. So I'm sure, if they need to, that . . 
The gentleman's left; there's no use answering more of his 
question anyway, so . . . 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —I have just followed the debate with some 
interest this evening, Mr. Chairman, and I find an interesting 
presentation from the member from Assiniboia —one that 
included smoke and mirrors. He had a real story about smoke — a 
fire in, I think it was in Assiniboia. They replaced the lumber yard 
down in Assiniboia with a building that was a little less than the 
building that burned down. I wonder if SGI gave the Assiniboia 
Co-op the same problem they gave Mr. Townsend when . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order! 
 
An Hon. Member: — What's wrong with that? It's a legal 
question. This is a committee . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No, I do not find this on the subject of the 
estimates. I think we'd better get into it now, rather than going into 
those kinds of comparisons. They're not relative to this. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —No, I don't disagree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
guess the Townsend fire and the fire in Assiniboia certainly don't 
have any relative comparison with respect to the debate on 
co-operatives. I've heard a lot of diatribe here tonight that certainly 
doesn't have any relative place in a debate on co-operatives either. 
 
The number of lumber yards, for instance. I think if you go back to 
the teens and the '20s in Saskatchewan, you'll find that, for 
instance, in the town of Shaunavon there were nine lumber yards. 
In the town of Indian Head there were 11 lumber yards. Why did 
these lumber yards go broke? Should we get into that debate? 
That's the debate we're into tonight on co-operatives by Her 
Majesty's loyal opposition. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1527 
 
 

I'll tell you why most of those lumber yards went broke. Most of 
them went broke simply because of economic reasons. I'll tell you 
that the economic stability of that part of the province, I think, is 
somewhat undermined by a plight in drought and certainly other 
factors, but the centralization of lumber yards in this province has 
been ongoing for the last 10 or 12 years. 
 
Kyle, Eston, White Bear — all these towns used to have lumber 
yards. Kyle still has a co-op lumber yard. I think maybe Eston 
does too, but they used to have competition out in these areas. The 
competition is centralized, but the client still goes into the central 
points — Swift Current in that case, and that part of the province. 
I'm not sure if Beaver operates in places like Shaunavon or 
Assiniboia, but they still have the opportunity with the good 
highways the NDP developed — the faster transportation to travel 
into these larger centres for lumber. 
 
I mean, the debate on the Tory housing program is non-existent. 
They don't have a housing program and we are debating whether 
the Tory housing program in fact affected the closure of those 
lumber yards. I'll tell you the housing program that did. It's the 
housing program of the former NDP government. 
 
You can travel around Saskatchewan at will into virtually every 
small town in this province and you'll find government housing 
projects. Some of them . . I don't know if Cabri was ever even 
completed, but it was in different construction stages. There was a 
basement on one lot; it was framed on another lot. On another lot 
they actually got to shingles. I don't know if those houses have 
ever been occupied by real live people who have jobs in Cabri. 
 
I will say, though, that what that housing program did throughout 
Saskatchewan was . . in fact initiated the end of a market in 
housing in most small communities. If you go into a town like 
Cabri, for example, and put in 10 housing units and compete with 
the market-place, how does a school teacher that's been there for 
10 years, that bought his house or built it 10 years ago, how does 
he market it? He can't do it. 
 
Foam Lake's a good example. And I know a friend of mine who 
was a school teacher in Foam Lake, he couldn't even sell his 
bicycle at a garage sale, let alone his house, because of the market 
and the fact that the NDP had gone in there over the course of 10 
or 12 years and they had built houses in these small villages, some 
of which were never occupied. 
 
I think of another example — Avonlea. And I realize this is 
somewhat off the co-operatives debate we were on earlier, but I'm 
just answering the debate we had here from the NDP. Avonlea. I 
drove through town the middle of winter when the drift was up 
against the house; I decided to stop and have a look because the 
front door was open. I thought maybe there was a family in 
trouble. It was just another NDP housing project. Nobody would 
even stop to close the door. Now that is the problem, and that's 
why lumber yards are closing throughout Saskatchewan. It isn't a 
Tory housing policy, because as I said earlier, it's virtually 
non-existent. 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — During the debate by my colleague, the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Chairman, you indicated that it 
had to be relevant to the estimates that we're dealing with. I have a 
lot of problems trying to relate what we're talking about relative to 
the estimates in Co-ops; what the former Tory member — once a 
Liberal and now a WCC — whether he is promoting Toryism, 
WCC, or a Liberal philosophy, I don't know. but what I would like 
to know, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I believe the member from 
Regina North West did stray slightly there. While he did bring it 
back to the debate, I would prefer that he stay on that debate, and 
it continues. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —Well I appreciate, Mr. Chairman, we have to 
stay within the context of the debate, but I sat here and listened for 
a long time trying to find how closure of four lumber yards in the 
member's seat in Assiniboia had any effect on the overall 
management of co-operatives throughout the province. I can 
suggest, though, that a former policy of this government to 
construct co-op housing, and also housing of government-owned 
nature throughout Saskatchewan, did have a very adverse 
affection the market in rural Saskatchewan. This government was 
unable . . .I mean the former government under the NDP was 
unable to turn the corner on that issue. 
 
The present government is having to deal with it and there are still 
a number of housing units throughout Saskatchewan that are either 
in an uncompleted form or in fact are vacant as a result of a poor 
rural economy, and also possibly a result of poor initiatives out in 
the rural parts of Saskatchewan that would offer the young people 
— the people between 18 and 40 years old — the opportunity to 
stay in their home towns and work. 
 
But if the NDP want to get into resolution that affect the NDP we 
can certainly . . . Mr. Koskie, I certainly don't mind discussing and 
jumping into the debate. But here is one resolution . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The Chair will not accept that 
you use other members' names; use their constituency. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —I apologise to the member from Quill Lakes. 
This actually has something to do with co-operatives, because in 
fact the resolution was based on using co-operative to deliver this 
initiative. And the NDP, you suggested legalizing prostitution in 
the province. And I asked the minister, and they suggested they'd 
do it through co-operations. And I ask the minister: have any 
applications been made to the Department of Co-operatives, and if 
so, have you turned these down? Or have you suggested to the 
NDP how they might approach this area, and if they do get back 
into government, do you think they will ever initiate this initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we have had no  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1528 
 
 

request so far, at least from the NDP, in regards to setting up a 
co-operative of that nature. Certainly we would have terrible 
reluctance to even consider that in any form at all; it is not part of 
what we would believe in, that I believe the co-operative 
movement stands for nor should ever stand for. I believe the 
people of the co-operative movement are upstanding citizens of 
this province, and that they would not want us to in fact consider 
such a ridiculous type of a thing. So certainly, no we haven't, and 
we would have some problems even ever considering that type of 
an oddball situation. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —As ridiculous as it may sound, it comes from the 
NDP's own publication, March 12, 1986, The Commonwealth, for 
anybody that might be interested in researching it. And while it 
hasn't been implemented I realize in law, they are suggesting that 
they would use the co-operative movement to initiate this 
initiative. 
 
But getting back to housing for just a moment. And of course that 
kind of housing would be required, and I suppose that is part and 
parcel of their solution for housing in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you refer to some of the Saskatchewan literature that is 
available, you go back to the teens and twenties when there were 
10 and 12 and 15 lumber yards in some communities in 
Saskatchewan. They also had two or three brothels, and at that 
time, I suppose that was a solution — a housing solution where . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I find it very difficult to relate 
this to the topic, and would the member please . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —But the solution, sir, is certainly . . . at times you 
will find the solution, the seeds of the solution, at least, within the 
problem. And I think the seeds for this solution are lower interest 
rates; lower interest rates for the youth and the people throughout 
the province so that they can stay in their home towns — they can 
stay in Climax; they can stay in Assiniboia; they can stay in Kyle; 
they can stay in Carrot River. So they can stay there with the 
confidence that they cannot only own their own homes, they can 
buy their lumber at the co-op lumber yards or any competitor in 
the area. 
 
A philosophy or a policy like that is necessary. It hasn't been 
offered by the government. It has been offered by the Western 
Canada Concept Party in the form of a program that would offer 
all home owners in the province zero percent interest on the first 
$50,000. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. We're not talking about 
housing projects. We're talking about the co-operatives and 
co-operation, and please let's get back on the subject. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —I certainly want to co-operate, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Getting away from housing for a few moments, if you won't allow 
me to expand on a program that would in fact offer an initiative 
that lumber yards and places that the member from Assiniboia 
pointed out have been closed, they could reopen under a program 
like that one. 

If that's not of any interest to the Assembly, for a moment I would 
like to ask a few questions about the co-op college in Saskatoon. 
The first question I'd like to ask is simply: how much has that 
college cost us annually over the last three years and what are the 
curriculum offered in the co-op college in Saskatoon to the youth 
that are graduating from high schools or to those who decide to 
participate in that curriculum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that there is no 
co-op college left now in Saskatoon, that it's been sold; and they're 
running in regional areas, not in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —The question first is: what's the annual cost 
approximately, and does that cost overrun the budget? I see that in 
their budget they're allowed to overrun the budget and just call on 
the treasury, if in fact their budget is overrun. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. 
member's question, the co-op college has been sold; there isn't one 
any more; and that we don't fund it in any way. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —Thank you very much. So basically the 
government involvement in the co-op college financially is no 
longer in existence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions I want to ask the minister regarding the co-ops — the 
wild rice co-ops and the co-op fisheries and the northern stores. 
 
However, I do want to make a few remarks, Mr. Chairman, if you 
will just allow me that leeway to stray a little bit here. When what 
was talked about and all the laughter about co-operatives and the 
former attorney general, they were all laughing about and joking; 
and I didn't see any members in the seats that weren't laughing 
when they talked about co-operatives and the movement that was 
on resolutions that do not even exist, Mr. Chairman. And I find it 
kind of interesting. 
 
And the member from Regina North West, when he talked about 
if there was any research done, and I suggested he maybe should 
talk to his colleagues in Ottawa, the former minister of Defence 
and also a former cabinet minister in Alberta who did some 
research under this. And I can tell you that the New Democratic 
Party in no way has ever been involved in the type of debate that 
we have heard go on between the Conservative member from 
Regina North West, who calls himself a WCC member — and I 
tell you he is still a Conservative member, as there is no change. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — State your . . . 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —I suggest that this debate — on a point of order 
— this debate is not to discuss my political leanings. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1529 
 
 

I can guarantee the member . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The point of order is not well 
taken. This is a dispute between two members. The debate 
continues, but I would warn the member from Athabasca to get on 
to the item at hand and . . . 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to 
make it abundantly clear, Mr. Chairman, that we in the New 
Democratic Party do not take part in the type of debate that was 
going on today, and we do not agree with that debate. And I just 
want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If the member from Kindersley would quit hollering from his seat, 
Mr. Chairman, then I will continue on with my questioning. This 
is the type of situation that we have, and that's why we have the 
type of articles that we see in the paper that I am going to allude to 
a little later, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But you know, if we're not going to have any order in the House 
and the members are going to continue to rant and rave, you may 
as well dissolve the House and call the election and let's get it over 
with, because I tell you, the citizens out in voter land want that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I would like to put the question to the minister, 
but there's just no order in the House. You stated, Mr. Minister, 
that 97 per cent of Saskatchewan's commercial fish were sold 
through the co-operative movement. And I wonder if you could 
just elaborate on that, Mr. Minister, and indicate if that is a true 
fact or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we just go by the figures we 
have. But in our figures, it shows approximately 90 per cent. If 
you heard 97, I'm sorry. It's 90 per cent of the commercial fishing 
in this province is done by co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'm just 
wondering when you talk about 90 per cent, as you indicate that 
are sold through the co-operative movement, do you consider the 
Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation to be a co-operative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, just to make sure that the 
hon. member has it. You know, the way I said it is: 90 per cent of 
the commercial fishing done in this province is done by 
co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, there you have totally lost me now, Mr. 
Minister, because I am a commercial fisherman myself and I do 
produce fish. And in my area . . I just don't understand what you 
mean by 90 per cent of the fish in the province that is produced 
commercially is produced by co-operatives or co-operative 
fishermen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, the information . . . Mr. Chairman, the 
information that we have is 90 per cent of the commercial fish in 
this province is produced by fishing co-operatives or fished by 
fishing co-operatives. Now maybe that's debatable and we're not 
. . . We don't know for sure, but that's what we have as figures. 
Now certainly if the member has something different, we'll 
certainly entertain it. 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to 
make that clear, that I did not consider the Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation to be a co-op. It's a corporation and not a 
co-operative, and also it's outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that when we were talking about housing — how the retail 
outlets and the lumber yards in the province — I think one of the 
greatest fears that most of the co-op lumber yards have is the 
downturn in the industry of housing in Saskatchewan. And I 
know, Mr. Minister, that you were the former minister of 
Saskatchewan Housing, and you see that there are a lot of lumber 
yards, co-op lumber yards. And I deal with one on a fairly regular 
basis in Meadow Lake. 
 
But I think from what I have been led to believe by them is that 
their major concern right now is the fact that they're not going to 
be able to get the type of materials that they need to retail in this 
province, because if we take the duty that has been proposed by 
the United States lumber industry, it's a threat to the lumber 
industry in this province. And that's where our co-operative 
lumber . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you better believe it. That's 
where the co-operative lumber yards are getting their lumber from. 
 
And I think that if this takes place, and you see that the Americans 
apply the 27 per cent duty, and as it indicates in the write-up right 
here, that lumber products . . . duty in United States could close 
Saskatchewan mills. And I think that is a great threat to our 
co-operative movement and especially the retail lumber yards who 
at this present time get a percentage of their lumber from outside 
of Saskatchewan. They bring in Alberta lumber and British 
Columbia lumber that they can't get, but they get a large 
proportion of it out of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if this duty is put on and the lumber industry in this province 
happens to fold up because of the 20 per cent duty that is being 
imposed by the lumber industry in the United States, which, Mr. 
Minister, Weyerhaeuser Canada, who your government has dealt 
with and given a $248 million, really an incentive to take over all 
our forest industry in this province — the biggest majority of our 
forest industry — and here they are in the United States trying to 
work out a duty with the American lumber industry that would put 
a 27 per cent duty on our lumber. And I think that's where the real 
threat is going to come, because you're going to see a lot of the 
sawmills in this province who are supplying the softwood, the 
spruce, and the hardwood that they produce for our retail outlets, 
that's going to be gone. And that's going to be a real problem. 
 
(2030) 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister . . . and I'm sure you were involved in 
the dealings with Weyerhaeuser when they were given the rights 
to the timber from PAPCO. They were also given the rights to all 
the timber that came out of the Big River sawmill. And that Big 
River sawmill is a very important contributor to our co-op retail 
outlets, lumber outlets, in the province. And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, and being a part of cabinet, if you considered the fact 
that  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1530 
 
 

when you give control to such a large corporation, that the effects 
is going to be felt right across this province. 
 
And now that we have a housing program that has been proposed 
by our government, if we were to implement that, if we were to 
become the government and were to implement that; there is just 
no way that the lumber yards in this province could operate. We 
could have to start implementing lumber, because you can imagine 
what would happen to the housing industry if the citizens of this 
province were offered a $7,000 grant to build their first-time 
home. Now that's going to take a lot of lumber, and you're going 
to say . . . and it's a three-year program, and I say that to the 
members, to that Minister of Finance, it's a three-year program for 
$7,000 for first-time home owners, a grant. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order! This doesn't pertain to 
any programs or anything that any political party might be doing. 
Certainly don't enter into this discussion. And let's get on with the 
estimates of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. Order. 
The debate continues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, my point of order is simply this: he 
was relating a program that will create housing starts, that will 
create the sale of co-op lumber . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can't I state my point of order? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No. Order. Order. I have given the same 
privilege to each one in this House . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you haven't. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have exactly and . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Order. And so the debate carries on, but sticking with the 
subject. The point of order is not debatable. I have stated . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, I haven't even stated my 
point of order yet. You don't listen to the whole point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. You have stated enough that I 
understand where you're coming from . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Order. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is that when you were negotiating . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There is just so much noise in this 
House, I'm surely sure that the minister cannot hear any question, 
the member from Athabasca cannot state his question. So let's get 
some order in here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
as a cabinet minister when you were  

negotiating the deal with Weyerhaeuser for Big River sawmill and 
the bush operations, were you aware at that time that the . . .what 
would happen with the 27 per cent duty on the lumber . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I have stated this tonight on two 
or three occasions already, that the Weyerhaeuser project has 
absolutely nothing to do with what we're talking about. so let's get 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's the crux of the whole debate here 
tonight. You've got to allow it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It is not the crux of debate, so let's get on with 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. All right I will not stand for 
that any more. Now we either . . . If you're questioning my 
decision here, then I'll take the next step. Carry on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I was only trying to 
make a point that the retail lumber yards, the biggest fear that they 
have today, Mr. Minister, is the supply of lumber that they're 
going to receive. And I might add, Mr. Chairman, the amount of 
lumber that they're going to need, because if you have a buoyant 
housing economy, then, Mr. Chairman, it's going to take a lot of 
lumber. And that's when I think that the lumber yards in this 
province want to make sure that they have an abundant supply 
without going outside the province, or outside of the country for 
any larger percentage of the material than they are right today. 
And that was the question that I was asking you, Mr. Minister, 
when you were negotiating these agreements. Do you not feel that 
the biggest fear now surrounding the retail co-operative lumber 
yards is the fact that they may not be able to get the supply of 
lumber that they will need out of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to start with, and 
without going into the Weyerhaeuser deal or any of those, just to 
make it absolutely clear, the tariff, the countervailing tariffs that 
they're talking about is in the United States. What we'd probably 
end up here in Saskatchewan, or in Canada, is a surplus of large 
amounts. 
 
I wasn't part of the negotiating team when they made the deal for 
the pulp- and paper-mill, and certainly you would have to talk to 
the Minister of Economic Development and Trade or whoever 
was on the negotiating team, or the minister for Sask Forest 
Products. 
 
In regards to an area, whether or not Weyerhaeuser operated the 
Big River mill, and I believe they'll operate it for many, many 
years . . . In fact it's good utilization of the wood up there because 
as you know, and well know, that they're going to put the large 
saw logs through there and the pulp into the pulp-mill; what 
should have been done many, many years ago. 
 
But even without them operating, you well know that there's a 
large number of small contractors out there who in fact have 
lobbied for many, many years, and under the former 
administration were not allowed to hardly cut any — basically no 
small contractors allowed in the bush because of Sask Forest 
Products and PAPCO and Simpson  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1531 
 
 

Timber Company and MacMillan Bloedel. Because of those four 
companies out on the markets there, mainly PAPCO and Sask 
Forest Products, there was just no small contractors allowed out in 
the bush. So there is an opportunity there for many small 
contractors now under the agreement to operate. So there'll always 
be an abundant supply of wood in this province. 
 
But the thing you've got to remember, the member's got to 
remember, is that co-operatives get basically all of their wood 
from their own mills in British Columbia and bring them into 
there. They buy very little, only as a fill-in, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And as I said earlier, I negotiated with them earlier 
to try and get them in fact to buy Saskatchewan products. And 
they looked at it seriously, but felt they should continue to operate 
their mills out in B.C. 
 
So just to keep it in its own perspective, no, I don't think whatever 
would happen in United States would have any effect on the 
amount of wood or the supply of wood for our retail yards here. In 
fact, they'd probably have an abundance and the price would drop 
substantially, and that's the concern that all the lumber industry in 
this province has. And certainly it would hurt the lumber yards in 
a different way, whether it be co-op or whatever. It would hurt 
them in a different way because the number of people working 
would probably be less if that happened. And that's the concern 
they would have; not the lack of supply of material. There'd be a 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. I think that we've covered 
that area, so let's get back on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order! 
I think I have taken absolutely all I will take from members sitting 
in their seat, and if we have to get down to the naming, well then 
that is what will happen too. I'm not going to tolerate any more of 
it. And the reason I brought the minister to order was that that 
debate has gone far enough, and he's answered the question 
properly, and we'll get on with co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to 
close this off and then I'll get back to the other three items that I 
had, Mr. Minister. But what I was indicating, that the major 
concern was the supply of lumber . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. That is finished. We're not talking 
about that any more, the supply of lumber. We're talking about 
co-operatives, so let's get on to co-operatives. Get on to 
co-operatives. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member from Regina North West, what's 
your point of order? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. As long as 
the debate is relevant, I don't think you can dictate to the 
opposition where we can go with any debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — On a point of personal privilege. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There is no point of order. When I have made 
my ruling, that is it. Order. I will direct the debate as  

it relates to the subject that we're talking bout. And when I 
determine that we're not on the subject, then I make my ruling. If 
that ruling is not accepted, then we can take the next step, as we 
have done in this House before. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could have a 
ruling from you, sir. Can I no longer talk about the supply of 
lumber for the retail co-operative lumber yards in the province? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — As long as it applies to the co-operatives, to 
the subject we're talking about, certainly; but if we can't relate it to 
co-operatives, if we're just talking in general terms of lumber in 
the North, no. If we can relate it to as they supply the lumber to the 
co-operatives, yes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well yes, further to that point of order, Mr. 
Chairman, I would . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The point of order is not 
debatable. The point of order is not debatable. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
was trying to get off of the retail lumber yards, and the only 
remark that I wanted to make was that there is a concern in the 
retail co-operative lumber yards in the province that there could be 
a shortage of supply. And that's where I wanted to close off. I just 
wanted to make the remark to the minister that it is a concern. Not 
only is it a concern of all the co-operative lumber yards in the 
province, but it's also a concern of the general manager of Sask. 
Forest Company. Because, Mr. Chairman, that concern — and I 
say this to you, Mr. Minister — that concern has been expressed 
by your former general manager, and now the general manager 
when you were the minister, of Saskatchewan Forest Products: 
that the lumber industry could be in serious problems. And that is 
the way, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to close this off. 
 
Mr. Minister, I now want to turn and I had indicated to you when I 
first started that if you could just indicate in what shape the wild 
rice co-operatives are in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that in 
1985 the wild rice co-ops didn't have a very good year and they're 
certainly hoping for a better years in '86. But it was a poor year 
last year and you're aware of all the situations why it was, because 
of the weather conditions, poor harvesting weather — I'm sure the 
member is very familiar with it all up there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate 
whether the La Ronge co-op is funded any way, or is any part of 
the provincial co-operative scene. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is that the plant at La 
Ronge is under some funding from Tourism and Small Business. I 
don't know how much it is, but they are funded somewhat from 
them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But it is a co-operative. Is that right, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That's correct, yes. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1532 
 
 

Mr. Thompson: — My next question then is: could you indicate 
how much money was spent on the advertisements that were put 
out by the La Ronge wild rice co-operative? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. I'd have no idea. 
We could get the information for you but we have no idea how 
much they would spent. They're a local co-operative. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, I've seen a number of ads 
put out by one Kas Parada and, I believe, a provincial agency, 
advertising. It's on quite regular, and I don't think the member 
should look surprised that this is taking place. But I wonder, as 
you indicated you would provide me with the amount of dollars 
that were spent on that advertisement, it indicates the number of 
individuals that are working and the jobs that have been created. 
It's been on radio and television quite a bit. And as long as you'll 
provide me with those figures, then that will be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we'll try and get that from 
the wild rice co-op at La Ronge. Certainly, we don't have it and 
we'll ask them for it. Whether they'll give it to us or not, they're, as 
you know, a local co-operative and they certainly make their own 
decision there, but we'll certainly try and get it for you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. The last 
thing I wanted to touch on was the northern stores. I know that, 
over the years, that there have been some problems with northern 
stores. I believe there was a major fire in Pinehouse and that store 
was destroyed. I wonder if you could indicate whether that store is 
back in place and if it's operating, you know, on a fairly good 
footing at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is they're going to have 
an official opening on the 27th of June. Now whether it's operating 
right now or just getting ready to open, I don't know. But they're 
having an official opening at Pinehouse on the 27th of June of the 
new store. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Just one closing question and a comment. I wonder if you could 
indicate how the other stores are doing. I know that at Wollaston 
Post there is a co-op store, and I believe some over on the east 
side. If you could just indicate how those co-operatives are 
operating and if they're financial fairly secure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I understand we've had ongoing discussions 
with Federated, and they do not see any problems with the 
ongoing stores that's up there. They think they're operating fairly 
well. So that's what we get from Federated, and we've discussed it 
with them not too long ago. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
there has begun in the city of Regina a service fee co-op which is 
an outlet for groceries, an operation that works very well. I happen 
to be a member of it. And  

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister: has the department been involved in 
the establishment of this co-op in the developmental sense, and 
has it provided any developmental funding for this co-op? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I understand, in answer to the member's 
question, the department has been involved all along with the 
development of the co-op, the service fee co-op. The Department 
of Co-operatives hasn't funded it in any way directly, but they are 
subject to any other provincial types of funding that's out there that 
they may qualify for. And certainly whatever is available to the 
other sector of the province, or business sector, they can also draw 
on it. They got some federal funding, I understand, also. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I'm aware they received some federal 
funding. Would they be eligible for any of the funding that's 
provided under the subvote 4 here, grants for co-operative 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I understand, no. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Could you elaborate further, Mr. Minister, 
why not? Maybe it would even be more helpful if you explained 
how one becomes eligible for grants under the co-operative 
development program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To give you an example, certainly the one 
here in Regina could say that they . . . it's a French type of 
immersion, a program where we help fund it to $5,000, whatever 
we fund. That's basically how the Department of Co-operatives 
funds any of the grant that's out there. We don't fund retail outlets, 
and we don't fund basically . . . well we don't anything else other 
than where it's a training type program, and sort of special cases. 
And those two or three that we do fund are certainly the . . at the 
University of Saskatchewan we fund the one, and the two here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did you expend the full $152,500 in 
1985-86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I give it to the member from Regina Centre, 
but it was $129,500 that was spent in '84-85, during the 1985 year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And you say all that money went— and I 
can recall the conversation the other day — all the money went to 
the University of Regina, and University of Saskatchewan. Is that 
correct? Or am I not quite correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It went to the Centre for Co-operative 
Studies in the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, and Le 
Conseil here in Regina Centre for $5,000, and cooperative youth 
in Saskatoon for $5,000. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, your department, I believe, 
does some advertising. Can you tell me how much your 
department has spent on advertising in 1985-86, and what your 
budget is for 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In round figures, in '85-86 it was about 
$155,000; and for '86-87, we budgeted $115,000. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, on a department  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1533 
 
 

budget of $3 million, $155,000 is a pretty hefty budget for 
advertising. 
 
Could I ask you . . . In the papers recently there has been, and I 
want to preamble my question with the comment on answers 
which government ministers have been giving over the past 
several weeks when asked about advertising, is that the present 
government only advertises to provide information about 
programs for people and benefits that are available to people. But 
we've seen this ad running, and I realize that it's shared by the 
Federated Co-op and by the federal government and by the 
provincial government, but obviously a portion of that must be 
paid by the provincial government. 
 
Does your department contribute to the payment of these ads on 
the co-op upgrader, which really provides no information about 
programs or anything else? It's simply an ad that says that the 
co-op upgrader is going to be built. Is the Department of 
Co-operatives and Co-operative Development paying for some of 
the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And now that the member from 
Regina Victoria has finished his speech from his chair, maybe I 
can continue, Mr. Chairman. Has the Department of Co-operation 
and Co-operative Development paid for any portion of this ad, or 
is it the Department of Tourism and Small Business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is, Mr. Chairman, that on 
the first part of your question, what was this money spent on in 
advertising, basically it was resource material for those who want 
to know about the co-operative movement or who want to become 
part or organize a co-op. And there's a lot of material that goes out 
and it's basically for requests. 
 
The only advertisement that we did in regards to the upgrader was 
a congratulatory advertising for starting up an upgrader here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So that's the only one the Department 
of Co-ops had anything to do with. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And how much did that congratulatory 
advertisement cost you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I understand it was somewheres in the 
neighbourhood between 12 and $15,000 for the advertisement. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And that was obviously not 1985 and 1986. 
Was it done in the last fiscal year or in the present fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The last fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Even though it was done in the last fiscal 
year and your estimates show your final figures, you still only 
estimate between 12 and 15,000. 
 
But never mind that, that's still . . . For $12,000 or $15,000, I'm 
sure the Department of Co-ops could have done something to 
assist some co-operative who's trying to get off the ground or 
something, rather than putting in a congratulatory ad. But that's a 
decision of you, Mr. Minister; it's a decision of your government. 

I think it's not a particularly good expenditure of money. It's not 
going to create jobs. The refinery will create jobs but your ad . . 
your 12 or $15,000 advertising bill will not create jobs, except 
maybe the advertising firm that may have done it for you. 
 
So I want to ask you the question: which advertising agency has 
your department utilized —or agencies? If there's more than one, I 
would like them all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand all our 
advertising is done by The Marketing Den in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did you say The Marketing Den? And all 
of the work by the department from the point of view of 
advertising is done by that agency? Thank you very much, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The grants for co-operative development again this year — same 
amount, $152,500 — are they designated for the same programs 
as you funded last year, or do you have some money for some 
potentially new, innovative ideas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In the grant program, they're for the same 
ones, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have a 
couple of questions, just to get a few facts on the record. Firstly, 
with respect to securities and the co-op securities board, could you 
indicate in the year ended March 31, 1986, how many security 
issues were approved and what was the total face value of the 
securities approved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Would you ask that question again? I missed 
part of the last question. Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — During the year ended March 31, 1986, 
could you tell me how many security issues were approved by the 
co-op securities board, and what was the total value of the 
securities approved? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there were nine; and it was 
for $102,593,200. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you 
give me the top three or four issues which were approved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I can give them all or whatever you 
like. Federated Co-operatives Limited was $100 million; Weyburn 
Co-op was $2 million; Whitewood was $200,000; and the rest 
were smaller amounts. But I can give them all to you, if you like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you very much. The $100 million 
Federated one made up the bulk of the approvals. 
 
I turn now to The Co-operative Guarantee Act and I note that that 
Act has not been used very much. I noted that the approvals in the 
years of the 1970s — typical years were 10, 19, 20, 12, 12, 6, 3, 4; 
in the 1982 it was 2; in 1983 it was zero; in 1984 it was zero; in 
1985 it was zero. Why are you not dealing with any applications 
for guarantees  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1534 
 
 

under The Co-operative Guarantee Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we haven't had any 
requests, but two are pending now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, did you, 
in the period ended March 31, 1986 . . . Was the answer — was 
the number still zero for the year ended March 31, 1986? For 
March 31, '83 it was zero; for '84 it was zero; for '85 it was zero. If 
we continue that to '86, is it still zero? And now I'm talking about 
approvals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, yes, till March 31, 1986. The 
two are pending at that since that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in an 
earlier answer, you spoke of the co-op upgrader, and spoke of the 
participation of the government in the upgrader project. Could you 
tell the committee whether or not any documents have been signed 
with the federal government in furtherance of this upgrader 
project, following the signing of a memorandum of understanding, 
which must be close to a year ago now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I can't answer on behalf of 
Federated Co-op, nor do I know if an agreement has been signed 
with the federal government, a further agreement has been signed. 
So I can't answer that one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'm not 
asking whether Federated signed anything. I'm asking whether the 
Government of Saskatchewan signed anything with the federal 
government after the memorandum of understanding which was 
signed some time last summer, by my recollection. Certainly 
before last fall. And I'm simply asking whether or not any other 
documents have been signed. Do we have a deal on the financing 
of the co-op upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it doesn't really fall 
under the Department of Co-ops. It has been handled by the 
Department of Economic Development and Trade, and 
Department of Energy and Mines, and I believe their estimates are 
coming up. And you can probably ask them at that time, and I'm 
sure they can give you an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm less 
sanguine than you are about whether they'll give us an answer. I'm 
sure we'll hear a lot of words, but whether or not we'll hear an 
answer is another matter. 
 
Do I understand, then, Mr. Minister, that you are advising me that 
the financing of the co-op upgrader is not being handled by the 
Department of Co-ops, but rather by the Department of Economic 
Development? They are doing the negotiating with the federal 
government with respect to the co-op upgrader. Did I understand 
you to say that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I can tell the member that the 
Department of Co-ops haven't been doing the negotiating for the 
agreement with the federal government and the Federated Co-ops 
and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly either the Premier or my colleagues in cabinet, the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, or Minister of 
Energy and Mines, and certainly I 

 assume the Minister of Finance, will all be aware of it. But I don't 
know where it is. And I'm sure if you ask them, they will give you, 
as I said earlier, an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I think I'm not putting my question very 
well, Mr. Minister. I am asking you whether, as Minister of 
Co-ops, you know which of your colleagues is looking after this 
— the negotiations for this co-operative project. I'm simply asking 
you. I'm not going to pursue what the nature of the negotiations is. 
I'm just trying to find out whether the Minister of Co-ops has 
troubled to find out which of his colleagues is handling the 
negotiations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm aware of who's 
handling it. I'm just simply telling the member that there's a whole 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who's not handling it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, who's not handling it. Certainly not the 
Department of Co-ops; we're not involved directly in the 
negotiations. We are there, certainly would like to see it go, and 
we're certainly working to promote it. And any way we can help 
them as a department . . . As you're aware, it's an advisory type of 
department. 
 
And the upgraders are very, very unique, and certainly the first 
one in Canada, and we're very proud of it. And certainly, as the 
Department of Co-ops, being an agency that has promoted 
co-operatives all over the province, I'm sure, as you would be 
aware of and we are, you know, it's very, very positive for the 
province. And the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade has been the lead agency and will continue to be so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it you're 
proud enough of it to know which minister is handling the 
negotiations and you're telling me that it's the Minister of 
Economic Development. Did I understand that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That's correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I'll ask you 
— and I think I know your comment is that you prefer that I ask 
the Minister of Economic Development — do you wish to give 
this House any additional information on the progress of the co-op 
upgrader in so far as legal arrangements are concerned between 
the province of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada, and the 
Federated Co-ops or their subsidiary, Consumers' Co-operative 
Refineries Ltd.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, Mr. Chairman. I'm sure that, as I said 
earlier, he can speak to the lead agency, which is . . . the minister 
responsible for the lead agency, and that is certainly Economic 
Development and Trade. He could also speak to Federated Co-op. 
It's confidential, I'm sure, to this point. When it's all finalized or at 
that time, I'm sure that the public will be aware of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as you 
will be aware, substantial funds have been committed for, and 
some are being spent, at least on engineering if I can believe the 
ads sponsored by your  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1535 
 
 

department . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are we in a debate with 
the member for Kindersley or am I directing a question to the 
minister? And I'd be happy to have a ruling from the Chair. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to 
address his question to the minister and I'm sure he will receive an 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. The minister in question, Mr. 
Chairman, I'm sure you were referring to, is the Minister of 
Co-ops and not several of the other ministers who are clustered 
opposite, chatting away, but not giving information. I'm asking the 
Minister of Co-ops whether he will give the House the information 
as to who is putting up the money for the preliminary expenditures 
now being incurred for the planning of the New Grade 
co-operative upgrader, if in fact such expenses are being incurred. 
Do you know who is putting up that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that's an answer for 
the Department of Economic Development and Trade to handle. If 
he'd direct that question to the minister at that time, I think that 
would be more appropriate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I suspected that 
the Department of Co-ops wouldn't be very well informed on this 
largest co-operative endeavour that we've had in the province for 
some years. And I will direct them to one of your colleagues who 
may well be informed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I'm always entertained by the interjections of the member for 
Moosomin. he's usually very entertaining and it's a great pity that 
he doesn't give the committee the benefit of his interjections into a 
microphone so that we could all enjoy them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn now to a subject we have already 
touched upon, and that is the deposit insurance corporation. In just 
a few figures, can you tell me what the state of the deposit 
insurance corporation is, in the sense of roughly what is the total 
number of deposits it has insured? And can you tell me what funds 
are deposited with the deposit insurance corporation, the former 
mutual aid board, as a basis for meeting those obligations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I believe it's confidential, the information 
that the deposit insurance guarantee board has in regards to that. 
But there is sufficient funds there, they are properly funded, and 
basically that's about the best answer I can give you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don't 
want to pursue this, but why in Heaven's name would the total 
liability of the deposit insurance corporation be confidential? And 
why would the deposits with the deposit insurance corporation, or 
the mutual aid board as it used to be, why would that be 
confidential? It seemed to me that this material was regularly 
made public, although it may not have been. It may have come to 
my attention from material which wasn't public material. I could 
be in error there. But I would ask the minister to consider whether 
he thinks it should be confidential. I won't press the point if he 
insists. I'd simply like to know (a) whether he thinks it should be 

confidential; and (b) what are the reasons if he does. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'll certainly give it to you in round figures if 
that would . . . there were six credit unions, exposure was 
approximately $22 million, and the reserve of the guarantee and 
the credit unions is about $400 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I didn't 
direct the right question to you, or I didn't make myself clear. I 
wasn't asking what the exposure was with respect to credit unions 
which may be at risk, I was just asking what the total exposure is. 
As I understand, the deposit insurance corporation, in effect, 
guarantees the deposits which are on deposit with Saskatchewan 
credit unions, so that will be its total exposure. Or alternatively, it 
guarantees them up to a given level. I believe it to be the former 
and not the latter. I believe that — and I'm not always sure 
whether or not all deposits are guaranteed, whether all term 
deposits are guaranteed and whether share balances are 
guaranteed. 
 
(2115) 
 
I believe them all to be. I believe them — the so-called share 
accounts and the so-called personal chequing accounts and their 
maximizers and their plan 24s, and the rest of it; and also their 
term deposits — I believe them all to be guaranteed. I ask you 
whether that is true, and then what is the total exposure. And 
understand, I'm not asking what is likely to be lost. That's not the 
question I'm asking. 
 
In the same way that the federal deposit insurance corporation 
guarantees all the bank and trust company deposits up to $60,000 
in Canada, the gross of that would be their total exposure. Can you 
tell me what kind of money we're talking about. 
 
That is, you don't like the word "exposure," tell me the total 
deposits which are guaranteed, if you prefer that phrasing, and 
then, if you can, tell me what sums are on deposit as a means of 
meeting any claims that may be forthcoming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don't have it with us — the total number 
of deposits. We'll get it and send it to you, but we don't have it 
with us tonight. but we'll certainly get it and send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to ask a 
few questions to the minister relative to the '84-85 report. And I 
want to get some of the details for the current year, or the past 
year, that is, the '85-86. 
 
I notice in the last report that you issued for the department, there 
were some 55 co-operatives were incorporated throughout the 
province in '84-85. And you may have indicated this, but I'm 
wondering how many were open during the past year — the 
'85-86 — up until March. Can you give me that figure? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, just . . . like in your report you 
indicate that in the '84-85 year, the annual report that you put 
forward, you say that during the year 55 co-operatives were 
incorporated throughout the province. And then  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1536 
 
 

you go on and say in different areas. 
 
And so what I'm asking for is: during the past year, that is the 
'85-86, to March 31 of '86, how many co-operatives were open 
during that period of time if you have that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'll give it to the member. I 
gave it to the member from Regina Centre here last week. It's 45 
for '85 - 86; it's 55 for '84 - 85; 35 for '83 - 84; 41 for '82 - 83; 38 
for '81 - 82; 34 for '80 - 81; 28 for '79 - 80; and 23 for '78 - 79. 
That's as far as I go back. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And during the year, the past year, that is '85 - 86, 
were there any closures of co-ops throughout the province? 
 
If you have the number of openings, I'm wondering whether you 
have the total number of closures in '85 - 86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, from April 1, '85 to March 
31, '86, there was 12 dissolutions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And would you be able to provide a list of those 
closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the 12 were the Key Lake 
grazing co-operative . . . Keg Lake, I'm sorry . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Keg Lake. The Candle Lake Co-operative 
Volunteer Fire Department Limited, the Saskatchewan 
Co-operative Court Reporters Association, the Job Action 
Co-operative Limited, Mother Hubbard's Child Care Co-operative 
Limited, the Eastern Saskatchewan Community Media 
Co-operative, the Big Shell Recreational Area Co-operative 
Limited, the Livelong Community Hall co-operative Association, 
the Claydon Co-operative Hall Limited, the Shaunavon Bowling 
Co-operative, the Studio Co-operative Limited — and that's the 
12. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — With the closures of those 12, how many persons 
lost employment as a result of the closures of those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, one part-time employee is all 
that was actually laid off during the closures. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Out of all 12? And were they active prior . . 
You're saying only one employee for 12 individual co-operatives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, most of them are either 
grazing co-operatives or recreation co-operatives. And some of 
them never got off the ground; they incorporated as a co-operative 
and never became active, so then they had a dissolution. Basically 
there's only one half . . . one part-time employee that was laid off 
because of the 12 closures. A lot of them were recreation type of 
co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the openings, you say in 1985 - 86 
there were 45. Do you have any idea as to . . . out of those 45 that 
were developed, the total investment in respect to those openings? 
Do you have the cumulative investment for those 45 that opened 
last year? Do you know how much was invested in the opening of 
the 45  

that you indicated opened in 1985 - 86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure— invested by 
who? The members or by the department? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You indicated that there were 45 new 
co-operatives were incorporated. And so in respect to those 45 
incorporations, what I'm asking you: do you have any knowledge 
of the total investment by the 45? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have any idea how 
much investment the total value of investment would be in the 45 
co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, do you know how much employment, how 
many people were employed by the incorporation of the 45 during 
the year '85 -86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, just to give him an idea, we 
don't know how many employees but, you know, the 
incorporations, there was 13 under agriculture and there was one 
under forestry under tree planting. So there'd certainly be a 
number of employees. Under the agriculture one there was five 
feeder co-operatives, and I don't know how many employees there 
would be involved in that. There were six soil conservation 
co-operatives, one farm, and one machinery co-operative. There 
was one grain storage co-operative, and one bus co-operative, one 
television co-operative. Under the wholesale-retail — and there'd 
certainly be a good number of employees — one agriculture 
supplier, two general retailers, one farmers' market, and three 
northern native handicraft co-operatives. Under the real estate and 
business there were seven — one housing, one insurance, three 
employment, and two just other miscellaneous ones. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I look under item 1 in the Estimates, 
administrative services. The first thing that I note is that there is an 
increase in the number of personnel from 12.1 to 13.1. And what I 
would ask you, Mr. Minister, are all the 13.1 positions filled? Are 
there any vacancies in respect to that, and can you indicate what 
position is being created for the increase from the previous year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There are no vacancies and the one position 
that we moved over was from the secretary of the security board 
over to the guarantee board, and they handle both anyway. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the development of co-ops in the 
co-op movement throughout the province, I'm wondering whether 
you are aware of any allegations in respect to co-ops versus 
private family, or private small business, whether any advantages 
that co-ops may have over small business. Are you aware of any 
particular concern by the small-business community vis-a-vis the 
promotion of more co-operative businesses throughout 
Saskatchewan? Have any concerns been raised with you, be it tax 
advantages or any other advantages that the co-ops may have over 
the private businesses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, co-ops are treated the 
same as everybody else, and they don't have a tax advantage 
because they send it back to their shareholders who, in fact, pay 
taxes. So of the 566,000  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1537 
 
 

shareholders in this province, if there is a profit, it goes back — 
part of it goes back either in equity or direct refund and they pay 
the tax on it. So they don't have any advantage. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I hope you're sure of that because that's not 
the perception that small business have, that they don't have the 
equal advantage in respect to competing with consumer 
co-operatives. 
 
I note in your report here that in the '84 - 85, and that's the only 
one we have, you indicate that co-operatives have a vital role in 
economic development of northern Saskatchewan. And branch 
staff help northern residents identify new development 
opportunities and provide information support necessary to 
undertake ventures such as fishing, wild rice, and child care 
co-operatives, and so on. 
 
And you go on to indicate that staff assisted in the writing of 45 
grant applications. And it says, grant applications worth more than 
$1 million creating 14 permanent jobs and 30 temporary jobs. 
 
I guess my question is what . . . where did the million dollars come 
from, vis-a-vis this report for the making of the grants? Because it 
indicates here, as I say, that the staff . . . it says the staff assisted in 
writing of 45 grant applications worth more than $1 million, 
creating 14 permanent jobs and 30 temporary. I guess my question 
is, during the past year, have the co-operatives been active in 
northern Saskatchewan attempting to create opportunities? And, as 
you indicate in this report, there were grants applications . . . 
assisted in writing of 45 grant applications. Has that been carried 
on, and where is the grant money available from? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, it's continuing on. And basically the 
grant money came from the federal sources, and we just helped 
them fill out the application forms, access to them, work with 
them to get whatever grants available. Or if there's any provincial 
grants that they would fit into, we help with them, too. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, have you got any statistics similar to '84 -85 
as to what assistance you were able to obtain for the northern 
people through the federal grants? 
 
You indicate in your '84 - 85, certainly that there were 45 grant 
applications, a million bucks, and 14 permanent jobs and 30 
temporary jobs. Have you any indication as to the results of this 
program during '85 - 86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, Mr. Chairman, it hasn't been compiled 
yet. We don't have it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well are you going to . . . is it possible to provide 
us with that information, because I want to see whether the 
magnitude of the assistance that is going into northern 
Saskatchewan . . . I'm surprised that the report ends March 31st. I 
would have thought that you would have been monitoring the 
applications on a monthly basis and that that information could, in 
fact, be provided. I'm rather surprised that you can't give any 
information. If  

you can't tonight, will you, in fact, make that information available 
to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can't tonight. I'm 
being told that we're pulling — it's being compiled together now, 
and we will have it available in a while and certainly will be as we 
have to compile it together for the '85 - 86 report. But it isn't all 
compiled together yet. When we get it compiled together, we'd 
have no problem sending it to him. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I'm just looking at generally what has been 
happening to the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development, and I guess what one can see over the recent years 
and certainly since you took office, Mr. Minister, is that the 
number of personnel has decreased significantly. Support staff — 
you find that decreasing substantially over the last four years of 
your administration. We find also that a very substantial decrease 
in the budget this year again from 3,074,150 to 2,959,720. I can 
hardly say this represents a very strong commitment by your 
department or by you yourself. Either you're incapable of going to 
treasury board and fighting on behalf of the co-op movement, or 
indeed, the other observation that I would make is that your 
government is less than eager to assist the co-op movement. 
 
The other thing that I notice here is that there's a drift in the 
concentration of the allocation of the budget. The allocation of the 
budget is into the administrative services, item 1, and out of the 
other subvotes. You notice in communication and development 
services, that has been reduced. If you look in the registration and 
inspections, that's cut back. And the grants remain the same. 
 
But in the administrative services, you have an increase in 
personnel and also you have a significant increase in the total 
expenditure. In fact, if you look at the budget for the Department 
of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, you'll find that 
one-quarter of the total budget is in administration. That's about 
the proportion. 
 
And apparently, yes, this is the new efficient government which 
puts money available for the development of the economy and 
development of co-operatives. But here it's tied up in . . . 
one-quarter of the total budget is tied up in administration, and 738 
million out of 2.9. And I think that's an indication of what real 
support that the government is giving to the co-op movement 
through your ministry. 
 
And I just wonder what justification the minister has for the 
significant increase in the administrative services expenditures and 
a cut-back in the other areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. 
member's question, the reason the administration services went up 
by one is, as I mentioned earlier, that secretary was moved from 
one position to the other, which ended up in administrative 
services. The one thing that you have to make absolutely clear is 
that the field people that's out there in contact with the public has 
not changed. And they are in fact the same number. So the 
services is the same as, or even better than, it was before. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1538 
 
 

And the number of people that you have internally, working with 
in the office, does not state the type of service that you're giving to 
the community out there. 
 
We feel very strongly that the type of services need out there is the 
type of services that contact person within the regional areas who 
can contact the local people who want to set up the small co-op, 
who go right to their town, or their village, or their hamlet, or their 
farm, wherever it may be, to set up that type of a co-operative. So 
the regional people are placed totally. The only reduction was in 
office staff, and so therefore — and they've been vacancies that 
haven't been used. So basically it's running very smoothly, running 
very well, in fact. 
 
And I think some of the things that's happened within the 
Department of Co-operatives — the new Co-op Act, the new 
Credit Union Act, the new upgrader, and certainly the new 
fertilizer plant. Those are very, very important things that's 
happening within the co-operative movement in themselves, plus 
45 new co-ops being — last year, I think that's important, and I see 
no problem at all where the Department of Co-operatives go. 
 
And I think it's a very good department. It's certainly very 
streamlined. It's working very well, and we have good people out 
in the field who are working well with the public to, in fact, make 
sure the co-operative movement continues. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think you'll have to agree that since 
1982 - 83 the staff — there has been a total of about 20 positions 
that have been deleted from the department. 
 
And I don't think you can deny that financial commitment to the 
Department of Co-operatives certainly has decreased. And again 
this year there has been a very substantial decrease in the amount 
of expenditure — from over 3 million to 2.9 million. And so, I 
think that what is fairly evident from the statistics is that overall 
there's a fairly significant cut-back in the funding towards the 
department. 
 
There was, I think, the Co-op college — and this has been 
mentioned before — received $100,000 grant from the department 
in 1980 and 1981. And I'm wondering; you may have alluded to 
this, but why, in fact, have you discontinued the $100,000 grant to 
the Co-op college? Certainly I thought it was doing excellent work 
in so far as the promotion of the co-op movement, and I note that 
you saw fit to cut back that $100,000 grant. What was the reason 
for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I mentioned earlier to, 
I think the member from Regina North West, that the Co-op 
college has been sold by the co-operatives limited. We do fund the 
co-operative studies in the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon which wasn't funded before. It's a new type of a 
program, and it amounts to $119,000 — not $100,000. The main 
programs change from time to time, and certainly if that's their 
wish, that's what we'll be doing. And if they wish later on to 
change it and have a different type of program, sure, we'll take a 
look at it. But although we don't fund $100,000 to Co-op college, 
we fund $119,000 into the University of Saskatchewan for 
co-operative studies, so I  

think, either way, they're important they're still being funded. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you have anyone in the department that's on a 
personal service contract, other than through the public service, 
where you have a contract; you've hired someone by contract 
rather than through the public service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, no, we don't have. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There are cut-backs in positions: 31.1 to 28.1. 
Could you indicate what positions were deleted in 
communications and development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that it will be 
three positions by attrition. As they become vacant, they will be . . 
You know, that's how we'll pick them up. There won't be anybody 
laid off, and they'll all be working through. So it will be just 
through attrition through vacancies. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, are there three positions there vacant? Is 
that what you're saying? Or do you have 31 now and you're 
waiting for attrition to take place? What do you have? You're 
budgeting, apparently, for 28.1, which is a cut-back of three. Do 
you have three positions vacant or three less positions and, if so, 
what are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I was saying they will be 
through attrition. There's two retirements coming up, and there's 
one vacancy now. So there will be nobody laid off. We'll just, as 
they come up through retirement when they normally retire, we 
will retain that position. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What positions are they? The two retirements — 
what positions are they? And what about the one that is vacant? 
Can you give me the positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — One is the co-op management adviser in 
Saskatoon, and the other two are secretarial positions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Co-op adviser in Saskatoon. What were the duties 
that was being carried out by this particular person, and are you 
able to discontinue the use of such adviser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, within the department we'll 
be transferring another position over into that branch. But that's the 
position that will end up being utilized. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Within the department, you're going to transfer 
over another position. Would you indicate from where you're 
going to transfer it — and it's going to be the equivalent position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we're going to maintain the 
position, and it's going to be the position that works with the 
public. Whether it be exactly the same or not, I don't know, and it 
depends what position we  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1539 
 
 

transfer over there. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Surely, in drawing up your estimate, you know 
what you're going to do. I mean, here is a position of an adviser in 
Saskatoon; you said it will be replaced. And you must know where 
it's going to be coming from. Is it coming from one of the other 
subvotes? Are you taking one from administration, are you taking 
one from registry and inspection services, or are you bringing in 
someone else? Or are you going to leave it vacant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding, Mr. Chairman: there's 
one from administration going into that function. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what is the position that it holds in 
administration at the present time that will be transferred over 
down into communication and development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the employee probably 
wouldn't know, and we'd like to work with the employees. We 
don't want any problems internally. It may be one of two or three 
different positions. We'd like to work with them and see which 
one would best fit into it, which one would like it. We just 
wouldn't impose it upon them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It seems that you're indicating a retiring. Is that 
early retirement, forced in retirement, or a long service, normal 
retirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don't have forced retirement, Mr. 
Chairman. it's regular retirement, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well certainly that'll be good news to the civil 
service of Saskatchewan after the abuse they have taken from your 
government since forming the government. And I want to say that 
you'll never be forgiven for that abuse that you laid on the civil 
service. 
 
I wonder, in respect . . . I think, Mr. Chairman, we can ask the 
member from Meadow Lake either to enter the debate and ask — 
or either I have the floor, which I do. What he's doing is standing 
there chirping along with the member from Moosomin. That's all 
he is. He's sounding like a squirrel with a dog underneath. He 
keeps chirping like a squirrel. 
 
But I say, in respect to the registration and inspection services, you 
have also a decrease again of another person. And I wonder if the 
minister could indicate what position is being deleted in item no. 
3. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I gave the answer about four times, Mr. 
Chairman. That's a transfer of that secretary up to administration., 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Grants for co-operative development — could 
you give a list of the particular grants that are given  

under item no. 4? Could you provide that list? Because I noticed 
that the amount budgeted is exactly the same. And are you, in fact, 
proceeding to use the full amount? And what is the list of the 
organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in regards to the question, 
the centre for co-operative studies in Saskatoon at the University 
of Saskatchewan is budgeted. The reason that we're budgeting 
$152,000 —it's on a formula and it could be more than $119,000, 
so we're budgeted to make sure that we have sufficient there to 
cover it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What did you use last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The same formula. The appropriate formula, 
and they got $119,500. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The formula the same as last year. What would 
change it so that you wouldn't be able to put down straight 
$119,000? What in fact would increase the amount that you'd 
grant to the university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's based on — two things could do it — 
inflation or their budget requirement, according to the number of 
students they would have there. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Vote 6 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — This concludes the estimates for Co-operation 
and Co-operative Development departments, and would the 
minister like to thank his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 
the opposition for the questions that they put forward. I'd also like 
to thank my associates here, my deputy minister and the 
administration, for their answers that they've been able to supply 
me with for the opposition. I'm sure that the opposition has been 
enlightened by the answers we've been able to give them in 
regards to the co-operative movement, and certainly the 
co-operative movement in the province of Saskatchewan is alive 
and doing very well, thanks to people such as we have in the 
department here, because they are excellent people, and all the 
department is, and they're doing an excellent job. I'd like to 
especially thank them for supplying me with the answers here this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I join with the minister to 
congratulate and to thank his officials for providing the 
information in respect to the estimates. I thank the minister for 
being as forthright as possible under the circumstances of a 
difficult cut back in budget in his department, and certain when we 
form the government we look forward to further funding and 
development of the Co-operative department. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:54 p.m. 
 


