


















































June 16, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 16, 1986 
 

1979 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of honour 
to be able to introduce some guests on behalf of a fellow 
colleague, and the guests that I wish to introduce are visitors from 
W.P. Bate School, which is in the Riversdale constituency. I've 
been advised by the Assistant House Leader to keep my normal 
comments brief, so I, therefore, will. I just, though, would like to 
welcome you to Regina. 
 
They're seated in the east gallery just behind me. I'd like to 
welcome you to Regina, the students of W.P. Bate School, 7 and 
8's. They're accompanied by Mr. Larry Lazecki, Mr. Earl 
Pederson, and Mrs. Debbie Flegel. I'll advise you that I will be 
meeting with you at 3 o'clock, after your tour, for pictures and 
refreshments, and I will be open to all and any questions that you 
may have regarding the proceedings you see this afternoon. 
 
I would ask all members of the House to please greet the guests 
from Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to the House, 26 
students from Lakeview School in my constituency who are seated 
in the Speaker's gallery, together with their teacher, Mrs. Becker. 
Lakeview School brings students to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
every year, and I'm happy to see the grade 4 class here again this 
year. 
 
I will be meeting with the students at 2:30 downstairs for pictures 
and a drink. I hope that they have an enjoyable day today in the 
legislature, and I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, 
and through you to the House, a group of 24 grade 3 students from 
the town of Raymore. I know that many Hon. Members are 
familiar with the progressive town of Raymore which is just north 
of Regina, since they pass through it as they travel to and from 
Regina. I'm very pleased to have the students here this afternoon, 
along with their teachers, Brenda Olineck, Shelly Rowein. Also 
accompanying the students are Carol Hugie, Sharon Linklater, 
Gloria Orthner, and the bus driver, Mrs. Nicholson. 
 
I trust that they're having an enjoyable time at the legislature, and I 
look forward to meeting them after question period. I request all 
Hon. Members to please welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

 
Escalating Liability Insurance Premiums 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. In the March 17th throne speech, Mr. 
Minister, your government made a commitment, and I quote: 
 

..in this session, my government will announce measures to 
protect municipalities, hospitals and school boards from 
dramatically escalating liability insurance costs. 

 
Mr. Minister, that was in March. Tomorrow it will be three 
months to the day. Can the minister tell the Assembly when he 
plans to bring forward these measures to protect Saskatchewan 
municipalities, hospital boards and school boards from 
sky-rocketing liability insurance premiums? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we will be bringing forward the 
appropriate solutions that we believe the provincial government 
should be advancing to the people of Saskatchewan at such time 
when we have completed the consultations with the organizations 
involved. And I would inform the Leader of the Opposition that 
this very day I met with SUMA officials and elected 
representatives from local government bodies in one of the regions 
here of our province. The issue was discussed at that particular 
point in time. 
 
Perhaps the Leader of the Opposition is not aware that the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association has requested 
that all of their members provide them with responses to a 
particular questionnaire which was sent to every urban 
municipality in the province some time back. I understand that 
those questionnaires have been completed; that they have been 
forwarded to the urban municipalities association executive. 
 
I do not believe that the responses have been completely collated 
or evaluated or analysed in any way yet, but have requested from 
the urban municipalities association that they provide me with that 
particular information which will enable us to better determine 
what is the most appropriate response to the liability insurance 
question. 
 
The president of the urban municipalities association has 
discussed this with me on occasion. We had a good talk again 
today, and while it is an issue that we’re all concerned about, I 
think the Leader of the Opposition would agree that its’ far better 
to wait until you have all of the relevant information before you 
make a decision than to make a decision and then find out that, in 
fact, there was information that should have affected that 
particular decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, The 
minister seems to have taken lessons from his colleague, the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, in using the buzz word 
"consultation" as an excuse for inaction. My question to you is 
this, Mr. Minister - I ask you specifically: when you said in 
March, "My government will announce measures to protect 
municipalities, hospital boards and school boards," what did you 
intend, and when will you announce the measures which you 
promised three  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1980 
 
 

months ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I just indicated to the member 
opposite that we are engaged in consultation; I am, with the urban 
municipalities association. I know that the minister responsible for 
SGI has also met with other interested groups, and it is important 
that whatever particular kind of a solution that is offered at the 
provincial level be a solution that, in fact, takes into account all of 
the various kinds of concerns and recognizes the level and the 
scope of the problem that affects the urban municipalities. 
 
Surely he's not suggesting that you would in fact put into place an 
ostensible solution which in fact turns out to be not very 
appropriate when the municipalities have additional information 
that they have brought to our attention. It seems to me to be very 
reasonable, indeed rational, that one would wait until the results 
from this particular survey - which the urban municipalities 
association initiated on their own; which they have agreed they 
want us to be aware of before any particular solution is 
implemented here in the province - it seems to be very reasonable 
that in fact we wait until that information is available to us. 
 
I met, as I indicated, with the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) today, requested of him that he 
provide us with that particular information as soon as possible. He 
is agreed that that is what in fact they will do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, did it occur to you to get 
the facts before you made the promise in March? And are you 
aware, Mr. Minister, that the Saskatoon Public School Board has 
seen its liability insurance premiums jump 328 per cent this year? 
And are you aware, Mr. Minister that the City Hospital in 
Saskatoon has seen its liability insurance premiums increase from 
32,000 to 180,000, an increase of 462 per cent? 
 
And since you did not mention either the problems of school 
boards or hospitals in your previous extensive replies, can you tell 
me when you are going to announce measures which will apply 
not only to urban municipalities but also to school boards and 
hospital boards to give them some protection from increases at the 
level of 328 per cent and 462 per cent, which they are now 
experiencing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have indicated to various 
groups that there are certain different options which can be 
considered. There is the possibility of self-insurance pools being 
established by the urban municipalities association. There is the 
possibility of a legislative cap being put on, which other provinces 
are considering, and that full range of options is something that 
this particular government is considering, and we have discussed it 
with those particular organizations. 
 
But, in fact, this particular government believes that the sensible 
approach is to consult, to find out exactly what the scope and the 
extent of the specific problem is, and then to act. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that's a far more sensible way of dealing with the 
problem than doing the kinds of things that the former government 
did when, for  

example, they implemented land bank and it didn't turn out to be a 
solution for anybody - for absolutely nobody. 
 
So we expect, Mr. Speaker, that once we have engaged in the 
finalization of that consultation process, that we will in fact have 
the appropriate kinds of solutions to deal with that particular 
problem here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary to 
the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, in view of the fact 
that you promised action in your throne speech .. As a matter of 
fact, you announced measures to protect municipalities and 
hospitals and school boards against escalating liability insurance. 
Will you not now concede that this inaction of yours is ultimately 
going to drive up the cost of living and the tax bills on 
Saskatchewan residences? And don't you agree that either the 
property taxes will go up, or services will be cut, or both, in order 
that municipalities and school boards can cover this dramatically 
escalating costs which are happening and with which they're not 
getting any assistance from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it is the role of the government 
to respond to problems, to consult with organizations, and to 
implement solutions. And that is in fact exactly what we're doing. 
It's the role of the opposition to present constructive alternatives, 
and they have presented none. They have presented absolutely 
none. Now maybe they want to advance some today in question 
period, but it would have been the first time in three months that 
they would have advanced any particular kind of a solution. 
 
We have in fact, Mr. Speaker, talked about the possibility of 
working through SGI, or SGI alone, or the organizations 
themselves, setting up self-insurance pools. We have talked about 
the possibility - and there are both advantages and disadvantages - 
to legislating some kind of cap to insurance settlements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's the kind of thing that, when you recognize it's a 
problem, you say, yes, it's a problem; we're going to deal with it. 
We indicated that there were problems with retirement income, 
and we have advanced a pension for the first time ever here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That's recognizing a problem and 
offering a solution. We are doing the same thing with liability 
insurance. We recognize that there is a problem; we are 
consulting, and solutions will be advanced. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I remind you that two months 
ago I gave you some alternatives when we did Urban Affairs 
estimates, and you listened to those as much as you have listened 
to the school trustees when it came to the implementing of the 
assessment agency. You so-called consult but don't listen. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, unless you act quickly, the sky-rocking 
liability insurance rates are going to drive up transportation costs 
and in fact do away with some of the transportation services that 
we have in this province. And the example - and I'm asking you 
whether you're aware of it, Mr. Minister - is the example of the 
Moose Mountain bus lines, which have indicated that their 
liability insurance has increased from $26,000 to  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1981 
 
 

$155,000 in this year alone. And this is the reason given by this 
bus line for cancelling the service, in an application, between 
Regina and Bengough. 
 
Do you propose, Mr. Minister, to allow these sky-rocketing costs 
to just work their way through the entire economy, or do you 
propose to act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very clear that 
this government, when it takes a stand that it's going to act, indeed 
it does act. And that's exactly what we are doing. When I met with 
the president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association today and discussed the particular issue with various 
locally-elected councillors, that's acting, Mr. Speaker. That in fact 
is acting. That's listening to the people of Saskatchewan. That's 
discussing the kind of problem that they have. 
 
When the municipalities, in fact, fill out a questionnaire dealing 
with liability insurance, send it into their organization, they 
forward it to us, and we, in fact, consider those particular 
responses; that is acting, Mr. Speaker; that is acting. 
 
Contrary to the members opposite, who have yet to take a position 
-they have not told us whether or not they are in favour of 
self-insurance pools being established. They have not told us 
whether or not they are in favour of, in fact, legislating a cap and 
where that cap should be. So it's fine for them to continue to 
advance a problem and to advance it. In fact, we have been 
meeting with the various organizations that I have just talked 
about. We are discussing with them rational solutions to that 
particular problem. We will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
in view of the fact that the premium increases hitting 
Saskatchewan people are not related to the liability incurred here 
in this province; that they are determined by incidences that have 
happened on the other side of the globe in Bhopal, and the shuttle 
crash, and the Air India crash; in view of that, Mr. Minister, can 
you explain your reluctance to use the public's insurance company, 
SGI to drive down liability insurance rates? Why won't your 
government use SGI to establish insurance premiums that are 
made in Saskatchewan, based on the kind of experience that 
happens in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the NDP's 
approach to say, this is the solution, and we are going to 
implement it regardless of who is involved or regardless of what 
the implications may be. And we all recall that under them, under 
the NDP administration, SGI lost literally tens of millions of 
dollars because of mismanagement. 
 
Now we have no intention, Mr. Speaker, of putting the public at 
risk through making the wrong kinds of insurance decisions 
regarding SGI. We want to make sure that the right kinds of 
decisions are taken, which is exactly why we are involved in the 
consultation process that we are. 
 
And it may very well be that the urban municipalities  

association and that the rural municipalities would very much like, 
after they have looked at the entire range of options and the scope 
of the problem that confronts them, that they would like to have an 
SGI solution imposed across the province. On the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker, they may not. They may want to set up their own 
self-insurance pools, and there's a wide gulf between the two, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think the member opposite doesn't seem to recognize that 
consultation is an integral part of what this government believes 
in. It's what we stand for. We are engaged in that at present, and 
we will continue to meet with those organizations to find the 
appropriate solution and to put that solution in place, and it will be 
a solution that will ensure that the taxpayers' dollar is at minimum 
risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Proposed American Duty on Canadian Lumber 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well all I can recommend, don't ask that guy 
another question. 
 
But my question is to the Minister of Economic Development and 
Trade, and it deals with the threat of our forest industry posed by 
the American attempt to put on a 27 per cent duty on Canadian 
softwood lumber sold to the United States.  
 
As you may well know, Mr. Minister, last Friday, Canadian 
governments and representatives from the industry met in 
Vancouver to set a strategy with respect to the latest example of U. 
S. protectionism. 
 
Can the minister give the people of Saskatchewan a report on the 
strategy session, and can he tell the Assembly what specific role 
Saskatchewan will play since the American action threatens nearly 
$20 million annual sales of Saskatchewan lumber to United 
States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The meeting in Vancouver on Friday 
involved both the federal and all provincial governments, with the 
exception of Prince Edward Island, along with the industry and 
four representatives of the IWA (International Woodworkers of 
America). Arising out of the meeting there was unanimous support 
by both governments, federal and provincial, the unions involved, 
as well as the industry involved, that Canada should take a 
common front with regards to the particular item with regard to 
softwood lumber. 
 
The application will be coming before the commerce department 
and the International Trade Commission. The thing that one has to 
remember and understand is when you appear before the 
International Trade Commission as a quasi-judicial body wherein 
due process will be the rules of the day — and we believe, as does 
the rest of the governments and the industry and labour, that we 
stand in a very good stead on the question of fairness with regard 
to that issue. 
 
With specifically as to what we agreed to do, all parties agreed to 
have prepared by early in July all details with regard to their 
particular industry in their particular province or region, and then 
the representation to the ITC will be done with one voice. That 
was a decision of all  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1982 
 
 

governments concerned, of all political stripes, and labour as well 
as management - will all appear together with a common front 
representing Canada on a very serious question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Could the minister 
indicate who will in fact be co-ordinating getting all of the 
representative groups which you are talking about, and who in fact 
will be the spokesman for that? Is that the representatives of the 
Canadian government, or will the province itself have its 
representatives also present in future discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the question will be co-ordinated by 
the Hon. Joe Clark, Minister of External Affairs. It will be 
External Affairs along with the Canadian ambassador to 
Washington, and that will be the focus by which we would draw 
together our information. Any questions as it relates to political 
lobby would also be handled that way. We will be meeting further 
as a group, again of governments and industry and labour, as to 
how best to mount any political lobby that would be undertaken 
between now and the time of decision, which is likely November 
or February of '86 or '87. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final supplemental. You indicate a possibility 
of putting forward a political lobby also. You indicated that Mr. 
Clark would be representing and co-ordinating along with the 
ambassador. I want to ask you specifically: will all the 
presentations being made by the federal government, be it the 
ambassador or the minister of foreign affairs, Mr. Clark - will the 
presentations be made available for scrutiny by the particular 
provinces that are most deeply affected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Will the information, the question is, be 
made public? Certainly it would be made public. I think, when one 
looks at the fact that on this particular issue all Canadians, whether 
they represent governments of various political stripe, represent 
the trade union movement involved in the forest industry, or 
represent the industry itself, all have a similar interest on this 
particular question. And that representation, we would have no 
problem sharing our particular information and position with 
members of the opposition when that particular information has 
been gathered. 
 
One thing you might look at from Saskatchewan, and certainly 
some Saskatchewan can advance: under the new arrangements in 
the forest, some of the stumpage fees in Saskatchewan that 
Saskatchewan government would charge to the industry will in 
fact be increased. And that's one of the arguments being advanced 
by the lobby group in the United States is what is unfair about the 
Canadian forest industry. We don't accept that particular 
proposition by the United States. We're dealing with The Forest 
Act in the province of Saskatchewan, not based on the countervail 
action, but based on what we believe is fair: (a) return to the 
provincial coffers, and (b) fair to an industry as to stumpage fees. 
 
So those types of things will be valid in the hearings before the 
ITC and the Department of Commerce, and certainly something 
that would be part of due process. 
 

Free Trade Negotiations 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Economic Trade and Development. It deals with public 
comments made by the Premier of Alberta, Mr. Getty. In an 
interview reported to today's edition of the Toronto Globe and 
Mail, the Premier of Alberta is quoted as saying that free trade 
negotiations may have to be suspended until after U.S. 
congressional elections in November of this year. 
 
Premier Getty told reports, and I quote: 
 

.. during this election year we may not be able to make any 
progress with the United States. If over the next month or two 
we establish that there is no serious ability to negotiate, then I 
think we might make the decision to say, let's just stop. 

 
Does the Government of Saskatchewan support the Premier of 
Alberta in his position that free trade negotiations might have to be 
suspended if they become too much of a political football in this 
fall's U.S. congressional elections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think we make a couple of 
comments. With regards to the statement by Mr. Getty which I 
read in The Globe and Mail, as did most other people probably, 
I'm not going to defend or commend the statements of Mr. Getty 
in Alberta, or whether in fact that is true. 
 
I think, though, from this point of view from a Canadian 
perspective, one of the great problems that we can face, dealing 
with the very difficult trade negotiation with the United States, 
whether it's free trade or whether it's dealing with the forest 
question or whether it's dealing with the hogs or cattle question, is 
that you have to deal, I think, from a very strong voice, and that's 
not to show yourself of a house divided. 
 
And so from that point of view, whatever the collective decision in 
this country as to how we would proceed with those negotiations, I 
don't think it does a great service to anyone for someone to come 
out one day to take this position and somebody come out the next 
day to take another position. 
 
So I think that the position that we have taken as a government, 
the position the federal government has taken, the position taken 
by most premiers in this country, is that we no longer have the 
luxury of simply saying, let's keep the status quo, because the 
status quo is very much changing these days. 
 
We don't have that luxury. We have to make sure that we preserve 
those U.S. markets. We have to make sure that we preserve and 
create new markets, whether in United States or other parts, or a 
province like Saskatchewan could stand in very poor stead, quite 
frankly, because we export almost half of everything we produce 
in this province into the world. 
 
The biggest market for that is United States. And I think it's very 
important that we, in fact, preserve that market, however we 
proceed to do that. But it's very important that we preserve that 
market to create jobs in the province  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1983 
 
 

and maintain jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister, we all agree 
upon the necessity of preserving the U.S. market; it's a question of 
how we do it. Let me say, by way of background, that Canada has 
experienced more difficulties with the U.S. protectionism in the 
last three months since free trade negotiations began than we have 
in the 15 years preceding that. 
 
The latest example of how trade between Canada and the U.S. has 
become a convenient political football in this year's congressional 
elections is the attempt by some prominent U.S. Congressmen to 
ban all Canadian beef and live cattle imports to the U.S. while the 
International Trade Commission conducts a fact-finding study of 
the beef trade between our two countries. 
 
Does the Government of Saskatchewan not now agree that free 
trade negotiations have simply stirred up protectionist forces in the 
U.S. and provided protectionist forces with a point of focus which 
allows them to place increasing pressure on Canada to give up its 
traditional share in the U.S. market? 
 
Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that a better understanding of the 
U.S. market might have deterred you from wildly flailing the free 
trade issue which has rang the alarm bells south of the border? If, 
Mr. Minister, you'd done your homework .. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is going over and 
over the same subject area, and I think if you have a question, 
come directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that if you 
had done your homework you might have better understood the 
U.S. market, and you might have avoided the very serious 
problems which the protectionist forces south of the border are 
now visiting on us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think, that to listen to the hon. 
member's question, he would have us believe that somehow 
because we decided to enter into some trade negotiations that this 
has all happened. 
 
The reality of what has happened in the United States is that the 
traditional party that supported free trade in the United States is 
the Democratic Party, and that Democratic Party of late has been 
looking at protectionism as a good vehicle by which to unseat the 
Republicans, and that's a dangerous, dangerous trend. That trend 
has been developing for some time. That trend has been 
developing for some time, as has the trade deficit in the United 
States which stands today on the yearly basis of $148 billion. 
 
Those are concerns for us, but to simply listen to the members 
opposite, or to listen to their national leader, or to listen to Lloyd 
Axworthy, is that we should simply stand by, do nothing, keep the 
status quo and lose those jobs, lose those markets, and that would 
be harmful to this country, and that would be harmful to the 
people of Saskatchewan, whether they work in the lumber 
industry, on the farms, in the potash mines, small manufacturer of 
farm equipment, or whatever you have. That policy is  

wrong-headed. That policy is your head in the sand. That policy is 
status quo, and that policy will not wash. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 62 - An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on 
Saskatchewan Highways 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Regulation of Traffic on Saskatchewan 
Highways. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 - An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Motor Carriers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 - An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles 
and Licensing of Drivers 

 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Registration of Vehicles and Licensing of Drivers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 - An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Ambulance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Ambulance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 - An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan and Providing for the Payment of a Minimum Monthly 

Pension 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to rise 
today and move second reading of The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act. 
 
The guarantee of an adequate retirement income for ourselves and 
our families is a goal common to us all. As announced in the 
throne speech and in my budget address, this government is 
committed to offering   



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1984 
 
 

additional retirement security to the people of Saskatchewan and, 
in particular, to those members of society such as home-makers, 
small-business employees, part-time and self-employed workers 
who are making a valuable contribution to society, but who have 
not been given the opportunity to adequately save for their 
retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud to introduce The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, an Act which once again 
demonstrates Saskatchewan's ability to be a national leader in the 
development of social programs that protect and enhance the 
security of the individual, an Act that is an important milestone 
towards the goal of ensuring that all Saskatchewan residents will 
be able to retire above the poverty line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an historic occasion. Not since the 
introduction of the medical care insurance Act in 1961 has there 
been such an important social policy legislation introduced in this 
Assembly. For the first time in Canada, a government will be 
recognizing the contribution made by home-makers and 
acknowledging their right to a pension of their own, enabling 
part-time workers, self-employed persons, and small-business 
employees to establish a saving plan for their retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there clearly is a need for new pension opportunities 
for those who are least able to provide for a secure retirement. 
Home-makers, who make an important contribution to the 
Saskatchewan way of life, are often not covered at all by the 
Canada Pension Plan and have no access to private pension plans, 
but the built-in inequities against women within our retirement 
system do not end there. Of those women who have chosen to 
enter the work-force, almost 64 per cent are unable to avail 
themselves of a private pension plan. Consequently, Saskatchewan 
home-makers who have chosen to raise families or who are in and 
out of the work-force may have very few opportunities to save for 
their retirement. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the results of these inequities are all 
too predictable. As of 1984, slightly more than half of those 
unattached single women, 65 and over, were living below the 
poverty line. From a more general perspective, this is even more 
alarming when one considers that women live longer than men on 
an average and, as a consequence, three-quarters of our single 
senior citizens are women. 
 
The structural inequities within the existing pension mechanisms 
are acute. They not only affect home-makers but extend into the 
employment sector. In this regard, as we go about our business in 
this Assembly and in our day-to-day affairs, we have a tendency to 
forget that 55 per cent of our labour force is not covered by an 
employer-sponsored pension plan. 
 
While the Canada Pension Plan covers the entire work-force, 
contributions and benefits are based on an individuals' earnings. 
Consequently, low-wage workers who have the lowest 
contributions to the Canada Pension Plan also receive the lowest 
benefits. Indeed, while the maximum CPP retirement benefit is 
$486 per month, it is the case that in Saskatchewan the average 
retirement  

benefit is only $215 per month - only 44 per cent of the maximum 
benefit. 
 
As a result of inadequate pension coverage, the federal 
government has had to establish a system of comprehensive 
income support for seniors. Old age security and guaranteed 
income supplement payments account for over 15 per cent of the 
total program expenditures of the federal government. But even 
with this large commitment of public resources, almost half of the 
550,000 single Canadian senior citizens living alone in 1984 had 
incomes below Statistics Canada's designated poverty line. 
 
May I remind the Hon. Members that this is not a new problem. In 
1966 the Senate Committee on Ageing commented that: 
 

Without question the most serious problem encountered by the 
senate committee in the course of its investigation was the 
degree and extent of poverty which exists among older people. 

 
This government does not intend to ignore this long-standing and 
serious social problem in the hope that it will go away. In 1982 we 
protected home owners and their families through our mortgage 
interest reduction plan. Today we are determined to take the lead 
on pension reform by addressing the structural inequities within 
our pension system. 
 
Clearly it is time for a government in Canada to act, and we intend 
to do so. It is our intention to strengthen those mechanisms which 
ensure our personal and family retirement security. The opposition 
is well aware that governments have been discussing pension 
reform for years, but actions to date have not adequately addressed 
the problem facing retiring Canadians. 
 
As I indicated earlier, the lack of action is particularly serious with 
respect to home-makers, especially for those who have chosen to 
raise families or who may move in and out of the work-force. 
They have been completely left out of any pension reform 
legislation. The federal government and the provinces, however, 
have agreed on some important changes to the Canada Pension 
Plan with respect to early retirement benefits, disability benefits, 
and the Canada Pension Plan credit splitting. While these changes 
are extremely worthwhile, they do not address other concerns of 
significant importance. 
 
First and foremost, no action has been taken to include 
home-makers in the Canada Pension Plan. In December of 1983 
the report of the parliamentary task force on pension reform 
recommended that home-makers be covered by the CPP. All 
members of that task force endorse the recommendation with one 
exception. 
 
There's much support for home-makers' pension. Despite the 
widespread support, provincial and federal governments have been 
unable to arrive at an agreeable solution, and it is unlikely that an 
agreeable solution will be forthcoming. 
 
I would like to make it clear at this point that I am blaming  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1985 
 
 

no one government in Canada for collective failure to take action, 
but it does take one government with foresight, determination, and 
courage to get the ball rolling. This government, through the 
leadership of the Premier, has decided that now is the time for 
Saskatchewan to again take the lead by introducing the first 
pension plan in Canada which embraces the contributions of 
home-makers. In the months to come, we will be encouraging the 
federal government and other provinces to follow our lead. 
 
Federal-provincial agreement has been reached on private pension 
reform. A series of improvements to minimum conditions to be 
obeyed by private pension plans have been agreed upon. These 
improvements will assist members of existing pension plans, but 
they will not do enough, in our view, to extend pension plan 
coverage to workers not now covered by a pension plan. 
 
The lack of pension coverage is a particular problem in the 
small-business sector because small firms often feel they cannot 
afford the additional start-up and ongoing costs required to operate 
a pension plan. The Saskatchewan pension plan will extend 
additional pension plan coverage to thousands of Saskatchewan 
workers who currently have limited access to an 
employer-sponsored plan. 
 
As I indicated earlier, the Saskatchewan pension plan will extend 
pension coverage to groups now underrepresented in pension 
plans. It will address those structural inequities within the existing 
pension system. As a result of the Saskatchewan pension plan, 
Saskatchewan families will now have an opportunity to achieve 
secure retirement incomes. 
 
There are three key target groups: firstly, home-makers and 
part-time workers who now have no opportunity to join either the 
private pension plan or the Canada Pension Plan. Employees of 
small business; small businesses typically feel that they cannot 
afford the cost of operating a pension plan for a small number of 
employees. Saskatchewan pension plan will be of considerable 
assistance to the small-business sector. Thirdly, farmers, 
small-business proprietors, and other self-employed individuals, 
who are covered by the Canada Pension Plan, will gain additional 
access to a pension plan. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension plan will be a voluntary pension plan. 
All residents of Saskatchewan between the ages of 18 and 65 will 
be eligible to contribute. In addition, approximately 450,000 
persons could be eligible to benefit from a government-matching 
contribution. 
 
There are three main aspects of the SPP: basic matchable 
contributions, non-matchable contributions, and thirdly, 
guaranteed minimum pension. In addition, the Saskatchewan 
income plan has been amended to provide increased benefits and 
thus complement the Saskatchewan pension plan as an overall 
retirement benefit package. 
 
Firstly, the basic matchable contributions. The plan will allow 
Saskatchewan residents to supplement their  

contributions to the Canada Pension Plan with contributions to the 
new Saskatchewan pension plan. The government of 
Saskatchewan will match SPP contributions made by individuals 
with less than 25,800 in annual CPP (Canada Pension Plan) 
insurable earnings and income from other sources. 
 
CPP contributions depend on an individual's insurable earnings as 
defined for Canada Pension Plan purposes. Insurable earnings 
include wages and salaries in the case of employees, and income 
from self-employment in the case of farmers, business, 
proprietors, and professionals. 
 
In 1986, maximum Canada Pension Plan contributions will be 
made by all those with insurable earnings of 25,800 or above. The 
amount of the matching government contribution available to the 
participant will be determined by the difference between the 
maximum Canada Pension Plan contribution and the participant's 
actual Canada Pension Plan contribution. A ceiling of $300 will be 
placed on the matching government contribution. 
 
(1445) 
 
The extent of the individual's matchable contribution may also be 
reduced by the amount of income from other sources that is 
received in a year. Individuals with combined Canada Pension 
Plan earnings and income from other sources in excess of 25,800 
will not be eligible for the government matching contribution. The 
first $1,000 income from other sources will be exempt. Some 
examples of other income would include interest dividends, capital 
gains and rental income. 
 
All participants with Canada Pension Plan insurable earnings and 
income from other sources below $9,133 in 1986 will be eligible 
for the maximum $300 matching contribution from the 
government of Saskatchewan. The total of the participant's 
matchable contribution and the matching government contribution 
for a calendar year may not exceed $600. 
 
Secondly, non-matchable contributions. Participants ineligible for 
any or the full government matching contribution may contribute 
to the Saskatchewan pension plan a non-matchable amount equal 
to $600 less the total of their matchable contribution and the 
government matching contribution, if any. 
 
And thirdly, the guaranteed minimum pension. Participants 
eligible for the government match in the first 10 years of the plan 
will be entitled to a guaranteed minimum pension based on 
matchable contributions. A minimum monthly pension of $15 will 
be guaranteed for each year eligible participants contribute the 
maximum matchable amount of $300. The provision will increase 
the SPP pensions paid out during the initial years of operation. 
 
For example, with the minimum pension provision, contributors 
who receive the maximum $300 government match each year and 
have reached 65 two years after the Saskatchewan pension plan 
begins, would receive a pension of $30 per month. Without the 
minimum pension provision, a benefit of only $11 per  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1986 
 
 

month would be paid. 
 
As contributions and investment earnings accumulate, the 
minimum pension will no longer be necessary to provide adequate 
benefits. A home-maker who contributes $25 per month each 
month for 30 years could receive a pension of between 600 and 
$1,025 per month at age 65, depending on the investment 
performance of the fund. 
 
Saskatchewan pension plan will be open for contributions on 
December 31, 1986. Contributions for the 1986 calendar year and 
any year thereafter will be permitted until 60 days following the 
end of the year. A board of trustees appointed by cabinet will be 
responsible for the administration of the plan. The board will have 
the power to employ administrative staff. 
 
Funds accumulated from contributions by participants in 
government will be invested; returns on investments will be 
accredited plan participants. 
 
An annual statement showing accumulated contributions to date, 
including the investment earnings, will be provided to each plan 
member. Benefits will be paid out in the form of monthly annuity 
payments based on individuals' accumulated contributions, plus 
any government contributions made on his or her behalf, including 
accrued interest. 
 
The government recognizes, however, that Saskatchewan senior 
citizens who have already retired will not be able to benefit from 
the Saskatchewan pension plan. Along with the Saskatchewan 
pension plan, the government will introduce companion legislation 
to increase the Saskatchewan income plan payments for senior 
citizens by $15 in each of the next three years, and by at least $5 in 
the fourth year. 
 
By 1990, the maximum SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) payment 
to a single senior citizen will have doubled from $50 per month 
today to $100 per month in 1990. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension plan will recognize the importance of 
homemakers as the foundation of the Saskatchewan way of life 
and as the heart and soul of our families. It will also provide the 
opportunity for small-business employees, part-time, and 
self-employed workers to belong to a pension plan. 
 
I'm confident that when viewed by future generations the 
Saskatchewan pension plan will be seen as an important milestone 
towards the goal of ensuring that all Saskatchewan residents will 
be able to retire above the poverty line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second reading of an Act 
respecting The Saskatchewan Pension Plan and Providing for the 
Payment of a Minimum Monthly payment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, as will be clear from those 
who have listened to the minister's remarks, the proposal is one 
which is replete with a great deal of detail  

and, accordingly, I will be moving to adjourn the debate following 
my brief remarks this afternoon. 
 
But I think the minister set the stage for the introduction of this 
legislation by moving back to the period prior to 1966 at the time 
when a comprehensive study indicated that many people in 
Canada did not have adequate pension protection. 
 
In the last 20 years, great strides have been made in Canada in 
providing better pension protection. Some of us can hardly credit 
the fact that there was no Canada Pension Plan prior to 1966; there 
was no guaranteed income supplements prior to 1966 - at least 
federally administered. We had only the old age security pension 
which had come from the period of the 1920s, thanks to the 
well-credited work of J. S. Woodsworth and others who had 
fought valiantly for old age security pensions. 
 
Since that time, in recent years, we have seen the advent of 
supplements to the old age security and guaranteed income 
supplement by way of spouses' allowances and other payments 
which, in part, bridge the gap between the ages of 60 and 65 for 
some recipients of pensions. 
 
And the minister has made reference to other improvements to the 
pension legislation dealing with credit splitting and disability 
benefits. He spoke of a decision by a parliamentary committee in 
favour of pension for home-makers in 1983 and said that there 
was widespread support for it. He suggested, by inference, that 
this Bill was going to provide what the 1983 report recommended. 
Not so. Not so. 
 
There is no question that was what was proposed in 1983 of the 
introducing and permitting home-makers to join the Canada 
Pension Plan would be something which would have widespread 
support all across Saskatchewan by all persons. But that is not 
what this Bill does. This Bill does not do that ..(inaudible 
interjection) .. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite are offering comments. They will 
have an opportunity to debate the Bill, and I very much hope that 
the member for Weyburn enters this debate and doesn't carry on 
with his present practice of making his comments from his seat. 
And I am going to look with a good deal of interest to see whether 
he does in fact comment on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that this Bill really raises is: who will 
likely take advantage of it; who will likely take advantage of it? 
And that's the one that we should explore when we discuss this in 
second reading and when we discuss it in committee. Who is it 
likely to benefit - cui bono? 
 
We will need to address this because clearly many people are 
excluded. People of middle incomes where both the husband and 
the wife work will be excluded from this Bill. They .. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm going to ask members on both 
sides of the House to control their noise-making so that the 
member can be heard. Order, order. The member for Regina North 
West has been making a considerable amount of noise ever since 
the House  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1987 
 
 

opened today, and I'm .. (inaudible interjection) .. Order. When I'm 
on my feet and ask for order it implies all people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think we're going to have 
to ask ourselves; who benefits from this Bill? We already .. We 
can identify very quickly some people who will not benefit. 
People of high incomes will not benefit; no problem there. People 
with middle incomes where both husband and wife work, they will 
not benefit. The people who will get clearly the most benefit are 
people who have low incomes but whose spouses have high 
incomes. That will be the best situation, because they lose nothing, 
and they have a benefit which is total. 
 
And I think the member for, say, Prince Albert-Duck Lake would 
appreciate that. If he has a spouse, or the member for Maple Creek 
has a spouse where the income is low, the nominal income is low, 
then that is the ideal situation for benefits - the ideal situation for 
benefits - because there will be no question of being able to raise 
the money to pay the premiums, and the benefit will be total. 
 
Where someone is at the low end of the scale, obviously they will 
not get the total benefit. If they're at the bottom end of the scale 
and they would ordinarily get only the OAS, old age security 
pension, and the guaranteed income supplement, this Bill will give 
them modest help because they have to face the fact that they're 
going to lose the guaranteed income supplement. 
 
This pension, as a result of the enactment of this Bill, will mean 
that people who would otherwise be entitled to a pension from the 
federal government fully paid for by the federal government will 
now have to get a pension from the provincial government, half of 
which the person paid for. So they will see some diminution in 
their benefits. 
 
An Hon. Member: What was that word? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Some diminution, is the word. I offer it to 
the schoolteacher opposite who inquired about it .. (inaudible 
interjections) .. Shame? Shame that he didn't know what it meant! 
Shame indeed. 
 
But I want to point out just who benefits and who doesn't from this 
Bill. And we will pursue this in committee; we will pursue this in 
committee, Mr. Speaker. But I think that there is no question that 
there are some people who get greater benefits from the Bill than 
others. And what we will have to do, as a legislature, is to ask 
ourselves whether or not these people are the persons most in need 
of a contribution from the public purse. 
 
And the members will need to judge whether or not my 
18-year-old daughter who - I'm looking over this Bill and I believe 
will be able to join the plan. She will be 18 by December 31st; 
she's a student and she has no income. It looks to me like she's 
going to be eligible. And we have to ask ourselves whether my 
daughter is the person who is most in need of help with respect to 
retirement income. And she may be, but that's a judgement we all 
are going to have to make. 
 
And those who see no problem with the Bill will say, fine, there's 
nothing wrong with 18-year-old students getting a  

benefit from the public purse when someone at the very bottom of 
the scale gets a very much lower benefit - very much lower 
because they lose the guaranteed income supplement which they 
otherwise would have obtained. 
 
So all of these will need to be addressed. I'm not saying that there's 
anything .. that these are not capable of being solved. But they 
certainly will need to be addressed, and they're not going to be 
addressed by shouts of: are you for it or against it? and all that sort 
of thing. We're talking about a lot of money, a lot of public money, 
and we have to ask ourselves whether we're targeting that money 
to the people who need it most. It is the same old question of 
fairness which comes up with this government all the time. Are 
they directing the money to the people who need it most? Is it fair? 
And we're talking now about very significant sums of public 
money. 
 
The minister has suggested that 450,000 people could participate. 
And suppose you thought that they were going to get a 
government contribution of only $100, which is one-third of the 
maximum. Then that becomes $45 million a year each and every 
year. And we shouldn't assume that this is small change we're 
talking about. We're talking about a very large expenditure of 
public money, ongoing year after year. What we have to ask 
ourselves is: is it being targeted to the people who need it most? 
 
(1500) 
 
And those are questions which I know the minister will be able to 
address when we get into committee. We will have a debate at 
second reading, which we are now participating in, some of us on 
our feet and some of us from our chairs. But I think that it is a 
serious business. It represents, I would think, the largest 
expenditure of public funds of any Bill which has been presented 
at this session, and therefore ought to receive the sober 
consideration of all members of this House. I very much hope it 
will receive that sober consideration addressing this very real 
question of whether or not the expenditure proposed by the Bill is 
being targeted to those who need it most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will want to look in more detail at the remarks of 
the minister who introduced the Bill, and accordingly I beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 60 - An Act respecting the Payment of Benefits to or 
on behalf of Certain Senior Citizens 

 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased today to rise and 
move second reading of a Bill respecting the Payment of Benefits 
to or on behalf of Certain Senior Citizens. This, Mr. Speaker, is 
the companion piece of legislation to the new Saskatchewan 
pension plan just introduced by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to move second reading of this Bill 
which, together with the Saskatchewan pension plan introduced, 
enhanced income protection to Saskatchewan people, in particular 
to the senior citizens  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1988 
 
 

of our province who have retired without opportunity to contribute 
to the Saskatchewan pension plan and who certainly deserve the 
opportunity to retire with adequate income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pension initiatives discussed today in the 
Assembly by my colleague and myself are designed to put to rest 
the fears that people have as they approach retirement; fear that 
their savings would not keep pace with inflation; fear that 
unforeseen expenses might force them to turn to welfare; fear that 
they might become a burden to their children. 
 
I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, that our government today is taking the 
initiatives that we have which will ensure that people will be able 
to retire in dignity with sufficient and adequate income to meet 
their needs. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is a piece of 
legislation which indicates our particular concern specifically for 
that segment of our population which does not have, and 
traditionally has not had, adequate income upon which to retire, 
and those are low-income senior citizens whose only form of 
income is old age security and the guaranteed income supplement 
which comes from the federal government. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that governments today must be 
responsive and sensitive to the needs of senior citizens. They are 
one of the largest segments of our population that is, of course, 
growing in size, larger perhaps than most segments of the 
population are. Consequently, our government has put forward 
considerable effort to ensure that we are appropriately meeting the 
needs of Saskatchewan's senior citizens. 
 
We have conducted two seniors' forums here in the province, one 
in 1983 and one in 1985, at which time we discussed with senior 
citizens a variety of needs which faced them - whether they were 
housing needs, whether they were transportation needs, whether 
they were medical needs, or whether they were income needs. 
And many senior citizens have expressed their concerns that there 
be appropriate income available to the lower-income senior, 
particularly those people who are widows that have to exist 
entirely on the old age security and the guaranteed income 
supplement. 
 
As a consequence, Mr. Speaker, we, in the past, took some 
significant steps to enhance the Saskatchewan income plan which 
has provided a supplement to those low-income seniors. When we 
took government a few years back, Mr. Speaker, we doubled the 
income benefits available to seniors under the Saskatchewan 
income plan, for example, for single seniors, from $25 to $50. We 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that that was a very important thing to do. 
Under the former administration, the Saskatchewan income plan 
in fact had been increased only once, and that was a meagre $5 a 
month in seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many things that we have done to respond 
to the needs of seniors, but I believe that the action that we are 
taking today is indicative of the very concrete concerns that our 
government has respecting seniors. We have demonstrated, and 
we are  

demonstrating today, that we are committed to programs which 
protect the ability of seniors to live full, independent, fulfilling 
lives, and the Saskatchewan income plan Bill that is before us 
today is another step in this direction. 
 
There are two aspects to the Saskatchewan income plan legislation 
that I want to discuss. First, Mr. Speaker, this Bill clarifies the 
present Saskatchewan income plan. Specifically, the Bill 
establishes the Saskatchewan income plan program under a 
separate piece of legislation. It solidifies in legislation the 
Saskatchewan income plan. This guarantees that this important 
income security program will become an enduring part of income 
protection for seniors. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill ensures that sick benefits are 
available for Saskatchewan residents, even if they spend some 
time of the year away from Saskatchewan. Thus a senior receiving 
SIP who visits his family in another province will continue to 
receive benefits. 
 
The Bill specifies that benefits are provided on the basis of a 
guaranteed income supplement application. That is, seniors need 
not complete a separate application for the Saskatchewan income 
plan benefit. The guaranteed income supplement application 
serves as the Saskatchewan income plan application as well. 
 
Fourthly, the Bill authorizes benefits to be available for seniors 
who are 65 years of age or older. 
 
Second, the Bill will be supported, Mr. Speaker, by benefit 
increases over the next four years. In each of these years, benefits 
will increase by $15 for each single person and $30 for a married 
couple; and in the fourth year, benefits will increase by at least $5 
per single individual and $10 for a married couple. And these are, 
of course, monthly figures. 
 
I expect, Mr. Speaker, that increases will commence later this 
year. These increases will double the present benefits from a 
maximum $50 for a single individual to a maximum of $100 for a 
single individual, and benefits for a couple will increase from $75 
per month to $175 per month. Mr. Speaker, these increases round 
out the programs available for Saskatchewan seniors today and the 
seniors of tomorrow. 
 
I'm very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that our government has seen fit to 
provide Saskatchewan people with the opportunity to retire in 
dignity through the introduction of the new Saskatchewan pension 
plan and to provide senior citizens with adequate retirement 
income, particularly those who have not, and will not have, an 
opportunity to contribute to the Saskatchewan pension plan. And 
of course that income will be made available to them through this 
companion piece of legislation which ensures that the 
Saskatchewan income plan will become an enduring part of 
income security for senior citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this Bill can best 
be described as the government's afterthought  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1989 
 
 

after they decided not to call the general election, which most 
people had expected and wanted. That is clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister describes it as a companion piece legislation to the 
pension Bill which we heard about just a short while ago. I want to 
say that this Bill leaves out a very large number of Saskatchewan 
people who need some form of income assistance which this 
government continues to ignore. And he had an opportunity - they 
had an opportunity to include them in this legislation; they chose 
not to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people between the ages of 60 and 65 
who have no source of income. Most of those people happen to be 
widows. Many of those people happen to be handicapped or ill. 
And because of those circumstances, Mr. Speaker, those people 
should have a guaranteed income as is proposed by the New 
Democratic Party and which would have been in place had the 
government chosen to call the election. 
 
Now the member from Meadow Lake points to the Minster of 
Finance and says, well, it's over there. It's not over there, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill does not provide for those people, and the 
pension Bill does not provide for those people. Those people need 
that assistance now. Their only source of income if they're unable 
to work, Mr. Speaker, is welfare. They should not have to go and 
get their means of being able to provide shelter and food through 
that kind of source. The government chose to ignore that problem. 
 
I want to say to the minister who just spoke, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people are going to balance these small increases that he spoke of 
against the dramatic costs of other things that they have had to pay 
in the last four years. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this will 
not cover those costs. This increase that the minister speaks of will 
not even cover the increased costs of the power bill, will not even 
increase the cost of the power bill that has increased in the time 
that this government has been in power. 
 
I remind the minister that the electrical rates alone have increased 
by 40 per cent; power bills have increased for senior citizens by 
over $40 a month, that's power and gas. The minister stands in the 
House and he says, I'm going to provide $15. They have the old 
practice; we take with one hand and we give with the other. 
Except that they have given it a new definition, and they take 
many times more with one hand than they give with the other, 
leaving senior citizens in this province in a far greater difficult 
situation than they were in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors of this province will not be fooled by this 
legislation. They will still remember that this legislation does not 
provide the free telephones which this Conservative Party and this 
government promised in the last election. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will not provide relief to senior citizens 
who are unable to have the age exemption in the calculation of the 
flat tax - another example of taking tax money from people who 
can least afford it. The age exemption does not apply for the flat 
tax, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite know it, and the seniors 
who are  

having to pay it know it as well. The government opposite 
promised to cut income tax by 10 per cent; instead they taxed 
people, including senior citizens, more because of the provision of 
the flat tax. 
 
Another group of people, Mr. Speaker, who were hurt by another 
tax which this government put on and then took off, after they 
took some money away from them, was the used car sales tax. 
Many senior citizens buy used cars. And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
will not in any way make up for the money that has been taken out 
of senior citizens' pockets through that Bill of a year ago which 
provided used car sales tax which many seniors had to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the removal of the property improvement grant and 
the education component on property is a far greater loss to senior 
citizens than what this legislation will provide for them .. 
(inaudible interjection) .. 
 
Our party, the New Democratic Party, had proposed in 1982, may 
I remind the member from Meadow Lake, a shelter allowance for 
senior citizens. That would have provided up to $100 a month for 
senior citizens. This legislation does not even come close to that 
and only proposes that it will reach that point by 1990. 
 
Had there been an election, Mr. Speaker, senior citizens would 
have been far better served. The government killed that program 
of the shelter allowance for senior citizens when it was elected. It 
took it away, and now it tries to replace that up to a $100-a-month 
program with an increase of $15 for seniors and $30 a month for 
couples. And that increase, Mr. Speaker, is less than those people 
have to pay, I remind the Minister of Urban Affairs, for increased 
power and electrical rates. 
 
(1515) 
 
I'll have to question the priorities of this government when it 
comes to senior citizens and their sincerity. It is three months after 
the budget. Three months ago we had a budget in which nothing 
was mentioned to provide increases in the Saskatchewan income 
plan for senior citizens. It seems to be another example of one of 
those five-year plans that lasted three, or two and one-half months. 
 
Another example. Now, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 
decided not to call its election, it felt that it needed something to 
tide them over, and so they come rushing into the House with an 
increase to the SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) program. Why 
would they not have announced it in the budget if they had 
intended to do it? Seniors were not important when the Minister of 
Finance prepared his budget. The senior citizens of this province 
were not considered. Now, with the election delayed and the 
popular vote of the government rapidly going down and rapidly 
slipping, even among senior citizens, all of a sudden the vote of 
the senior citizen has become important, and as an afterthought 
they bring this legislation in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, of course they will welcome this increase. 
Who wouldn't? I think senior citizens will say yes, we are going to 
take the $15, or we're going to take the $30 if it's a couple. And the 
members on this side of  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1990 
 
 

the House will support that, Mr. Speaker. But we make the point 
that our senior citizens should not be used as a political football by 
any government, and that's what this government is doing: nothing 
n the budget; not call an election; polls going down; and so they 
react not to the needs of the seniors of this province, they react to 
the polls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the last four years there has been confusion in the 
minds of this government which has created confusion in the 
minds of many senior citizens. I have numerous senior citizens 
who did not apply for the heritage property grant program of last 
year. The Minister of Urban Affairs will not even make any 
provisions to allow them to be able to have those application 
deadlines extended one more time so that they can qualify. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, the reason this has happened because 
there was s property improvement grant program, the government 
cancelled it. They listened to the polls. They introduced a heritage 
property grant program. Many people missed the grant deadlines 
because of the confusion, because right after they introduced it 
they cancelled it - right after they introduced it they cancelled it 
and introduced another heritage grant program for this year, a 
situation which has created a lot of confusion and therefore many 
people who did not apply - and I say that that was a deliberate ploy 
by this government to cause confusion so that people, some people 
would not apply and therefore would not qualify. 
 
The minister says he extended the deadline. I agree. He did - once. 
But surely, for the numbers who are applying since his extension, 
he could extend it again and provide them the money which they 
have every right to have, and he and his government refuse to do 
it. 
 
Should you wonder, Mr. Speaker - the members opposite shouldn't 
wonder - that the voters, and particularly senior citizens of 
Saskatchewan, have become cynical? They've become cynical 
about the Conservative Party. They've become cynical about the 
Premier, and they've become cynical about this government as a 
whole, which does not act because of any kind of plan for the 
future of this province; it acts only on the basis of its pollster's 
results and therefore cares not for the interest of the citizens who 
live here - including senior citizens - but cares only in its 
perpetuation of power. And I say, in my concluding remarks, Mr. 
Speaker: that will not work. It did not work in 1929; it will not 
work in 1986. 
 
And the members laugh. I detect, Mr. Speaker, it's a very nervous 
laugh because they know what the facts are. If they were not afraid 
of the facts, we would have had an election already, as there 
should have been, and this province would have had a government 
that would have acted responsibly instead of a government that 
continues to act irresponsibly. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 - An Act respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in 
Saskatchewan 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members have before 
them a draft Bill called The Prepaid Funeral Services Act. This is 
new and necessary consumer protection legislation. Its preparation 
has been actively supported by the Canadian and Saskatchewan 
funeral services industry. 
 
Prepayment contractual arrangements which people have to 
provide for their own or another person's funeral expenses are 
commonly known as prepaid funeral services plans. This Bill is 
specific to these plans and has no implications for any other type 
of sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some $120 million in Canada are now held in 
various trust funds for prepaid funerals. In Saskatchewan it is 
estimated that some $2.5 million has been set aside for this 
purpose. In Ontario there have been cases where these funds have 
been misappropriated. 
 
Mainly in response to these situations, The Funeral Service 
Association of Canada has asked all provinces to consider this 
type of legislation. The Saskatchewan association, which 
represents the vast majority of professionals in the funeral industry 
here, strongly supports this national call for legislation. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, has decided to act. We are again 
going to follow the self-administration model which we have 
pioneered with other industries such as the Saskatchewan 
insurance industry. All sellers of prepaid funeral contracts will be 
required to register with an industry council and be subject to its 
by-laws. Sellers will also contribute to the industry council's 
assurance fund. This approach, Mr. Speaker, maximizes consumer 
protection and minimizes direct government administration. 
 
In addition, my department has noted significant public concern in 
this whole area, and we have responded. For example, we publish 
information on funerals and funeral planning. This information is 
widely distributed and has received a very positive response, 
especially from senior citizens. Hon. Members will appreciate that 
people are particularly vulnerable when they are making decisions 
about funeral arrangements. Seniors maybe most in need of this 
enhanced protection. 
 
The proposed legislation is clear. Direct selling of prepaid funeral 
services will not be allowed. Telephone solicitations will be 
prohibited. The privacy of consumers will be protected. We will 
not tolerate sellers attempting to take advantage of people who are 
in hospitals or nursing homes. Under the proposed legislation 
sellers cannot contact anyone unless they are requested to do so. 
There will be, however, no restrictions on general advertising done 
by the industry. 
 
Consumers' pocket-books will also be protected. Prepaid funeral 
service contracts may be rescinded or cancelled by consumers at 
any time. All moneys received must be kept in trust, including 
principal plus interest accounts, in Saskatchewan. The money 
cannot be withdrawn from a trust account unless the beneficiary 
dies, or the contract is cancelled by the buyer. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1991 
 
 

The Bill also recognizes that there are some circumstances where 
the seller of prepaid funeral services wishes to cancel. Under the 
proposed Act, any seller who decides to cancel a contract must 
obtain the written consent of the purchaser or give written notice. 
The consumer then is entitled to recover all of his or her money n 
damages, or enough money to provide an equal or greater service. 
 
Persons seeking to sell prepaid plans must register with the 
proposed industry council. That council will pass by-laws and 
establish an insurance fund to pay out any claims. The 
superintendent of insurance in the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs will review and approve these administrative 
arrangements and procedures and will retain investigative powers. 
The superintendent also exercises discretionary powers under the 
draft Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this industry-oriented approach will ensure that the 
real experts in the area, the industry, are also responsible for the 
successful day-to-day operation of this Bill. It is, of course, in the 
best interests of the industry to do a first-rate job. Consumer 
confidence in the industry will be greatly enhanced. No additional 
administration costs are anticipated with this Bill, and the civil 
rights of Saskatchewan residents are not adversely affected by it. 
 
I would be pleased to discuss specific provisions of the Bill in 
greater detail with members during the committee of the whole. 
Mr. Speaker, I recommend this Bill to all members, and I now 
move second reading of a Bill to be known as The Prepaid Funeral 
Services Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we do not intend to hold up 
this legislation; it will be allowed to proceed. I want to make one 
point, Mr. Speaker. It simply is that here we see an example of the 
contradiction of this government. The minister proposes 
legislation in which she describes it as consumer protection 
legislation. The other day she introduced another piece of 
legislation which is a Bill dealing with credit reporting agencies in 
which is proposing to remove the licensing and bonding 
provisions, which is an abdication of the role of protecting the 
consumer by the Department of Consumer Affairs, and the 
argument, contrary to the argument used here, was that that 
legislation was in keeping with the government's philosophy of 
having less legislation and less regulation. Here we are completely 
opposite, the minister coming in with another Bill which is called 
the Act respecting Prepaid Funeral Services in Saskatchewan, and 
she does exactly the opposite - more legislation and more 
regulation. 
 
I wish - and I know that the public of Saskatchewan dearly wishes 
- that this government would make up its mind what its policy and 
its position is, because daily, and weekly, and monthly, they come 
here and they contradict one thing that they have said a time 
before. That's the point, Mr. Speaker. Although members opposite 
make light of it, it is an important point. People have a right to 
expect of their government, of whatever stripe it is, some 
consistency and at least some indication of its direction and its 
scope. 
 

I don't think there's anybody out in the public world of this 
province who can predict with any kind of certainty what the 
position of this government is on anything, because it does not 
have a position. 
 
I'm not going to, as I said, hold up this legislation, Mr. Speaker. I 
am proposing that it proceed today. It has some features in it that I 
think are worthy of some serious consideration, which I think most 
people in this House and in the public would support. So I will 
therefore conclude my remarks. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
 Bill No. 59 - An Act respecting the Establishment of 
Ambulance Districts and Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance 
Operators and 
Emergency Medical Personnel and the Provision of Ambulance 
Services in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to explain the 
purpose of the Bill, and at the end of my remarks, I'll be moving 
second reading of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since taking office our government has assigned a 
very high priority to improving ambulance services in 
Saskatchewan. We appointed a review committee under the 
chairmanship of the member from Moosomin, and the 
recommendations of that committee have served as the basis for 
many significant initiates over the past three years. 
 
We've established a permanent ambulance advisory committee. 
We've consolidated the responsibility for ambulance services 
within the Department of Health and have established an 
ambulance service unit for that purpose. We have changed the 
funding formula to make it more effective, and we continue to 
improve funding to local ambulance boards. As well, we have 
taken steps to provide an advanced level of training for emergency 
medical assistants. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new ambulance Act is another step towards our 
goal of rationalizing ambulance services and making them more 
effective. At present there was no one statute which incorporates 
all the necessary provisions. Ambulance boards are established 
under The Rural Municipality Act and The Northern 
Municipalities Act and The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. The 
authority for air ambulance services is in the The Department of 
Health Act. Grants to ambulance boards are paid under The Health 
Services Act, while provisions for licensing of ambulance 
operators and emergency medical assistance are in The Public 
Health Act. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the involvement of so many separate 
statutes is awkward and confusing. The new Act is designed to 
eliminate these problems and to provide one clear and 
comprehensive legislative base for all aspects of ambulance 
services in the province. 
 
The Bill includes the necessary provisions in three main areas: the 
establishment of ambulance districts and  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1992 
 
 

boards together with their powers and responsibilities; second, the 
licensing and regulation of emergency medical assistance; and 
third, the licensing and regulation of ambulance operators. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, the Act includes provision for the making of 
grants to ambulance boards, for the operation of the air ambulance 
program, and for offences and penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill does not incorporate any radical changes in 
current policies or legal provisions. Rather, it represents a 
consolidation of these policies and provisions with changes and 
additions as necessary to correct existing inadequacies. 
 
I should also note, Mr. Speaker, the ambulance advisory 
committee has been closely involved in the development of the 
legislation. The committee includes representatives of the 
Saskatchewan Road Ambulance Association, the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Technicians Association, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 
Association, ambulance boards, and the Departments of Health 
and Advanced Education and Manpower. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, all the major professions and 
organizations involved in the delivery of ambulance services have 
had a full opportunity for input, and I'm confident that the Bill 
reflects a high degree of consensus among them. 
 
I believe that the statute is a significant further step towards 
achieving our goal of an effective and efficient ambulance service 
in this province. I am therefore pleased to move second reading of 
Bill 59, an Act respecting the Establishment of Ambulance 
Districts and Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance Operators and 
Emergency Medical Personnel and the Provision of Ambulance 
Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the ambulance 
operators in the province don't share the minister's enthusiasm for 
the great job that he has been doing over the past four years. In 
fact, at their last annual convention, news reports coming out of 
that convention were anything but rave reviews for the minister's 
handling of the ambulance services and the money that he's 
allocated for it. 
 
But having watched in other areas of health over the past number 
of years - especially this year, I might add, with the nurses and 
doctors and chiropractors, and the problems that we're having in 
the health care area in this province .. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Deal with the Bill. Are you on the Bill or 
off the Bill? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we are dealing with the Bill. Of course 
doctors and nurses have a great interest in the ambulance service, 
but the kind of nonsense we hear, and hear in this Assembly, the 
bragging that goes on about the great job we're doing with health 
care by this government, leaves something to be desired. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I want to take an opportunity 
to review the details of this Bill and will come  

back and leave a few words to say on it. I would therefore beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 52 - An Act respecting 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations be now read 
a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 47 - An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I'll ask the minister to please introduce her 
official and then we're ready to begin. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have seated 
on my left Mr. MacGillivray, who is superintendent of insurance 
in the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when second debate of the Bill was being 
discussed, the member from Regina North East had asked some 
questions that he wanted answered during committee of the whole. 
If he likes, I can give you the response right now. 
 
One of the questions had to do with harassment. And the member 
stated that he suspects the Bill will not cover harassment, and he 
doesn't really see how it will be enforced, but perhaps I could 
better explain it. 
 
While The Collection Agents Act contains a section dealing with 
harassment, section 29, The Direct Sellers Act, indeed does not. It 
is difficult to enforce penalties against harassment because it is 
very difficult to prove. And I believe that the consumer's best 
recourse, if he or she feels he is being harassed, is to either close 
the door or hang up the phone, and indeed that does happen. 
 
A second question was concerning the Act not applying to certain 
persons. The criticism is not justified. The exemption is necessary 
so that the new definition of a direct seller would not catch every 
private individual who, say, phoned a friend and offered to sell 
him a car; and that is to say, we don't, as a government, want to 
regulate the routine sale of personal property amongst friends. 
 
You also questioned the five-year licence being onerous for 
students, particularly university students who may want to take a 
summer job as a direct seller, and you feel that that might be an 
onerous burden on him. Students can easily be exempted from 
having to secure licences because the Act provides a number of 
exemptions. For example, if the average sale is under $50,000 or if 
the vendor  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1993 
 
 

who that student may be working for is licensed and bonded, and 
if the salesman pays the municipal fees, then he can be, in fact, 
exempted from the Act. 
 
And you also questioned the matter of exemptions from bonding. 
And I can just assure the member that, to my knowledge, only one 
vendor has ever been exempted from having to post a bond under 
the Act, and that person sold Christmas cards door to door one 
season, and therefore she was exempted, and she's no longer 
selling Christmas cards. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That's helpful 
and I think will shorten the time that we will need to proceed with 
the Bill. Let me say at the outset that we favour the 10-day 
rescission right; I indicated that in my second reading speech. I 
think there are considerable difficulties that have been created, and 
so there is no problem with that. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the problems that I did indicate, which I 
think you attempted to answer, is the one dealing with ongoing 
business. You say that the Act will not apply to such a person if 
the contract is not part of an ongoing business. The problem I see 
with that provision is that, how do you define what is or is not an 
ongoing business? 
 
I can tell you that my fear is that there will be all kinds of concerns 
which will be coming in here, not calling themselves ongoing 
business. And unless you have a very tight definition, there is 
going to be all kinds of people working directly door to door but 
not covered by The Direct Sellers Act. 
 
So I would like you to be able to tell the committee, if you may, 
how will you define an ongoing business? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — An ongoing business will be a business 
that's ongoing on a continually .. continual annual basis or 
seasonal basis, or a business that is registered in Saskatchewan. 
We are saying that consumer-oriented sales are not considered a 
business. If I sold you some of my furniture, I wouldn't be 
required to be licensed as a direct seller. It's consumer oriented. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I'm not sure you're clear 
on that, and I'm not sure you are either. Boy Scouts and Girl 
Guides, Madam Minister, sell door to door, regularly, annually, 
seasonally - you define it as you want. Is this Bill now going to 
consider them an ongoing business? Because according to your 
definition that you have just given me, they will be. 
 
Now can you please clarify that, because already I have had some 
concerns expressed, and they are wondering what their status will 
be. I think it's an ongoing tradition, if you would like, that this kind 
of selling by those kinds of organizations is almost .. it's expected. 
And this is a very important means by which they raise funds to 
run their operations. How, Madam Minister, will they be affected 
by your new provisions? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — As far as having certain groups register, or 
register as the direct seller, that portion of the  

Act hasn't changed. We are concerned with a business where a 
person derives his livelihood, or her livelihood, or part of it, from 
selling door to door. 
 
As far as a class-room selling chocolate bars or a hockey team 
selling hams or Girl Guides selling cookies, we don't consider that 
business. That is a fund-raising project of that particular group. 
We also are not concerned with, as I said, sales from a consumer 
to a consumer, like the isolated type. 
 
But we feel that with the increase to 10 days cooling-off period is 
very advantageous to the consumer. It won't hurt the legitimate 
businesses. We feel the only area or the only group that may be 
hurt are those that would try to undermine the intent of the Act, 
that extra six days. Legitimate businesses are not concerned with 
the 10-day extension, and consumers will be protected. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I go back to your 
comment on university students, and once again I think you've 
opened up another big loophole that you could drive a Mack truck 
by. And you actually will be increasing the amount of regulation 
and supervision and checking that you will have to do, because 
with your five-year licence provision I really don't quite 
understand why your government has opted to do that, except that 
you need some immediate cash, and this is one way which to get 
it. And then the next five years hopefully, you think, will look 
after themselves. 
 
How will you be able to determine whether a student is in fact a 
student, or whether a student that has just come out of university 
says that the student is not a student but intends to continue 
working s a direct seller? How will you be able to determine that 
with your five-year licensing provision? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would like to say to the member that 
there is no change in the present Act, or the Act as it will be 
amended, in how the department deals with university students. 
What you find, I would indicate to the member, is that the vendor 
must be licensed and must be bonded under the Act. If a vendor is 
properly licensed and properly bonded and it has a history of being 
a good business with no violations, etc., of the Act, their sales 
people are exempted from requiring a licence, because they fall 
under the umbrella of the major vendor who is bonded and 
licensed. University students would be treated no different 
working for a vendor as a person with another job who sells part 
time over and above his formal work. 
 
As I said, as long as the salesperson carries the identification cards 
showing the name and the business address of the vendor, then 
they can be exempted. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I want to 
make one more point, and I want to preface this by saying that, as 
I indicated in my second reading remarks, the whole question of 
dealing with people who solicit by telephone, I think, is one that's 
timely and, in fact, long overdue. But I want to raise with you one 
concern about - and I'm sure your department has considered it 
and, if they have, if you will respond briefly then that will be my 
last point. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1994 
 
 

My concern is the statement that I provided in your explanatory 
notes that deal with the question of extension of rescission rights 
to telephone sales originating outside of Saskatchewan. It seems to 
me that this is dependent to some extent on the choice of law and 
rules in other jurisdictions. I'll use Alberta, for example, and I'm 
not in any way suggesting that this law exists in Alberta, but here 
is the example, hypothetically. The law of Alberta may deem that 
such a sale to have occurred in Alberta, and Alberta laws does not 
provide a right of rescission in such cases; an Alberta judgement 
could be obtained enforcing payment by the purchaser under the 
contract, despite the fact that the purchases had provided a written 
notice of rescission under the Saskatchewan law. 
 
Do you not see, Madam Minister, that there is a problem because 
of this, that you have your law in Saskatchewan, but because the 
solicitation was made out of Alberta by telephone, they have a 
different law there, and therefore the protection that you hope to 
achieve here will in fact not be provided? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — You are quite correct in your hypothetical 
case; there is the legal question of jurisdiction. What we do 
through the department through publication - pamphlets, that type 
of thing - is to encourage Saskatchewan consumers to deal with 
Saskatchewan licensed and bonded companies that have a 
corporate presence here. However, barring that - an outside 
solicitation - we do work in co-operation with our other 
counterparts across the country to help resolve disputes between a 
business and a consumer. 
 
It does work to some extent. The majority of the cases, you're 
dealing with very small amounts of money. I mean, you've seen 
the ads on TV or flyers that come to your house - 10.95 for this 
wonderful gadget that when you get it, it doesn't work. But as I 
said, we encourage people to deal only with licensed and bonded 
salesmen. 
 
We have talked to SUMA and SARM and have encouraged them 
to advise when they are sending out their tax notices or things like 
that within their own municipality, to slip in a card warning people 
to ask - if they have a direct salesperson come to their door - to ask 
to see that they are properly licensed and bonded to do business in 
the province. 
 
So there is the legal question of jurisdiction, and I suppose that 
will always be there, but we use our moral suasion and co-operate 
with our counterparts in other provinces to resolve consumer 
disputes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister .. do you want to have a 
few concluding remarks? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would just, Mr. Chairman, like to thank 
Mr. MacGillivray, superintendent of insurance, to be here to assist 
me today, and thank the hon. member for his questions. They are 
timely and of interest to the public  

in general. 
 
Bill No. 55 - An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we have 
with us Mr. Wes Bolstad, the executive director of the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One or two questions, Mr. Chairman. I 
know that the Bill has met with the approval of the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. I wanted to sort of get one thing clear, Mr. 
Minister. Under this Bill the property in question is transferred 
from the Prince Albert Pulp Company to the Weyerhaeuser 
Canada Ltd. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — That is correct, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In this transfer, Mr. Minister, and in this 
legislation, is there any change in status of the property as it 
applies to the influence that the Meewasin Valley Authority can 
have over its future development or what not? Is there any change 
of the authority over the property with this legislation over the 
authority it had before it? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response there, there will 
really be very little change in the authority of the MVA. The 
development review powers that the MVA did have over the 
property when it was public within Corman Park there, and 
therefore under the MVA, will no longer really apply. But because 
of the other clause in there granting an easement to the property 
down by the river bank, in fact the MVA will actually have more 
access to the land and the function of the land down near the river. 
So in effect, when you balance the two out, the MVA will actually 
have more authority or more say in the use of the land. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My final question, Mr. Minister. Is there 
any danger of the property near the river being in any way 
damaged with regard to its natural environment and so on, with 
this? I think I know what your answer will be, but I would like to 
ask you to tell us. Is there some restriction that prevents 
Weyerhaeuser - in this case if it's Weyerhaeuser - from moving in 
and somehow changing the property along the river without first 
of all getting approval from somebody? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in fact the easement that has 
been granted for the use there will actually give more authority to 
the MVA to do with the land as they so desire and, as you're 
probably aware, one of the mandates of the Meewasin Valley is to 
try and keep it in its natural state and for the use of the public. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1995 
 
 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'd just 
briefly would like to thank Mr. Bolstad for coming all the way 
from Saskatoon to Regina and helping us out, and certainly for his 
co-operation and the co-operation of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority to deal with this Bill. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me also reiterate the same comments as 
the minister made to thank Mr. Bolstad. It's a bit of a trip to come 
for a ten-minute session in committee. I could have made it more 
worthwhile and taken a couple of hours, but I don't think it was 
necessary in this case. Thank you, Mr. Minister, and through you, 
your official for responding to my questions so well. 
 
 Bill No. 53 - An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, seated beside me is Doug 
Cressman, assistant deputy minister of the department; seated 
directly behind Mr. Cressman is Heather Sinclair, solicitor with 
the Department of Justice; and behind me is Walt Bailey, director 
for forest management; at the back is Paul Brett, the executive 
director of forestry. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions I want to ask, Mr. Minister, today, regarding the 
amendments, and as I indicated when I spoke on second reading, I 
had some concerns, and there was also some concerns expressed 
by members of municipalities around the province. 
 
I first of all want to start off by saying - and following my remarks 
with a question - we've been operating in this province for the last 
20, 30 years under the present forest Act, and we've had large, 
multinational corporations and Canada corporations, such as 
Simpson Timber and MacMillan Bloedel and Prince Albert Pulp 
Company, who have been operating in this province for a number 
of years and always seemed to be getting along quite well, never 
asking for any amendments. Now we see, Mr. Minister, where you 
have indicated through correspondence that the industry has 
requested the type of amendments that we know have. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate why the bush 
operators, the Simpson Timbers and the MacMillan Bloedels and 
whoever, requested the type of amendments that you've got in 
here? Could you indicate the reason for these amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to respond to 
the question from the hon. member and make a few comments. 
 
There has been for some time sections of The Forest Act which 
give unilateral and sweeping powers to the  

minister, through the order in council route, to alter forest 
management license agreements after they have already been 
negotiated, agreed to, and signed. What it means, in effect, is that 
one day the government could sign an agreement with a company, 
and the next day, the very next day, unilaterally alter or cancel that 
agreement and, by a provision of another section of the Act, also 
pay no compensation whatsoever for having altered the 
agreement. 
 
As an example for the hon. member, I have here a proposed 
Simpson FMLA (forestry management licensing agreement) 
which we had been working out with the company, and Simpson 
had requested as an example this particular clause to be inserted. 
It's clause (c) under authority, further representations of 
Saskatchewan, and it's a notwithstanding clause: 
 

Notwithstanding the existence of section 58 of The Forest Act, 
Simpson, by entering into this agreement, has acted in reliance 
on the representations and warranties of Saskatchewan and on 
the good faith of Saskatchewan with respect to the 
commitments set forth herein. 

 
In recognition of Simpson's reliance, Saskatchewan further 
affirms its good faith intention to honour the commitments set 
forth in this agreement and to faithfully fulfil its obligations 
with respect thereto. 

 
And they have a similar clause a little later on, a notwithstanding 
clause, saying: 
 

Whereas the minister has undertaken to utilize his best efforts to 
enhance security of tenure of holder of forest management 
licence agreements, notwithstanding the existence of sections 
22 and 58 of The Forest Act. And the licensee, in reliance on 
the minister's undertaking, has entered into this agreement in 
good faith and with the expectation that those portions of 
section 22 and 58, which might alter the intent of this 
agreement, shall not be exercised during the term of this 
agreement. 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it would appear, particularly 
from this one document which I've brought - and I would be 
pleased to let you see it if you wanted to peruse it - that the 
companies are in fact uncomfortable, and they have expressed a 
level of discomfort with those sections of the Act which, I hasten 
to point out, have not been invoked under the previous 
administration or this one. But it seems to me, to the companies, 
and to officials, that perhaps we can deal with this in a more 
adequate fashion by making the amendments that have been 
proposed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, would that indicate the reason 
why you have not signed an agreement with Simpson Timber? I 
know that negotiations are taking place with Simpson Timber at 
the present time. Are you waiting, or are both parties waiting, for 
these amendments to be passed before you conclude the signing of 
that agreement with Simpson Timber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That's correct, hon. member. We  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1996 
 
 

would like to bring the amendments in so that those clauses, the 
"notwithstanding" clauses, would therefore be redundant, 
unnecessary, and we'd be operating under the new Act. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I still am concerned here 
because it would seem to me .. and I want to get down to the 
question. If the agreements that we have with the major forest 
industries in the province, where a Prince Albert company have 
cutting rights and Simpson Timber have cutting rights, MacMillan 
Bloedel have cutting rights, under the new agreements, is it not 
right, Mr. Minister, then, that small operators will have the right to 
go into areas .. 
 
Well let's just use the Weyerhaeuser deal for example. Now 
Weyerhaeuser owns Prince Albert Pulp Company's forested areas; 
they have their contracts. They now own the contracts for the Big 
River mill. And let's just take the Lakeland municipality out in the 
Emma Lake country where there is no forest agreement that exists 
with any major company. Could an operator, under your direction, 
go into that area and cut timber and supply timber to 
Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the 
small operators would contract to - you used the example - 
Weyerhaeuser, or any of the other companies within their area of 
interest, that is, the allocated area has been given to them. The 
allocated area which Weyerhaeuser will be operating under is 
somewhat smaller than the original size of allocation which was, 
in fact, given to PAPCO. And there's a reserve set aside of 84,000 
cubic metres for small operators in that area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, are you saying then that no one 
can supply timber to the Big River mill or Prince Albert Pulp 
Company outside of the agreement that has been signed with 
Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, sir. They will be able to purchase 
wood from all over the province, and the contractors will be able 
to supply. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, this is what I was getting to, Mr. 
Minister. And then the Lakeland municipality is quite concerned 
that their timber rights, or their control over the timber rights, they 
just were not going to have that. 
 
What you are saying then is that anybody who is a contractor and 
out cutting timber or pulpwood can supply timber from any place 
in Saskatchewan outside of the agreements or inside of the 
agreements that they have. And I think this is where the concern 
really comes in. As I indicated, the municipality of Buffalo 
Narrows, which only has a three mile radius - I think that that is a 
small example of where we can get into problems. 
 
But what you are saying is now that I could start up a logging 
operation, and I could get a permit directly from yourself, and I 
could go out to the closest place. I could cut roads into that 
forested area to supply timber for Weyerhaeuser. I do not have to 
stay within their contracts of their leases. 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'll address the last part first, if I may. No, 
they would have to be a contractor working for Weyerhaeuser 
under the terms of their FMLA to go into their area of interest, 
their allocated area, and work. But let me deal with .. You made 
several points, Hon. member. I've dealt with that one first. Let me 
deal with Buffalo Narrows specifically. 
 
It's not the intention of the department to interfere with or overrule 
the activities of any city or town or village with respect to timber 
that is located within their respective corporate boundaries - and 
you used the example of Buffalo Narrows - whether such areas are 
within provincial forests or not. The case at Buffalo Narrows is a 
point in fact. Within its corporate boundaries it does have 
provincial forest lands, and we don't intend to interfere with their 
current administration there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I still .. And you had admitted before 
that a logging operation could take place outside, outside of the 
agreement, as long as they are contracting for Weyerhaeuser or 
Simpson Timber, whatever the case may be. So anybody that's 
into the logging business, if there's a good stand of timber that 
does not lie within the lease by Weyerhaeuser, as long as they are 
contracting for, if Weyerhaeuser gives an individual a contract to 
supply 1 million feet of timber to the Big River saw-mill, they 
actually could take that timber out of .. Oh, they could go up north 
of Green Lake and take it, outside of the agreement, or they could 
go into the north side of Dore Lake, outside of the agreement, and 
deliver that timber to Weyerhaeuser's mill in Big River. Is that not 
what you said? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A small operator or contractor could 
operate in one of the areas reserved specifically for them. That 
area .. and there are two or three I can think of as it related to the 
old PAPCO allotment. There's a couple of areas that we're setting 
aside for those small operators they can permit to go into those 
areas and bring wood in. And also, just as a point of clarification, 
and I'm not sure if this is what you meant, hon. member, but 
pulpwood that is accruing in other areas, then they could bring in 
and contract to deliver that to Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I guess that just indicates the concerns and 
verifies the concerns that some of the municipalities have that 
they're not going to have any say, because if Weyerhaeuser needs 
material for the pulp-mill at Prince Albert or the Big River 
saw-mill, they're going to be able to get it outside of their lease 
agreements, because they will contract an individual and he will 
be able to cut outside that agreement, because that's what you have 
indicated. 
 
Also I'm concerned, and I'm reading from the explanatory notes, 
section 19: 
 

This amendment will delete the requirement for a forest 
management plan. We no longer in this province have to have a 
forest management plan in order to get cutting rights in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1997 
 
 

Is this not what this means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A point of clarification, Hon. member, 
could you tell me which section you're referring to there, please, 
because I missed a piece of it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Section 19. This amendment would delete the 
requirement for a forest management plan. And the question was: 
is it not true then that anyone who wants to go out and cut timber 
in a forested area does not have to provide, before they get cutting 
rights, a management plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There is a plan that will stay in effect. The 
present practice of a department is that forest management plans 
are annually prepared by the forest companies and they're 
approved by the department in accordance with the forest 
management licences into which we put other resource concerns. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I'm not going to take a lot of time, Mr. 
Minister. I just want to make it very clear that I feel that the 
request to have this amendment put in here did not come from the 
Simpson Timbers, did not come from the MacMillan Bloedels, did 
not come from PAPCO, before this $248 million deal with the 
Saskatchewan government. I think it's amendments that have 
come in from the Weyerhaeuser corporation who this province has 
given $248 million of our tax money to purchase our assets. And 
that's exactly what has taken place in this province. 
 
And if you want to take a look .. And the members, the two 
members, the member from Meadow Lake can holler all he wants 
from his seat. But let me tell you, that agreement with 
Weyerhaeuser, I could have purchased the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company and all its assets, because the Saskatchewan taxpayer .. 
And the member from .. the former minister of Co-ops, he's 
laughing because .. that's why he's not in cabinet. 
 
But I can tell you, I could have purchased the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company and its assets if the Government of Saskatchewan would 
have signed the promissory note for $248 million, and they don't 
have to pay 1 cent back unless they make a profit. And I say that 
this is why these amendments are in here. And one just has to turn 
to the last page, and this complete amendment doesn't mean a 
thing until you go into the last page, and I want to read the last 
amendment to just verify my argument. 
 
And here we have in this amendment a new section, Mr. Minister 
.. (inaudible interjection) .. You better believe it I'm against any 
project that's going to take $248 million of our taxpayers' money 
to pay for our assets. This province has a lot of assets, and you 
guys are selling them off with our own money. You're giving them 
away, and I'm opposed to that. Why didn't Weyerhaeuser not use 
their own money if it's such a good deal? And I ask the member 
for Meadow Lake: why did Weyerhaeuser have to have our 
money to buy our assets? And I say, that's wrong. 
 
And here we take a look at the new section of this amendment, 
and that's the most important part of this whole Bill - the new 
section. Let me read this, Mr.  

Chairman: 
 

This section will clarify that the authority for the use of forest 
lands for forest-related purposes lies with the provincial 
government through The Forest Act and not with other 
municipal jurisdictions. 

 
So this is what is says. And the member from Meadow Lake says, 
why shouldn't it be that way? I say that the municipalities, who 
have always had a say as to how our forest industry in this 
province was operated, should still have that say as to who's going 
to cut the timber, where it's going to be cut, and where the roads 
are going to be put. But under this new section, the total 
responsibility lies with the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
minister. 
 
And that I think is where we get into the real crunch of this Bill, 
Mr. Chairman, is the fact that the minister has total powers and he 
says quite clearly, "and not with other municipal jurisdictions." 
 
Mr. Chairman, with that I conclude my remarks and let the 
minister respond to my remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — If I may respond to a couple of points the 
hon. member raised. He did bring up the sale of PAPCO assets to 
Weyerhaeuser. It is not correct that the whole Act is somehow 
being tailored - or this section - to suit Weyerhaeuser. 
 
There were discussions with all the other FMLA holders who 
were very interested in these amendments and they want to see 
them go in and they support it - including members of the 
Saskatchewan Council of Independent Forest Industries with 
whom I must have had 10 meetings in the last 12 months. And I 
may say, hon. member, they were the people who first instigated, 
at least in my mind, the need for some amendments to come 
forward. 
 
You did refer to the effect on the R.M.s and I'd like to clarify that 
because you brought up some concerns in second reading, as did 
the Leader of the Opposition, which were legitimate concerns, 
unless one really reads into the intent. So I'd like to explain to you 
as honestly as I can the intent with what we're doing with that 
particular section. 
 
Currently, municipalities prepare development plans and by-laws, 
and when they're approved it gives them power to regulate 
activities within their boundaries. That power also extends to 
resource management. The power is granted by the Minister of 
Rural Development after extensive consultation with his or her 
colleagues. 
 
In practice, the Minister of Rural Development has been 
approving development plans which identify forestry as a 
permitted use. This means that of the 14 R.M.s which have 
provincial forests within their boundaries, and which have 
approved development plans in place, all have identified forestry 
as a permitted use. Of these, only two have decided to require a 
development permit for forestry activities. 
 
Requiring a permit has the effect of formally informing the  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1998 
 
 

R.M.s of plans and offering them an opportunity to comment. So 
in actual practice, the majority of the affected R.M.s have decided 
a provincial forest is best managed by the province under The 
Forest Act. The others clearly want to be consulted. 
 
The conclusion I draw when comparing the current practice of the 
way the R.M.s deal with the forest management and the way it 
will be dealt with in the Act as amended is, the different to the 
R.M.s is relatively minor. The real difference, however, is the 
impact the amendment will have on the forest company's 
perception of the ease of doing business in Saskatchewan. It will 
give them confidence that they're dealing with only one 
government and primarily one department in their forest-managed 
activities. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 - An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 
 
Hon Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 55 - An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 53 - An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
(1630) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure Supply and 
Services 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 13 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to introduce the staff from Supply and Services who 
are here today. On my immediate right is Mr. Otto Cutts, the 
deputy minister; and to his right, Mr. Ron Dedman, the associate 
deputy minister; directly behind me is Shirley Raab, the executive 
director, administration and financial services; on her right is Ken 
Brehm, the assistant deputy minister of planning and  

development; and then behind them, Ian Laidlaw, executive 
director of commercial services, and Allan Moffat, executive 
director of the supply division. 
 
Mr. Chairman, before we begin I would like to just make a few 
very brief comments on behalf of this department, and I will keep 
them brief, but there are a couple of important points. 
 
Over the past four years the Department of Supply and Services 
has achieved an impressive record of accomplishment. The 
department's success can be attributed to a very responsible 
pro-active management team and employees who as a group, I 
believe, are some of the most efficient and productive employees 
in the public service today. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairman, to the many initiatives the department 
has undertaken to reduce the cost of public administration and 
service over the past four years, the department has created two 
programs which have significantly enhanced Saskatchewan 
business. Notably they are the public sector procurement task 
force and the Buy Saskatchewan program. 
 
The public sector procurement task force purchases more than a 
billion dollars worth of supplies and equipment each year by 
co-operating with and encouraging hospitals, Crown corporations, 
local governments, and school groups to purchase 
Saskatchewan-made goods and services. Significant provincial 
economic development potential has been realized and jobs have 
been created for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Buy Saskatchewan program was introduced in December 
1983 to encourage Saskatchewan manufacturers and suppliers to 
stimulate increased production and new competition in the 
Saskatchewan market-place, and to encourage all government 
organizations, Crown corporations, and publicly funded agencies 
to use Saskatchewan consultants, products, contractors, and labour 
at every possible opportunity. 
 
The Buy Saskatchewan program has been extremely effective in 
assisting Saskatchewan firms to realize business opportunities that 
would have otherwise gone outside the province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, working together with the private sector has been 
the key to success in these and many other initiatives introduced 
by our government over the past four years, and we plan to 
continue with this strategy to the benefit of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In 1986-87 the Department of Supply and Services will be 
embarking on a new challenge. In the last budget the Minister of 
Finance introduced a new corporation whose mandate will include 
many of the functions presently being carried out by the 
Department of Supply and Services. The Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation will recognize and manage government 
assets and properties with a mandate to seek their highest and best 
use. 
 
The corporation will improve accountability with respect to the 
management of government assets and properties  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

1999 
 
 

and will play a significant role in the area of job creation in the 
province. Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
project commitments will result in the generation of over 3,600 
person-years of employment in '86-87 and over 15,227 
person-years of employment over the life of the program presently 
being embarked on by the corporation. 
 
In closing, I'd like to thank Supply and Services officials present 
here today in the legislature as well as those who are carrying on, 
and would not be prepared to entertain any questions the 
opposition might have. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a 
few routine questions and I'm sure he'll have the answers there 
handy. I wonder if you have a list of your executive assistants and 
staff in your office, and their salary and any increases that have 
occurred since January 1 of '85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 
opposition have that information. I gave you all my office staff 
back on, I think when we were doing Tourism and Small 
Business, and I think it's set out there by departments. Now if 
that's not correct, let me know and I'll provide everything we have, 
but I think you have my full office staff at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the minister has it there - my colleague 
who was working on that project with you is not here today - and 
if you have it handy there, I'll have a quick perusal of it, and there 
may be some questions coming out of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'll send this over. I 
should indicate to the members opposite that in the last week we 
have added an additional ministerial assistant, who has simply 
moved from the Department of Labour and is currently on 
secondment from the minister's office of Labour. So he doesn't 
show there, but I can provide that if that's essential. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other issue that I wanted to raise with 
you is the increases that have occurred since January 1st of '85 for 
each of these individuals. Would you have that handy? For 
example, Tom Steve, who is the communications assistant at 
3,852 per month, would he have received an increase in the past 
year, since January 1st of '85? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I don't believe any of 
those people are directly assigned to Supply and Services. I will 
have to check that information through the other departments to 
whom they are assigned. That's one of the problems with multiple 
responsibilities, but if in fact that is not given on the previous 
information that we sent over during Tourism and Small Business 
estimates, I'll commit to certainly provide that as early as this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could as well get from you your top 
officials - and I'll include here your deputy, and if you have an 
ADM (assistant deputy minister), and executive directors - if you 
have their title, salary, and as  

well any increases that would have occurred since January 1st of 
'85, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I'll send that information across. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, the associate deputy minister, 
you have a salary here for March of '86 but not for March of '85. 
What date did that position come into being and into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Dedman joined our staff December 
1, 1985. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, the deputy minister, does he have 
any other perks besides his salary? Does he have any other 
benefits, automobile, special assistants or that type of thing - 
executive assistants, who would work personally for him, and their 
salary, as well as the automobile or any other perks that he might 
receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Cutts has an 
automobile and the normal expense account, but other than that, 
there are no other perks in his job. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The deputy, when he receives a vehicle, 
what is the policy of the government now on the purchase of that 
type of an automobile? Is there an upper limit on the amount they 
can spend? Is it the same as cabinet ministers? Can you just give 
me the detail on what the guide-lines are now? 
 
I believe that CVA would fall under this department at any rate. 
Maybe you can just briefly outline what kind of automobile a 
cabinet minister can purchase, and how many miles would they 
have to have before they could purchase a new one, and that sort 
of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as of 1986 the dollar 
criteria for purchases of executive vehicles, ministerial vehicles, 
the limit net of taxes is $15,750, senior officials is $14,175. Do 
you want to go back in history? Do you want some previous 
numbers to compare to? 
 
An Hon. Member: — If you like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Okay. In 1985, ministerial numbers 
first, 14,450; senior officials, 13,000, and it drops back in that 
area. I believe it's 100,000 kilometres is required before a vehicle 
can be turned in. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other issue that I wanted to raise here 
on the purchase of those type of vehicles: is there a company in 
Regina that supplies the executive vehicles? Is it all bought from 
one auto dealer or .. Can you give me a list, let's say in the past 
year since January 1st of '85, the numbers of executive vehicles 
that have been purchased and where they were purchased from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 
specific information. We'll commit to provide it. 
 
The policy of course is that they're not bought centrally. A 
minister or an executive may purchase their vehicle any place in 
Saskatchewan within the guide-lines that I just indicated, but we'll 
send that to you. We don't have it  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

2000 
 
 

broken out. I can give you totals of CVA vehicles that have been 
purchased. I haven't got executive vehicles broken out. I can do 
that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well for now then, if you've got the total 
there for the executive vehicles broken down into ministerial and 
deputy level, and as well, a total for all the vehicles that were 
purchased by the government since January 1st of '85. 
 
But then I would also like - if you would send it to me - is the 
complete list of where they were purchased, by category. I've seen 
that done, and if you could get that for me, that would be all right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Once again, we'll have to pull that 
information together on the purchase locations. As of March 31, 
1986, vehicles in use: 22 ministers' vehicles, 61 option 1-C, which 
I assume includes some Crown corporations for the first time. The 
number is higher there. There's 61 for a total of 83. If you want 
totals in March of '85, the total is 78; March of '84 was 88; March 
of '83, it was 93; March of '82, 94; and back through. I think that 
covers our particular area. So there's been some Crown 
corporation involvement in the '86 numbers. 
 
The information on the places of purchase, I'll have to provide. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other issue here is leasing of vehicles. 
Do some of the ministers or some of the executives in departments 
lease vehicles, executive vehicles? Is that an option that ministers 
would have available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The only leasing that takes place is in 
the Crown corporations; none of the departments do. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And would those vehicles leased by Crown 
corporations, would that be handled through your department and 
the CVA? If it is, will you give me the number, and there again, I 
would like the companies that the vehicles are leased through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the Crown corporations 
that do in fact lease vehicles, do that independently. They don't do 
it through the Department of Supply and Services, so we simply 
don't have that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The number of executive vehicles of cabinet 
ministers is now 22. Is that correct? And the number that Crown 
corporations have leased, I believe you said 61, and that's down 
something year by year. 
 
Do you know whether or not there is a corresponding increase in 
the number leased within the Crown corporations? Would you 
have that information available? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Let me clarify that number. The 
number 61 is the executive vehicles. Now that's up 10 from 1985 
when it was 51. The reason for that is that there  

are some Crown corporation vehicles included there. Now that 
includes deputies' cars and so forth, other executive vehicles. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to go back to the increases of the 
executive salaries, and I just want to check with you into the 
policy of your department in granting increases. I notice that for 
your deputy minister, for example, about a 3 per cent increase; the 
assistant deputy minister, planning and development division, 3.1; 
the executive director, administration, seems to be about 11 per 
cent, or 11.25; and then the executive director, supply agency 
division, 3; and so on. And the range seems to be between about 3 
per cent and 11.25. What is the policy for salary increases of 
people at this upper level? 
 
You'll know that in the civil service overall the increase, I believe, 
has been between 3 and 4, and that's fairly consistent. How do you 
arrive at an increase, for example, of someone earning close to 
$5,000 a month, that they would get an 11 per cent increase? How 
would you arrive at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, anything on the 
information that we provided that is over the 3 per cent guide-line 
is either a promotion or some element of back pay that's included 
in the total, but the normal increases are all within the guide-line. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well your executive director, administration 
and financial service division, the salary in March of '85 was 4,317 
per month and that is now 4,803. And my calculation may not be 
quite accurate here, but can you tell me why there would be a 
fairly dramatic increase for that individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, that individual was 
promoted from comptroller to executive director. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what about the executive director of 
operations and maintenance, where there was a 7 per cent increase 
from 4,200 to 4,500? What would that be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — In that case, Mr. Chairman, the 
management series back pay did not come through in 1983-84 and 
was included in the 1985 numbers, and that's why that figure is 
above the guide-line. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister can outline 
what the guide-line is, because of the individuals you've listed 
here, five of them are above 4.5, and three of them are below. 
Now I suppose there's an easy way of getting peoples' salaries up, 
and that's to give them another name and pay them more. But it 
would seem to me when you have over 50 per cent of your 
executive salaries increased by in the area of 5 to 11 per cent, then 
there'll be those in the public who will believe that there's a 
mechanism in place to increase salaries at the upper level that isn't 
in place in the other areas of the civil service. Because obviously 
50 per cent having some other guide-line than the normal rate 
applying to their salary increases, when you have these kind of 
increases on people earning 5,000 or 4,800 a month, I'll tell you 
that there seems to be a double standard. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

2001 
 
 

We're talking about people earning in the area of 60 - $70,000 a 
year. And when you start applying increases of 7, 6, and 11 per 
cent, you can call it what you like, whether you're reclassifying 
them all, or whatever you're doing to jack their salaries up, or 
whatever they're doing. I don't know whether you scrutinize these 
very closely, but when more than 50 per cent of them are getting 
more than 4.5 per cent, then the public service and other people 
who are being asked to restrain themselves and pay more taxes 
don't understand what's going on in the civil service because they 
see a double standard. 
 
And I don't know whether we as legislators can blame them when 
there appears to be increases for people earning 50 and 60 and 
70,000, and people earning 20 and 25 and 30 are being told that 
there's a restraint program on. 
 
And these are the kinds of things going on in our society today 
that people are basically rebelling against and they don't want to 
have to pay more taxes so people at the top can get more. I think 
the people in the middle class, those people between 20 and 
40,000, are getting very close to the point of rebelling against the 
massive tax increases they've seen over the past four years and the 
kind of increase in salaries that people at the top are getting, and I 
don't know whether we can blame them. But I would just say to 
you that if you could outline what your policy is for salary 
increases, and for having done that - I believe it's around 4 per 
cent, your guide-lines - explain to me how the five who are listed 
here got the increases more than the guide-lines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I won't take the 
committee's time to respond to the long, drawn-out comment from 
the member opposite. I'll try to explain exactly what has happened. 
 
One of those was a promotion, which I have indicated. The others 
- the March 1985 numbers are actually indicative of their '84 
salaries, because their performance rating, their management 
series pay, had not been approved as of that date. That money 
came through during the post-March '85 period. Consequently, the 
numbers appear to be of a percentage that is higher than they 
would. And it's simply a matter of picking a date and providing 
you the most up-to-date information, but it has nothing to do with 
any double standard or any of the other inferences that the member 
tried to indicate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'm not going to dwell on it a great 
length of time. But I just say to you that the public, in each of the 
Crown corporations, in that committee and now in this committee, 
we see two different standards - one that applies to the civil 
service at large, which is firmly enforced, and in the general area 
of the civil service there would be some promotions as well. And 
it may be 2 or 3 per cent of the total within the civil service, but in 
the upper echelons of the civil service we have 30 and 40 and 50 
per cent who are getting massive increases as a result of 
promotions or name changes. And I think it's just a tool that's 
being used to basically pay off individuals who are already earning 
50 and 60 and 70,000. And I find that unfortunate. 
 

But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister; have you got a complete list 
of all the property that the government has leased at the present 
time? It's been traditional that the opposition has been given, either 
before estimates or during the estimates, a complete document of 
all the property. It's basically a book that lists out all the property 
and has been made available in past years, and basically is a 
tradition of the Assembly. I'm sure the member from Meadow 
Lake will confirm that, that that has been made available to the 
opposition in the past. And if you have that available for us now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 
information with us, but I'm informed that we sent you that about 
six weeks ago. That information is current. There have not been 
any significant changes. If that's not satisfactory we will commit to 
run off another copy and get it over to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well just on a point of clarification. I don't 
believe I have that copy but I will correspond with you directly if 
it has been misplaced in my office or one of the staff has filed it. 
But as long as I have the commitment from you that it will be 
forthcoming if I need it. 
 
What I need as well is the executive aircraft policy of your 
government. Have you got that complete list of the flights that will 
have taken place in the past year and will you send that across to 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — We'll provide that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you outline how many executive 
aircraft are presently in the fleet that cabinet ministers are allowed 
to use? I know there was a great hullabaloo made by the Premier 
when he cut down the number of people in cabinet, that he was 
also going to get rid of one of the executive aircraft. Can you tell 
me whether or not that aircraft has been sold, that Premier Devine 
talked so much about selling when he was trying to redo his image 
after the Regina North East by-election? Have you got any idea 
whether or not that aircraft has been sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as the member 
indicated, I think it was in late '85 that the Premier indicated that 
we would be disposing of one of the aircraft. We have done that. 
We have moved one of our pressurized aircrafts to full-time air 
ambulance. I think that will be seen as a positive step. It has been 
equipped with an additional door to make the transportation of the 
sick and wounded that much easier. 
 
The answer to the question is, there are now two full-time 
pressurized vehicles at the disposal of the exec air, and then there 
is a Navajo that is on back-up to both the air ambulance and to 
exec air. So the fleet has been reduced by one. There are two 
full-time and a part-time plane available to exec air. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Did you .. I didn't catch it, but I think you 
said you sold the Navajo. And if you did, who did you sell it to, 
and what was the final selling price of that aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The plane was sold in March of  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 

2002 
 
 

'86 to Prairie Air of Estevan, and the Prairie Air is owned by a 
Brian Hutton. The selling price was $72,200. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Are you saying that you sold that Navajo 
aircraft for $72,000? Is that what I heard you say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, that is correct. That was 
the selling price, $72,200, and people in the field indicate that that 
is indeed an excellent price for that aircraft. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, did you have any appraisal 
done on that aircraft? Because I want to tell you that a 182 Cessna 
is worth more than that, or a 172 retractable, which are very small 
aircraft. Four-seaters are worth that kind of money. Who did the 
appraisal on that aircraft and what was their recommendation of 
the value of it before it was sold? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


