


















































April 7, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 7, 1986 
 
 

409 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
when the chairman called it 5 o’clock this afternoon, we were 
talking about nursing home beds, and I am wondering whether 
you’ve had an opportunity over the last two hours to check with 
your officials and be in a position to respond to the question 
which my colleague asked, as to which years between 1975 and 
1982 in which there were no nursing home beds open in 
Saskatchewan. Because I’m sure that it’s all easily accessible. 
Are you able now to be able to tell us which years those were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I say, look over in ’82. And we have 
built a lot of nursing home since ’82. I don’t have the 
information of . . . It seems that there was an awful lot of things 
shredded when we came into office, and it’s rather hard to find 
some of these bits of information out. But as I said, we’ll do our 
best to research that rather dismal record. But at this point in 
time we don’t have the information for him. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s rather interesting. Mr. Chairman, I 
find it rather fascinating that within any particular department 
there would be shredding taking place. I know very well, and so 
does the minister that does not happen. I will allow . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member from Sutherland 
laughs. He must know something about what they’re prepared 
to do in case the Premier calls the election, which we don’t 
know yet. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that in the departments 
themselves, information is provided to the archives when the 
time has come by law. And I’m sure that there would be no 
official of the department, before 1982 or after, who would tell 
you otherwise. 
 
I think that for the minister to stand up now and simply talk 
about that, instead of responding to the question, indicates that 
he is not able to answer that question — not because he does 
not know the information, but because he knows that all of what 
he has been saying about certain memorandums and so on will 
prove to be wrong. 
 
Until the minister is able to tell us which year between 1975 
and 1982 there were no nursing homes built or opened, all of 
the things that he’s been saying, I think, are rather doubtful. 
And I could use stronger words than that, but I choose not to do 
that. 
 
Now maybe in two hours it’s been insufficient time to do that 
checking, so I will not pursue that question but I’m sure when 
we return to these . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we want 
the public to know what the minister up till now has not 
produced, but we will be fair. And I’m prepared to be fair. 
 

And I think when we return to these estimates tomorrow or 
Wednesday at the latest, he will have been able to find the 
information because his officials will have gathered it for him, 
and he will be able to respond to that question. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, another question that was asked prior to the 
calling of 5 o’clock was that dealing with the number of nursing 
homes beds that have been built, new ones, in the city of Regina 
in the last four years. And I’m sure your officials have that at 
hand. Can you tell this House the number of nursing home beds 
which have been opened, new ones, in this city in the last four 
years, and where they were located. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we talk about being fair, and I 
would like to be fair too. And of course if anyone was wanting 
to have access to the letter which specifically indicates the 
moratorium, I’d be more than obliged to give it to constituents 
or anyone who would like to have access to that letter, to show 
that that is exactly the stance taken by the opposition in nursing 
homes. 
 
On regard to the number homes, beds, that were built, as I said 
to the Leader of the Opposition, I think it’s fair to look at in a 
provincial context because I do look after health for the entire 
province of Saskatchewan — Regina being one aspect of that. 
 
I did say before supper that there were 11 beds added to the 
Lutheran Home. But I think we have to take that into 
consideration, with 43 new beds in ’82 as I had told you; and 
113 replacement beds in ’82; 75 new beds and 40 replacement 
beds in ’83-84; and 162 new beds, with 166 replacement beds 
in ’84-85. And I can assure the member opposite that there are 
many projects that are taking place now for ’85-86, and the 
other ones that have been designated will be developed in the 
future years too. 
 
The five-year program was very well received by communities. 
It gave them a chance to do their planning, to select their 
architects, to come up with their share of the sponsoring 
requirement. And as I say, those are the beds that have been 
built, 11 of them in Regina. But there is a promise, as I said 
earlier, and some of that sod . . . And I would invite you — as a 
member, I would certainly invite you to be present at the sod 
turning which will be taking place in the not too distant future 
in Regina here. I think you would be interested in coming to the 
Santa Maria one, and certainly with the Salvation Army. Those 
will be coming up very quickly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well hopefully that the coming of an 
election will speed some of those projects on, because certainly 
in the last four years that has not been the case. Let’s put the 
record straight here now. What the minister has just said, 
clearly, finally — I don’t know why he couldn’t answer it for an 
hour and a half previously, but he simply said that in the city of 
Regina in the last four years there has been a net of 11 nursing 
homes built. 
 
Now I must say, Mr. Chairman, that is not a record that that 
minister of this government can be very proud of. He talks of a 
sod turning. Well there is an awful lot of talk of sod turning and 
announcements by press releases, of  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

410 
 

projects which may never see the light of day after the election 
if these people are re-elected. I simply say to the minister that 
for the government to attempt to restore its credibility by 
making announcements prior to an election isn’t good enough. 
 
Now I sincerely hope, sir, that when this is all over that your 
announcements will actually come to bear fruit. The worry I 
have is that the record of your administration is such that there 
is an awful lot of good reason to doubt that that will in fact 
happen. And the fact that in the city of Regina there are only 11 
additional beds in four years, I think, tell you and tell the public 
of Saskatchewan that there is reason to be doubtful. 
 
You mentioned earlier that there is a waiting list in Regina of 
1,073 people waiting for a nursing home bed. The Leader of the 
Opposition mentioned that on November 18th of 1985 — and I 
checked this personally with the Department of Health, and this 
is who I got the figures from — there were 1,011 people 
waiting to get a nursing home bed. We have seen an increase in 
that, and yet all you’re able to talk about is a possible sod 
turning and announcements. 
 
And so I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that although indeed 
across the province there have been some beds added, I now 
speak for the city of Regina for which I am a member, and I say 
in this case you have not done an adequate job. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, because there’s an awful lot of people 
here who are in need of nursing home beds, some of whom are 
occupying acute care beds in hospitals. And you indicated that, 
and I know that there will always be some of that. The problem 
is that that number has been increasing in the last several years. 
And the reason it has been increasing is because of the shortage 
of certain nursing home beds, where those people would be 
going if the doctors or the physicians could send them out of the 
hospital for somewhere to go. They have nowhere to go, so they 
are occupying a hospital bed. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you made reference to the Salvation Army 
nursing home beds, and I think the proposal was 30. I remind 
you that that announcement was made in the 1985-86 budget. 
We are now in the 1986-87 budget, and now you’re only 
beginning to talk about sod turning. Is that what you said? Did 
you indicate in your response before I stood up here that the 
nursing home beds at the Salvation Army have yet not begun to 
be constructed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to indicate and 
do a little adding for the member opposite — the ones that I 
read off to you that have been constructed are 280 new beds and 
399 replacement beds. Now that is far more than you had ever 
constructed under your moratorium policy. For example, you 
like to focus on the city of Regina. I will indicate to you, in the 
last 10 years you built 70 hospital beds in Regina. In the first 
five years of our government we will have built 118 beds in 
Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes. You just come 
down to the sod turning and be there . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, you better come because you won’t be the star at 
many of them. 
 

Also I would draw out your attention, if you’re looking at beds 
and replacements and consideration and care of the elderly, 
there’s a new 238-bed special care home, level 4, going into 
Saskatoon, the Fairhaven home. That was one that those people 
had cried for for years to have and is well under construction. I 
was by it today; it is well under construction. 
 
So you may like to focus in on Regina. I will tell you we built 
11 beds. We’ve committed to building 118 beds, and I will also 
tell you that you can go wherever there has been a nursing 
home committed in this province by this administration and 
they will tell that there is no double talk, that they are being 
built. They are not election eve promises, like was the situation 
before, where there was a hurry up, let’s design something; let’s 
design a rehab in a 48-hour period. These have been well 
thought out and planned. 
 
And you may make accusations to the Salvation Army. You 
may try and indicate that they are dragging their feet and going 
slow. I don’t feel that way. They have been under careful 
planning; they have an architect and they are ready to go in 
building that nursing home. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that the Salvation 
Army is doing a very good job. That is what they are noted to 
be doing. I think the problem that they have faced, as have a lot 
of other nursing home boards throughout the province, is sort of 
the ability for this government not to be able to make a 
decision. And that’s the problem. I submit to you, Mr. Minister, 
that you’re going to have to and your government is going to 
have to do a lot better in the future with regard to nursing home 
beds, assuming that the Premier is going to be afraid to call an 
election for a year yet with his cold feet. 
 
(1915) 
 
You’re going to have to do a lot better than two and a half beds 
a year, which is what you have built in Regina in the last four 
years. And you’re not going to catch up to the backlog of 
people no the waiting list of 1,073 people at two and a half beds 
a year. That’s a dismal record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just for your information . . . And I recall 
back to the days when I was in opposition and one of your 
priorities, if I can recall, was building the Cornwall Centre and 
a cosy deal with Chartwood Developments. That’s where the 
priorities were. You know, in Regina it wasn’t nursing home 
beds. As I said, you had built very few in the 10 years — 70 
beds. 
 
But just to compare records, because that’s interesting from the 
years ’75 to ’82, the NDP put in 776 beds at $33 million. From 
1982 till now, our record is 2,205 beds at $160 million. So I 
think it’s very obvious to anyone which government has the 
commitment to long-term care in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I understand from the 
statements that you gave earlier that there have been . . . There 
are 118 nursing home beds planned for the city of Regina over 
the next three years. You have refused, at least in the time I’ve 
been here, to give us the figure for the last four years. Instead 
we’ve been treated to any number  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

411 
 

of inane statements about what has happened and what might 
happen. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could give me, before I go on to 
make some comments, I wonder if you could give me the figure 
for the last four years of the city of Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s about the seventh time I 
have said this. As I indicated, you must look at the total picture. 
I mean, there are senior citizens that require housing in 
Wawota, Saskatchewan. They’ve got a brand-new nursing 
home. There are senior citizen that require housing in Central 
Butte. They have a brand-new nursing home. There are people 
in Arborfield. Their nursing home will some be completed. All 
around here — Goodsoil, Meadow Lake — you can just name 
town after town where there are nursing homes being 
constructed. 
 
In Regina we have constructed 11 beds but we are committed to 
118, just the same kind of commitment that I remember making 
to Wawota. I remember the night I was in Wawota, Mr. 
Chairman. I remember going in there and meeting with the 
senior citizens in their senior citizens’ drop-in centre. There 
must have been 60 or 70 very sincere seniors there. They said to 
me, Mr. Minister, they said, we in Wawota have cried like lone 
voices in the desert for year after year to be acknowledged for a 
nursing home and our cries fell on deaf ears. 
 
I met with those seniors and I sensed the desire and the need. 
And after that meeting they got permission to build a home and 
that home is there ready to be opened today and I challenge any 
one of you to go to Wawota and say to those people there: did 
the Devine government deliver a nursing home? They’ll tell you 
very quickly, as they will tell you all around this province. Go 
to Kindersley, go to any place that I have read off here and ask 
them: did you not have straight up-front dealings with the 
Department of Health? Did they not come to build what you 
had asked for? Did you not have consultation and lots of time 
and co-operation in the planning? They will tell you very good 
comments about my people in continuing care who have gone 
out there in community after community. And I say to the 
people of Saskatchewan, we’ll continue to go out to community 
after community to build, in concert with those communities, 
the nursing homes and the facilities for senior citizens that they 
require and they deserve. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the figure of 11 nursing 
home beds — I can well understand why you want to talk bout 
something else. I can well understand why you want to talk 
about anything else that comes to your mind, when you mention 
the figure of 11 nursing home beds. That’s patently, woefully 
inadequate. 
 
So is 118. I am not sure who believes that you’re going to build 
118 over the next few years. I don’t know that we’ve got a copy 
of that document of yours yet, Mr. Minister, but I don’t know 
who believes 118. Even if you did, it would still be woefully 
inadequate. It would still be woefully inadequate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I swear there are more than 118 patients in the 
Pasqua Hospital alone who need to go into a nursing home. I 
have been there frequently in past occasions, and  

ward after ward after ward is filled with people who appear to 
me to be proper patients of a nursing home. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I am asked as frequently about nursing 
home beds as any other question, and I have been grossly 
overly generous to you people. I didn’t realize it was as few as 
11 beds. Mr. Minister, the figure of 11 beds doesn’t begin to 
meet the need; nor does the figure of 118 begin to meet the need 
in this city. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your projected estimate of the number of 
nursing home beds which you’re going to build in the province 
as a whole over the next three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Minister, the member 
opposite indicated, he said he doubts that these nursing homes 
in Regina will be built. Well I can tell you that all that member 
is doing is standing in this legislature and doubting — and 
doubting — whether the people who run Santa Maria are true to 
their word that they’re going to build that nursing home. 
Because it has been approved; they’re making plans; they’re 
ready to build it. He stands here and says, I doubt if it’ll be 
built. That’s what he’s saying. That’s what he’s saying. He’s 
saying to the Salvation Army . . . and, Mr. Chairman, you know 
the credibility of the Salvation Army across this province and 
Canada. They have the approval; the money’s in place; go build 
it. He’s saying, I doubt if they will build it. 
 
Now if that member wants to stand in this legislature and 
question the authenticity of the Salvation Army and the 
sincerity of the Salvation Army, so be it. Let him do it. I ask 
him to rise on this feet again and do that. I personally don’t 
question that kind of sincerity. 
 
I know the record of the Salvation Army in this province and in 
this country, and when the Salvation Army say they’re going to 
build something, mark my word, they will build. And more than 
that, they will provide, along with Santa Maria, firsthand care to 
the people of Regina. That’s why we entered into contracts with 
them, because those are the kind of community people that one 
would like to see. The Lutherans, the Santa Maria, the Salvation 
Army — those are the roots of our town here in Regina, and 
those are the people who have the great care in their heart for 
the senior citizens of this town. And I’m only too pleased — 
I’m only too pleased — to enter into contracts with them to 
build facilities for the seniors. 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, that’s far different from the 
expenditure pattern . . . I would like to have the money that was 
squandered in taking the “O” off SGIO. I would like to have 
that money for nursing home. I would like to have the cosy deal 
with Chartwood Developments and the Cornwall Centre. I 
would like to have millions of dollars that went into potash 
mines. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as you know, had they taken the money that they 
have spent in uranium and potash and all their great adventures 
and put it in the Credit Union Centre, we would be able to build 
all the nursing homes that are needed in this province and there 
would be a balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

412 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But because of their record, because of 
the record of the Blakeney government in squandering the 
money of this province, that’s why there were moratoriums and 
that’s why there were holds put on nursing home construction 
and hospital construction. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know whether the minister intends 
to answer the question or whether you intend to bluster all 
evening. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you remember the question I 
asked you. Do you remember the question I asked you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You have asked me seven times how 
many nursing homes were built in Regina. There were 11 built. 
You asked who were building them — the Santa Maria, the 
Salvation Army. I would also indicate to you that in the last 
seven years, the NDP’s record was 776 beds — that’s new and 
replacement. Our is 2,205 — three times the rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you don’t even remember the 
question that I asked you. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ll save 
some of the bluster and some which, I suppose, is not 
mentionable in this Assembly. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ll 
start dealing with the questions and save us these silly, 
blustering speeches that you’re giving us. Mr. Minister, I asked 
you how you can pretend even 118 nursing homes beds is 
adequate when the waiting list has apparently grown by 
60-some people in the last five months. How on earth do you 
suggest that 118 is enough? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly I would say that . . . You 
know, one can question what is enough. You know, you can 
always question that but I say that the 118 that we have 
committed will be built. They will go a long way to rectifying 
the need. That is a bigger commitment than 70 over the 10 years 
previous, by the previous government. So I stand on the 118. 
 
Sure, there will be need for more nursing homes and there will 
be need for more of them around Saskatchewan. It’s interesting 
to know that their centralist tendencies did not allow small 
communities to have nursing homes like we have. I read before 
supper the story of Theodore, Saskatchewan. But certainly 
anyone realizes that there will have to be more construction 
over time. But I’m just saying to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
members opposite, that the commitment of the Devine 
government to nursing home construction in Saskatchewan is 
unparalleled in Canada; I believe unparalleled in North 
America. When the 1,600 beds will be in place, we will have 
the higher bedded ration than anywhere else in North America, 
and I think that is a record, an enviable record, and I say that 
it’s one that I and my colleagues are proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll bet you’re not. I’ll be you will not, 
whenever you have the nerve to call an election or are forced by 
the effluxion of time to call an election, I’ll bet  

you don’t mention nursing homes. I’ll bet you’re not proud of 
it. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is notorious now that you are seriously behind 
in nursing home beds. The figures given by your own 
department suggest that you are 60 beds further behind in the 
last five months. Will you not admit that you are now behind 
and your schedule of 118 beds is going to allow you to fall even 
further behind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, how 
the member opposite can stand in his place and try and indicate 
— and I wouldn’t say indicate, I would say try and mislead — 
that we are behind in construction. I just want to read off the list 
that is now under construction, now under construction at this 
time: Arborfield, 36 new beds; Big River, 30 new beds; 
Dalmeny, 9 new beds and 27 replacement beds for a total of 36; 
Duck Lake, 30 new beds; Eston, 22 replacement; Foam Lake, 
10 new beds and 2 replacement; Goodsoil 12 new beds; 
Lampman, 19 new beds; Lucky Lake, 12 new beds; Meadow 
Lake, 25 replacement; Melville, 30 new beds and 2 
replacement; Nokomis, 12 new beds; Saltcoats, 30 new beds; 
Saskatoon Lutheran, 2 new beds and 78 replacement. That’s 
under construction now for a total of 256 new and 156 
replacement. And this gentleman says we’re behind. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the question which I asked 
you and which you forgot and which you could not remember, 
Mr. Minister, is: how many nursing home beds do you project 
you’re gong to build across the province in the next three years? 
That was the question I asked you. That was the question you 
forgot in the process of that nonsensical comment of yours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — How more to the point can I tell him? 
Then he says, what are you projecting? So I read what we’re 
building. That’s 256 and that’s 156. Add those together. So 
that’s part of the projection because they’re being built right 
now. And if you doubt it, we’ll shut the House down and you 
can get in my car and I’ll drive you around and show you 
firsthand. I’ll take you up and I’ll you even open the door to do 
what you want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
What am I projecting? I’ll tell you what I’m projecting. I’m 
projecting for ’86-87 . . . Just listen. I’m projecting a nursing 
home in Cut Knife, in Dinsmore, in Esterhazy, in Fillmore, in 
Fort Qu’Appelle, in Gainsborough, in Invermay, in 
Langenburg, in Lumsden, Mankota, Norquay, the Salvation 
Army, Santa Maria, Tisdale, and Yorkton. That’s what I’m 
projecting. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what’s the total for the three 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The total for the five-year commitment 
was 1,600, as I told you before supper. It’s in excess of 1,600 
beds. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Of which 118 are in Regina. Do I 
understand that correctly? 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

413 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That is correct. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, why with 16 per cent of the 
province’s population does this city get something like 7 or 8 
per cent of the nursing home beds? I’m doing the mathematics 
quickly, but I think I’m substantially accurate. We have 16 per 
cent of the province’s population, and we have well under 10 
per cent of the nursing home beds being built — by my 
calculation about 7 per cent. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: why with 16 per cent of the 
province’s population do we get half that percentage of nursing 
home beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll simply tell you why the nursing 
homes are placed where they have been under this 
administration. Because, if there was one thing became 
abundantly clear to me, as I travelled the province soon after 
becoming the minister, was that the people said, we don’t want 
to see everything in Regina. 
 
I know that your government, had you stayed in, you would 
have liked to have built more nursing homes in Regina, and you 
would have asked the people from Weyburn and from Indian 
Health and from Moose Jaw and from Lumsden to come to 
Regina. 
 
I don’t believe in that. I believe in letter these people end their 
lives, if they’re going to be in nursing homes, close to their 
loved ones in the area where they grew up. That’s the policy of 
our government. And that’s why you will see that there are 
nursing homes spread throughout this province, because that’s 
what people said to me. They said, look at, we would like our 
senior citizens to be able to remain in their community where 
their friends are, where their children are, where their 
grandchildren are, so that they can have those comforts in their 
older age. 
 
If you wanted to centralize them all in Saskatoon and Regina, 
and well be it known across Saskatchewan the centralizing 
tendencies of the NDP government, so be it. We chose to do 
different, and I believe people respect that decision. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting they all 
be put in Regina. I am suggesting that there is some logic to 
placing nursing home beds roughly in proportion to the 
population. And if 16 per cent of the province’s residents live in 
this city, then it strikes me there may be some logic in putting 
16 per cent of the nursing home beds in this city. You reject 
that. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, the reason why you are rejecting it is 
because you have written off this city in terms of any hope of 
salvaging any seats, and you’re being crass enough to punish 
the city because it hasn’t been a hotbed of Conservative 
support. You are crass enough, Mr. Minister, to punish the city 
because they don’t happen to be particularly imbued with your 
style of government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You know, Mr. Chairman, it’s amazing to 
me that the member opposite, who has represented a city riding, 
does not have a greater grasp of the city than he does after the 
years he’s been in here. If  

you went around . . . I know you don’t know where Langenburg 
is. You admitted that last time. You thought it was on the west 
side of the province. You said why have an eastern entry into 
the province at Langenburg. But be that as it may . . . I know 
your knowledge of rural Saskatchewan is very, very limited, but 
let’s be that as it is. 
 
If you look at the demographics — and I would take you to my 
colleague’s town of Melville. You know, it’s out just north of 
the valley, a bit east of here — where the crop insurance is 
going, to Melville. I want to tell you that a third of the 
population in Melville is over 65 years of age. So one would 
look at where the needs are. 
 
Now I know that you would like to see the people from 
Melville and Neudorf and Lemberg and so on come in here to 
Regina and housed in some great monolith of a place where 
they don’t see their neighbours. That’s your philosophy; that’s 
not mine. 
 
I went through that Lutheran home in Melville and I saw those 
ladies. I remember visiting with some of them of there — some 
ladies that I had known their children when they were young 
people at Lemberg. And they said to me, they said, Graham, we 
have fantastic care here. Oh, you laugh, you laugh. Yes, you 
laugh at those senior citizens. The Leader of the Opposition 
laughs in his seat because a senior citizen says to a minister, I 
appreciate what these people are doing. They said, I have 
wonderful care here. And I can show you pictures of that lady 
and I sitting together discussing this. It just so happens that 
there’s a picture of John Diefenbaker in the background too. 
 
But let me tell you, the people in Melville want to stay in 
Melville. And they deserve to stay in Melville and that’s why 
there’s 30 beds built on to Melville. 
 
Now you may think they should all go to Regina. I don’t think 
you understand the demographics of Saskatchewan; and 
secondly, I will stand up any day and stick up for Melville folks 
to live out their lives in Melville and not be shifted into Regina 
into a monolith of an impersonal structure. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I have some idea where Melville is. I 
was in Melville about a month ago — had some difficulty 
finding any Conservatives in Melville, I’ll tell you. But I want 
to tell you . . . And certainly had some difficulty in finding them 
in the Melville Chamber of Commerce, I might add. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you picked Melville, let’s go to Melville. 
What is the waiting list in Melville, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s a couple of factors here that I 
would just like to draw to the attention, Mr. Chairman, of the 
debate. 
 
The member, again in a deliberate attempt to mislead, let on 
that there was a horrendous number of long-term care patients 
in the Pasqua Hospital. I’ve checked the record and it is the 
following: there are 26 people in the Pasqua Hospital; there are 
49 in the General — and 8 in the Plains. A total of 83 in Regina 
at this time that could be put into nursing homes. 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

414 
 

The other thing that might be very interesting for you, might be 
very interesting to know, that the long-term care bed ratios are 
better in Regina and Saskatoon than they are in other parts of 
the province. 
 
So I think when we’re looking at it, and if you make rational 
decisions and not just argue for your seat because it happens to 
be in Regina. Because that’s obvious what you’re doing. I 
haven’t heard you stand up honestly and argue for one other 
part of Saskatchewan. You have said, Regina, Regina, Regina. 
 
You want to play politics with the housing of seniors. I don’t 
want to do that. I want to keep seniors where the need is 
regardless of any political gerrymandering or jiggery-pokery 
that you’re trying to pull. 
 
So therefore, let’s get things straight. What you tried to mislead 
this House with, a great problem at Pasqua, doesn’t exist. And 
the bed ratios in Regina and Saskatoon are better than those in 
the rural areas. So what we have done is brought rural 
Saskatchewan up to where it should have been, but was 
neglected — was neglected — because of the Smishek 
moratorium letter. That’s when rural Saskatchewan was 
neglected. Let me tell you that. 
 
And I can say, I hear you talking a bit about an election — the 
polls will indicate that appreciation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Two question, Mr. Minister. Do you 
remember the question, and if so, will you answer it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The question was: what is the waiting list 
in Melville. We will research it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are you saying that you don’t have the 
waiting list in Melville? 
 
I’ll suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that in Melville there is a huge 
waiting list, and that your projections are not going to meet the 
waiting list in Melville either. I will venture to say, Mr. 
Minister, I would be interested . . . Mr. Minister, I would be 
interested in a list of those communities where the waiting list 
equals the number of nursing home beds you’re building. I’d be 
interested in the list of those communities, because I think it’s 
going to be a short list. 
 
I will guess, Mr. Minister, that in Melville the waiting list in 
Melville is considerably in excess of the number of nursing 
home beds you’re building. That’s why you’re not giving me 
the information. Not because you don’t have it, but because, as 
the indication with Regina, you’re ashamed of the facts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The only part of the past that I’m 
ashamed of was that dreadful moratorium that was placed by 
the government opposite. I mean, I’m ashamed of that. I think 
everybody in Saskatchewan is ashamed. When I found out that 
they did that, I was so shocked, Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t funny. 
To think that you would take that kind of action against the 
senior citizens of this province. 
 
You know, we talk about Melville. I don’t know what the 
waiting list is in Melville at this point in time, but I do  

know that whatever it is, it is being addressed an awful lot 
better by this government because they have a new 
home-coming, which was falling on deaf ears before. And 
another thing we have to look at . . . I mean, we’ve brought in a 
lot of new innovations to help people to stay in their homes and 
out of nursing homes. 
 
I get the feeling from the member opposite, as he gets up and 
bleats away about nursing homes, that he would like to take 
every senior citizen and put him in a nursing home. I don’t want 
to do that. That’s the last resort. 
 
People tell me: Mr. Minister, I want to stay in my home as long 
as I can; I want support services; we would like enriched 
housing; things of this nature. And I will ask you, when you 
question my colleague, the minister for Sask Housing, to check 
this government’s record on enriched housing. We’ve come 
about with a new respite care, where many of the homes that are 
being built now have a respite bed, so the person can come in 
and stay for a while and then go back out to their home. 
Another thing that many of them have incorporated with them 
is adult day-care centres. 
 
So if you really understand the situation, Mr. Member, there are 
a number of services that can be incorporated that will help the 
elderly live their lives in dignity and in safety and close to their 
surroundings. And that is exactly — let me tell you again — 
that is exactly what they’re asking for. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that’s really splendid. That’s really 
splendid, Mr. Minister, to hear from such an acknowledged 
expert as yourself what senior citizens are asking. 
 
I wonder, however, Mr. Minister, when you’re going to give me 
the answer to the question. And let me ask you at the same time 
whether or not you will give us the waiting lists for all the other 
— I won’t say, every community Saskatchewan; that’s a long 
list — but give me the waiting lists for the cities in 
Saskatchewan and your projected construction of nursing home 
beds. Will you undertake to give me that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I gave you the one for Regina 
earlier this evening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I did. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, he did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I certainly did. 
 
Also, you know, when you look at the waiting list, you’ve got 
to look at other services that are there too. Of the nursing homes 
that we’re building now, all of the new homes have at least one 
respite bed. And a respite bed can really do a lot to help a 
waiting list. I mean, there might be people on a waiting list who 
are there because they’re living with their family. They’re living 
with their family, and the burden of keeping that person in the 
family can become very taxing on the care-giver. So if you 
don’t have any other avenue, then eventually that person  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

415 
 

will be demanding entrance into a nursing home. 
 
But with the respite program, you can allow that person to come 
in for a month, six weeks, or whatever the arrangement is. The 
family can go on a vacation, have a rest, go wherever they want. 
They come back, take their elderly back into their home. And 
those things, as well as enriched home care, all of these things 
impact greatly upon a waiting list. 
 
Now I can give you the waiting list from Melville. We will find 
that out. But I tell you, if you understand the problem and the 
situation, just the figures on a waiting list are not a true 
indication, because you have to look at the other services that 
are available within that community. And in many cases, with 
the new initiatives that we’ve brought about — namely again, 
respite and adult day care — a lot of those things are being 
rectified and looked after. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, two questions: do you 
remember the question, and will you answer it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll send over the Saskatoon and 
Regina and Melville ones, if you want to continue . . . It’s going 
to take a little while to put it together, but continue on with the 
question. But you’ll get those. You may have my commitment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I asked you for the lists. Do 
you have the lists for each community in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s the assessment and placement 
committees out there. Many of them are formed around 
Saskatchewan and they have those figures; they’re the ones that 
have the figures. They change almost daily. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don’t begin to understand 
how you can make a decision as to how many nursing home 
beds go in a given community if you don’t have figures on 
waiting lists. I can’t believe you don’t have that information. I 
can well believe you don’t want to give it to me, but I can’t 
believe that your department doesn’t have it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That just shows the viewpoint of the 
member opposite. He’s the kind of person, had he my 
responsibility, he would ask the community for a number, a 
number, not knowing if those people on that list could be 
duplicated in the next town. He wouldn’t investigate that. 
 
I have groups come in from towns. We sit down and discuss 
and talk. My officials go out and visit with them. I go, in the 
majority of cases, right out to the people, sit down, look at their 
facilities, and we make a decision as to whether they would be 
getting a nursing home or not. 
 
But the simplicity and the complete excuse that . . . termed by 
ignorance of the member opposite, to say that you would look 
entirely at a waiting list and make a decision on that without 
looking at the demographics, without looking at the 
geographical distribution, without going out to the community 
and discussing and talking to  

them, shows the complete lack of understanding of the 
long-term care needs of this government. 
 
And, my friend, if you ran your department — whatever it was, 
culture and youth — like you are talking on nursing home lists 
and waiting lists, it doesn’t shock me why you were turfed from 
cabinet. I can understand why the leader dropped you quick. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask you again the same 
question. Do you have waiting lists for Saskatchewan 
communities? And if you don’t, how in heaven’s name do you 
make a decision as to where a nursing home goes? 
 
What the minister says is, he whips out to a community, sits 
down and has a cup of coffee and makes a decision. I may say, 
the mess that you people have left in government suggests that 
that’s perhaps accurate. That is how you make decisions. Do 
you have anything more accurate or scientific than that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again he says, what is the waiting list? 
Now if you have a community and they don’t have a facility, 
how do they have a waiting list for that community? Some of 
those people could be over here in this town, some could be 
over there, some may even have applied in Regina as you 
would like them to do. So how do you pull together a waiting 
list? You go there and you sit down with those people and you 
look at the resources; you talk to them about their community. 
And with that kind of consultation, you come up with a decision 
as to whether that is the place for a nursing home or is it not. 
 
I mean, I just fail to understand your logic of saying, well show 
me 50 or 60 on the list, and you’ve got a nursing home. That 
isn’t the way you decide on nursing homes, my friend. And as 
you stand and insist upon this, you just show your complete 
failure of the grasp of how one addresses long-term care. 
 
I’ve had five consultation committee meetings around this 
province — over 2,500 people there. We sit down and talk 
about what are the long-term needs. I would give you a personal 
invitation to attend one. It would be a great learning experience. 
And a waiting list is very seldom the thing that is even 
discussed at these. It is new innovations and ways to address the 
problem with respite and adult care. These are the things that 
people are talking about. My stars, you can have a waiting list 
anywhere, but until you sit down and analyse it, it would be the 
poorest criteria upon which to build a facility. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would readily admit ignorance in terms of 
knowing how you people arrive at decisions. Nobody who is a 
serious student of government has ever been able to figure out 
how you people ever arrive at a decisions. It certainly isn’t done 
in any rational manner. 
 
I would have thought that one of the criteria, perhaps only one, 
but one of the criteria in determining whether or not a 
community gets a nursing home is need. I would have thought 
that would have been a criteria. I would have thought that is 
what a waiting list would have measured — the need in the 
community. I ask you, Mr. Minister, is need not a criteria, and if 
it is, how do you assess the need if you don’t have figures of 
what the waiting list is? 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

416 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again you indicate your lack of 
understanding small town Saskatchewan. I can tell you, if you 
go out, if you would ever take the opportunity to go out and sit 
down with one of these groups, certainly you will talk about 
need. But you’ll talk about need from all kinds of angles, not 
just one waiting list. That isn’t the criteria you decide on at all. 
There are a lot of other things. You look at available services, 
support services, proximity to other areas, things of this nature. 
That establishes need, and I tell you, you will get that need a lot 
better and you will sense that need and you will feel that need if 
you go and visit with those people in their own surroundings. 
 
I described vividly for you what happened in Wawota, 
Saskatchewan; Wawota, Saskatchewan, who had been ignored. 
I’m sure that year after year, Wawota, Saskatchewan, sent in 
some type of figure of a waiting list to you people when you 
were in government. But they never, ever did get the 
opportunity for a minister to come out and sit down with those 
people who will be in the nursing home, who request a nursing 
home, whose parents will be in the nursing home. They had 
never had anyone do that. 
 
With that, we establish need — Wawota have a nursing home. 
It will soon be open. And if you doubt that that is the way in 
which a good decision can be made, I invite you to go out and 
talk to the people in Wawota. They will tell you very, very 
plainly that they are very satisfied with the avenues that went 
through to establish the need for their home, and now they have 
the home. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I simply can’t believe that 
you spend the kind of sums that are involved in building a 
nursing home and operating a nursing home without knowing in 
advance how many people are going to use it. That’s what a 
waiting list is — the number of people who want to move into a 
nursing home. I can’t believe that you don’t have that. 
 
I can well believe you don’t use it . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, we’re killing Conservatives. That’s what we’re doing 
the longer this House remains in session, the worse your 
electoral chances are going to be. 
 
I can’t believe, Mr. Minister, that you place nursing homes in 
communities without knowing how many people want it. And 
that’s what the waiting list is. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you don’t have waiting lists for the individual 
communities, do you have it for the cities? I’m trying to get this 
down to a figure that even I think you can deal with. Do you 
have waiting lists for the cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I indicated to you previously, certainly 
the assessment and placement groups in the cities who are 
functioning very well; a mechanism that was developed by this 
government to address the needs so that those with the need 
would be getting in rather than your idea of a waiting list. I 
mean, I don’t think you’ve ever analysed the waiting list. 
Because you can’t have a waiting list in the cities. If you just 
want to go with your idea of a waiting list, some of those people 
could be registered on six or eight homes. They’re showing up 
six or eight times. 

Your idea is to take each of these waiting lists and say, well, 
there’s a great one. Let’s build one here and here and here. We 
decided that a group should take a look at these people and put 
them through a common assessment so that every person, every 
person is dealt with the same. They’re looked at by the same 
group of people, professional people, and those people sit 
down, and they look at the state of that person that’s being 
assessed at that time, and they also look at the support services 
of that family. Now there may be a person whose personal 
health isn’t very good and could go to a nursing home, but it 
may be more beneficial to that person that they go to the acute 
care hospital for a short period of time and then back out and 
have home care support and live in their community. That’s the 
decision that these assessment and placement groups make. 
 
It may well be that, on the other hand, the person needs home 
care, and that is given to the person. And it may well be that the 
person needs to go into a nursing home, because they don’t 
have any support, or their health may be such that is the 
priority. So to look at a list of names, John, Mary, Jim, and so 
on, and decide, well because there’s that many, my gosh, here’s 
a serious thing . . . I think it makes much more sense to look at 
the individuals. 
 
For far too long, not only in Saskatchewan, but across this 
country, we have tried to make individuals fit institutions. I 
believe that institutions and support services should fit 
individual needs. And that’s exactly what we’re doing . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will give you those numbers, but I 
just want to explain to you, because from your line of 
questioning — I have to say it! — that you have a very, very 
limited knowledge of how you address the long care needs of 
our senior citizens and disabled younger people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, limited though it may 
be, I do know that in each of the cities, there is a central registry 
and there are no duplications. So, limited as it may be, at least I 
know that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can only . . . Mr. Minister, did you undertake to 
give me a number on the waiting list in each city, together with 
the number of nursing home beds which you project you’re 
going to build over the next five years? Did I get that 
undertaking in the midst of all that blether? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have told you time after time, all the 
nursing home beds that we intend to build, and I will give you 
that. And I’m sure you can separate what you want for Regina 
and Saskatoon. I told you that for Regina and Saskatoon, I 
would give you the lists as they are developed by the placement 
committee. 
 
But again, let me caution you — and I say this sincerely when I 
say let me caution you — because the way you would address 
the waiting list, you would look at the total number and say, oh 
my gosh, we need this many. 
 
Now as I said to the Leader of the Opposition before supper, 
some of these are classified as priorities. Those priorities are the 
ones that this group, who assessed everybody and looked at the 
support, as I just said in the  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

417 
 

last answer, say are the ones that should get in. Those people 
are getting into nursing homes in Regina and Saskatoon within 
about a two-month period. And I think that is quite a 
commendable record. And I did say to you that the ratio of beds 
in the cities is higher than the other part of the province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, a moment ago you said you 
would give me the list for Saskatoon, Regina, and Melville. I 
ask you, Mr. Minister: will you include the other cities, six 
cities, in that undertaking? Will you give us the waiting lists in 
each of the cities, and will you do so before your estimates 
resume on Wednesday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will you my commitment to try and get 
a hold of the co-ordinating committees in the areas you ask and 
ask for their most up-to-date figures. I have nothing to withhold 
from you, and I would be more than pleased to try and do that. 
It’s going to take a little bit of time. I think you indicated a day 
or two, and that’s just fine. 
 
But I just want to point out something else to show you that 
your passion with waiting lists is not really correct. For 
example, I don’t know if you’re aware or not, but with our 
decentralization policy, we’re building a nursing home in 
Lumsden. It may well be that many of those people had 
registered in Regina. I mean, I think you can agree with that. 
They could be showing up on that waiting list. 
 
The same thing . . . We’re putting an addition in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. The same thing could be true. So I think you’d 
have to agree that just to take the raw waiting list could be very 
misleading and not indicate the true picture of need. There are 
other ways to address need. And that’s what I think some of the 
things we have put in place do this. 
 
I’m not saying the system is perfect, but I’m saying it’s come a 
long way in the last four years. And as I travel the province, 
these co-ordinating committees on placement are being 
developed in almost every area of the province and being well 
received. I’ll explain for a minute how they work. 
 
There’s people on there from the long-term care sector; that’s 
the nursing homes. There’s people on from the acute care 
system, the hospitals. There’s people on from the home care 
system. And they all sit down, and they take a look at individual 
A, and to the best of their knowledge they say, this service is 
what individual A needs. 
 
The greatest thing that I’m finding with that kind of support 
from those people, individual A can sometimes go into, would 
you believe, a nursing home, stay in there for a period of time, 
but because of better diet and care, his health comes back, and 
goes back out to his community, and can live two or three more 
years in his own home, surrounded by his friends. I think that’s 
the goal we want to see, and I can tell you sincerely that those 
kind of situations are taking place in Saskatchewan now. 
 
(2000) 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if, as you say, Regina has 
been awash with nursing home beds and the rest of this 
province has been neglected, then it really must be a corker in 
the rest of the province. That’s all I can say. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is, I think, by common agreement since you 
gave the figure, 170-odd people on the waiting list. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Virtually thousands on the big waiting 
list. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A thousand and some on the main list — 
that’s what I meant to say. You are building enough nursing 
home beds to accommodate approximately 10 per cent of them. 
 
So one out of every 10 people on the waiting list is going to get 
a nursing home bed if they can hang on for five years, 
apparently. Mr. Minister, one of every 10 of those needs will be 
met, and the other 90 per cent of the needs will simply not be 
met. 
 
Mr. Minister, if that’s how bad it is in Regina, when Regina has 
been the subject of all this lavish attention, then it really must 
be a corker in the rest of the province where the needs have, as 
you put — as you claim — have been neglected. 
 
That is why, Mr. Minister, I want to see what the waiting lists 
are for the rest of the province, and that is why I want to 
compare them with your estimates. Because I’ll venture to say 
that the Regina experience will be repeated everywhere else. 
We just happen to have the figures for Regina. That’s why 
we’re using them. If we would have had the figures for any 
other community, we would have been using it. I will venture to 
say the Regina experience, when we get the figures, will be 
duplicated elsewhere. I will venture to say your waiting list, the 
waiting list which you produce, will be many times the number 
of nursing home beds you’re going to build. I would venture to 
say as well that a fair analysis would produce the same 
conclusion in the other communities as it does in Regina, and 
that is you are rapidly falling behind — never mind catching up. 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that it behoves this Assembly to analyse 
your statement and find out if Regina has been given more than 
its fair share. Because if it has, then the rest of the province 
must be in very serious condition indeed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can tell you all of the province was in a 
serious situation in 1982. When we are building 1,660 beds, I 
think by your own logic it shows that there was a terrible 
situation in 1982 as to nursing home bed construction, all 
because of a moratorium. 
 
You mention the nursing home list in Regina of 1,070. One 
hundred and fifteen are on the priority list. Now you may 
question that. I don’t question the Regina assessment and 
placement committee. I think they know what they’re doing. 
You may think they don’t That’s your judgement if you so care. 
But let me indicate to you, I have talked to people who are on 
waiting lists. I know people who have their mothers on waiting 
lists. I’m sure if I went around in this Chamber I would find 
people here who have their parents’ names on waiting lists, and 
their parents are on  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

418 
 

that waiting list and they may not be ready to go in. They’re on 
there because they want a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
no. They want to secure a place so they put their name on the 
list years before they’re ready to go in. But I can tell you that 
came about because there weren’t nursing home beds. 
 
The assessment and placement committees, the co-ordinating 
committees, do not report to me the great gravity that you seem 
to think is out there. I think it’s being well handled and well 
managed. I don’t stand here and say that every person who’s 
wanting to get into a nursing home in Saskatchewan is going to 
get in tomorrow morning. I’m not saying that. But I believe in 
our major cities, if the people who the professionals class are 
the priorities, if they can get in within two months, I repeat, I 
believe that is very good service. With 118 more beds, that will 
improve here in Regina. 
 
So you know, we can go on all night and talk about waiting lists 
but I will say to you the waiting lists are only one portion of it 
and I believe that there are many people on waiting lists who 
have their name on there just to indicate that at some day, some 
time, some place, I would like to go into that home, but for the 
remainder of the time I want to live in my own home with 
personal dignity. That’s the message that comes across time 
after time after time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will you undertake to give us the 
information for the cities, Mr. Minister, and, secondly will you 
undertake to give it to us by Wednesday at 2 o’clock? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll get it as quickly as I can. I can’t say I 
can have everything by Wednesday by 2 o’clock, but you have 
my commitment we’re going to give you these lists that you . . . 
And we’ll do it as rapidly as we can. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how many people do you 
have in research in the Department of Health? How many 
people are in that research branch of yours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Five researchers in the policy and 
research branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Can five people make six telephone calls 
between now and Wednesday and find out what those waiting 
lists are? All you have to do is phone the local committee. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister: can five people make six telephone calls by 
Wednesday at 2 o’clock and have that information back to for 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I indicated to you we will do it as quickly 
as we possibly can and we certainly will. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
would you repeat again the figure which you said the . . . of 
patients in the Pasqua Hospital who are level 3 or level 4 
patients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I couldn’t indicate whether it’s level 3 or 
4, but classified as long-stay patients: the figures that I have 
been provided with are 26 at Pasqua, 49 at General, and 8 at 
Plains — should total 83, is it? Yes, 83. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister — 
thank you, Mr. Minister. Twenty-six at Pasqua. I just want that 
very, very clear. If you have any qualifications, make them now 
because I have some doubts with respect to that figure — and 
not only that, but I have undoubtedly people who will count 
them for me. And that is not the information I have received. 
Maybe for all I know, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, when 
they come about here in a day or so . . . I’ve heard it suggested 
that they were coming here, and they (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. No, I don’t know whether or not they will get in. 
That depends on whether or not the minister of government 
services has his chains up, but we are about to find that out. 
 
But the point I think we have established is that, in the opinion 
of the minister, there are 26 long-stay patients there — 26, no 
more. And that’s fine with me. You have said that twice or 
three times, and I’m happy to have that. But we’ve underlined it 
now. And I will know that if there are more than 26 there, the 
minister is ill-informed. I make that point. And I take it . . . I’m 
not asking the question, because you’ve answered it three times, 
as you say. 
 
I want to raise a different subject, and that has to do with the 
drug program in general, and the cost of drugs, and the likely 
impact on the Government of Saskatchewan and on your 
department and on the drug program of the proposals by the 
federal government, indeed the action by the federal 
government, to remove the availability of generic drugs. 
 
And I ask you, sir, have you made an estimate on how much 
that will cost if — or perhaps “when” is the phrase — when the 
current arrangements with respect to the production of generic 
drugs in Canada are changed and the major drug companies are 
given the long-term protection they seek? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I just go back to the 
other question on the Pasqua. As the information that has been 
provided to me tonight — and I think you must know (you’ve 
been through estimates many times) that one goes on the 
information that is provided to you — is that there are 26, and 
they are all level 4. But I don’t want to mislead or give you 
wrong information. I hope you understand that. I will be 
double-checking this figure myself. But as the best information 
that I have at this point in time, that’s the figure. 
 
You ask about the Eastman commission, I believe, and topic of 
generic drugs. Certainly, as you well know that we had an 
assessment of the drug plan in Saskatchewan; had that done 
soon after becoming a minister. I believe we have a very good 
drug plan. 
 
Certainly there are always from time to time — and I think you 
have corresponded with me occasionally — where there may be 
a drug or some drugs that some people don’t have covered. We 
can’t cover everything; however, we do use exceptional status 
for many cases to try and help people with drugs that are 
beneficial to them prescribed by their doctors. 
 
As far as the Eastman commission — I’m concerned about  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

419 
 

their changes in the patent protection Act. I have expressed this 
on numerous occasions. I did not have the opportunity to meet 
with the minister, the Hon. Michel Cote, Minister of Consumer 
and Corporate Affairs. But my deputy, Mr. Podiluk, along with 
my colleague, Mrs. Duncan, the Minister of Consumer Affairs, 
have met with them. 
 
I have expressed to Mr. Epp, the Minister of health, my 
concerns about this. I think you asked what the possible costs 
could be to the drug plan. Our estimation would be somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of perhaps $12 million if the protection 
that is advocated at this time were to be enacted. 
 
I think you asked what the possible costs could be to the drug 
plan. Our estimation would be somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of perhaps $12 million if the protection that is advocated at this 
time were to be enacted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
surprised at the low amount of that figure. The drug plan is now 
costing about . . . something over $75 million, good enough. 
And that is virtually all for drugs. I’m not talking about the 
administration, or I’m not talking about the portion of the cost 
of drugs paid for by the patients in the prescription fee. I’m 
talking about the figure in the Estimates of 76 million which 
will be virtually all for drugs, I would think. Twelve per cent 
would indicate a possible increase of drugs of the order of 15 
per cent or so, 15 to 16 per cent; 15 or 16 per cent of $76 
million is about $12 million. My mathematics is not great, but 
that’s not far off the mark. 
 
Are you of the view that the laws which make generic drugs no 
longer available will add only 15 per cent to the cost of drugs? 
Do you feel that’s a fair hit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t think the intent of the commission 
and the recommendations is to outlaw generics entirely. It’s just 
that the exclusivity period for the innovators would be longer. 
And of course that’s going to add a cost to us. 
 
It’s pretty hard to give you . . . I said approximately 12 million. 
It might go up as high as 15 million. But somewhere in that ball 
park is what our estimation at this time is. 
 
(2015) 
 
You know that along with the report, there’s talk about certain 
benefits coming to provinces and so on. I have stated, and I 
think in strongest terms I possible could, that we in 
Saskatchewan are rather doubtful if that . . . We would have to 
be shown that those benefits would be accrued to our province. 
And to be honest with you, I’m a bit doubtful if they would. So 
we have come out quite strongly, and I would be willing to give 
you a copy of the telex that I sent to the Hon. Jake Epp 
indicating the opposition of Saskatchewan to that type of 
legislation being brought in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
will know that generic drugs are almost always significantly 
cheaper than brand names, and  

sometimes spectacularly cheaper — on occasion one-tenth the 
cost, or thereabouts. That is not the norm. I concede that out of 
hand — but sometimes spectacular. 
 
And the proposal as I understand it, in Ottawa, is to change the 
patent protection period from four years to a period of 10 or 17 
years. And there seems to be some doubt as to exactly what is 
proposed. I trust that the minister has made the strongest 
possible representations to the federal government. 
 
And I ask the minister whether or not he or his colleagues, 
including the Premier, when they were in Ottawa, have 
reiterated the concerns which he has expressed, since this is 10 
or 12 or more million or $15 million which is not available for 
health care in Saskatchewan but simply goes to the international 
drug companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I haven’t been in Ottawa for 
some time, but at the last meeting of the health ministers that 
took place last fall on my initiative — and I don’t say this in a 
boastful way — but we did put this on the agenda. It was led by 
Saskatchewan, the whole discussion about the Eastman 
commission and the problems that this could have for the cost 
of provincially funded drug plans. So I can assure the member 
opposite that the stand that I have taken, as a minister 
representing this government, is one that would not want to see 
any type of change that would have damaging effects upon the 
cost of the drug plan (a) to the Government of Saskatchewan, 
but more important, the cost of drugs to the consumers of our 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
I’m sure everybody is heartened by the fact that something was 
on the agenda for a federal-provincial conference, but I’m not 
sure that they will be totally comforted and believe that they 
have protection on that account. 
 
Federal-provincial conferences are almost a daily occurrence. I 
would suspect that the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources is attending one at the moment, if I understand his 
schedule correctly, and doubtless, some of your other 
colleagues, who haven’t been about the House lately, are 
attending federal-provincial conferences. I don’t where else 
they would be. I don’t where else they would be with the House 
on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Members ask where the 
member for Shaunavon is. He will be here, and you will know, 
and the Minister of Health will know when he’s here. I can 
assure you of that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have a concern with 
respect to hospital beds, and we have a concern with respect to 
the number of hospital beds that are in operation . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, the member for Saskatoon Eastview says 
it’s a new-found concern. I’ll tell you this. I’m going to talk 
about hospital beds in Saskatoon and I’m going to tell you that 
the waiting lists in Saskatoon are twice what they were four 
years ago, twice what they were four years ago. And twice what 
they were four years ago because of things such as this: St. 
Paul’s Hospital will take 77 beds out of service partially in an 
effort to cope with budget deficits. This is last month. 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

420 
 

Mr. Chairman: — If the members are not in the debate, would 
they let the member who is on his feet please have the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The issue is hospital beds. The 
question is waiting lists for hospital beds. And the question I 
ask is, under what circumstances, Mr. Minister, with waiting 
lists for elective surgery approaching 5,000 and perhaps 
exceeding 5,000 in Saskatoon, under what circumstances would 
St. Paul’s close 77 beds last month because they ran out of 
money? Could you explain why that would happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, before I answer that 
question, I think just to indicate to the member the support that 
we have for changes to the drug plan that might affect our drug 
plan in Saskatchewan, I’d like to read the telegram that I sent on 
March 24 to the Hon. Jake Epp, re-proposed amendments to the 
Patent Act representing pharmaceuticals. It states: 
 

I’m writing to you, and also by copy, to the Hon. Mr. Côté, 
Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, to once again 
express the serious reservations that the province of 
Saskatchewan holds towards proposed changes in 
compulsory licensing provisions. 
 
The Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, because of its 
universality, would be affected in a very dramatic way by 
the changes being contemplated. 
 
Due to the broad nature of the plan, we have been better 
able than most to eliminate the cost impact of those 
changes. Additional cost to our drug plan could reach $15 
million annually, or nearly 20 per cent. 
 
Because such increases could be very damaging to the 
program and its continuing success, and in light of the 
apparent lack of concrete reciprocal arrangements, and in 
the best interest of all Saskatchewan residents, I would 
request a reconsideration of the entire issue by the federal 
government. 
 
May I also request that this matter be discussed in a full 
and detailed hearing with all provincial governments. 

 
So I think that indicates the position of the Saskatchewan 
government regarding the changes to the Patent Act. 
 
As far as the 77 beds that you mentioned at St. Paul’s Hospital, 
they were closed for a period of time over Easter. As I 
understand they are open and functional now. It is not anything 
new. The hospitals from time to time, both in the summer and 
over Christmas or Easter, may close down beds for a short 
period of time. 
 
There are a number of factors affecting this. First of all, many 
patients would prefer to spend those times with their families, 
rather than being in a hospital. Secondly, some of the medical 
profession choose to take their  

families and go for family holidays and do not book surgery 
over those periods. Thirdly, also some of the nursing profession 
prefer, because we have an increasing number of part-time 
nurses in our province . . . It’s very difficult, the administrators 
tell me, to sometimes have the necessary staffing ratios of 
nurses over holiday time. 
 
So, certainly St. Paul’s did close their beds. I believe they 
opened them again on April 1. And I should say that this isn’t a 
new occurrence, that this has happened many times previously 
by different hospitals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
frankly surprised at that comment with respect to March. We 
all, I think, know that hospitals have closed beds in the 
summer-time, primarily for staffing reasons. But I am frankly 
surprised when you say that on March 24th — and this is the 
date of this particular report — St. Paul’s would be closing 
hospitals. It is made clear by Mr. Brent Skinner, the hospital’s 
director of planning, that one of the reasons is to help ease the 
deficits. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not it would not have been 
possible to provide funds so that this hospital could keep going 
over that period and at least make some small dent in the 
massive elective surgery waiting list. And I’m simply not 
willing to accept that all the doctors who might do elective 
surgery were on holiday that week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s indicated to me that in about May of 
last year, we put in about $3.1 million for the hospitals to 
maintain their flows. And I think, when they check back where 
previously they had had a summer slow-down, that St. Paul’s 
did not have that happen in this last year because of that extra 
injection of funds coming in about May, if my mind . . . That’s 
my recollection of it, around May. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the facts 
before me with respect to St. Paul’s in May, but St. Paul’s was 
closed in March and it was closed in the previous December. 
They had closed about 90 beds in December, and another 77 in 
March. And this strikes me as hardly the actions of a hospital 
that is all that well funded when it’s facing the largest waiting 
lists in the history of that hospital by a very large margin. 
 
I’ll ask the minister whether he wants to make any comment on 
that. If not, I will got back to the drug plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s indicated to me that an agreement 
was reached with them in ’85-86 to maintain at least the census 
of the previous year, and that funding was provided for that. 
And I know that we did have this extra injection of cash. I guess 
the thing one would have to look at, and I don’t have that figure 
with — I suppose I could get it for you — is the number of 
people that did go through in this last year. From my 
understanding, we’re putting more through the hospitals each 
succeeding year, St. Paul’s being no exception to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
you’re quite right, I think, in fact that patients are going through 
faster, and you’re quite right in saying that the average length of 
stay, at least for conditions of a  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

421 
 

comparable degree of seriousness, acuity, is going down. And 
that’s one of the things that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
is talking about a good deal, as you know. But that’s another 
subject. 
 
(2030) 
 
I will come back to the drug plan and ask you a general 
question with respect to the policy of your government with 
respect to the prescription fee. You will be aware that the way 
the drug plan is set up, a prescription fee — or I should say a 
maximum prescription fee is negotiated with the pharmacists. 
And I believe it now to be $3.95. The minister will also be 
aware that a number of pharmacies are charging a good deal 
less than that. Some of them have for some time had a lower 
price for senior citizens or some arrangement such as that, but 
the minister will be aware that Superstore and some of the other 
chain stores are operating pharmacies and having very low 
prescription fees — under $1 is reported to be frequently the 
fee. 
 
My question to the minister is: does your government have a 
policy with respect to not only maintaining a maximum 
prescription fee, but maintaining any sort of a minimum 
prescription fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’re certainly aware of the concern that 
the member expresses. I can indicate to you that there are 
consultations going on at the present time with the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association just on that topic, 
and I believe that we will work out something in conjunction 
with them that will address the situation. So I guess my short 
answer is: we are aware of the problem: we’re in discussions 
with the pharmacists’ association now to come up with a 
workable solution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do 
you have any policy to announce, other than the policy which is 
now in force, that is, that there is a maximum but there is no 
minimum? That’s the current policy of the government. And do 
you have any . . . Are you in a position to announce any other 
policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Not at this time I am not, not until we 
finish our discussions and consultation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, just to pursue the topic of 
hospitals, I know you may be wondering why it seems that 
there are many people who are cynical about announcements. 
And I’m not talking about you personally, but I’m talking about 
the government as a whole. And I think there is good reason 
why people are cynical, after having gone through a period of 
announcement and no results. 
 
When you took office in 1982, there was by the Regina General 
Hospital a big hole. It was dug because excavation was there to 
complete the regeneration of that facility, and it was to be done 
by now. Since then, there has really been nothing done, and I 
am sure you will agree to that. Back in 1984, your government, 
in the budget, announced that the regeneration will proceed. 
Nothing happened. In 1985, I read here, again there was an 
announcement, and in Regina it says, work will continue on the 
regeneration of Regina General Hospital,  

the program which started in 1978. Nothing happened. 
 
Last year in the provincial health budget there was the 
announcement of one of those new five-year plans, one of the 
four five-year plans. Now this government obviously had 
decided to go with the five-year planning. It was announced on 
April 10th, there was a fund of $300 million for Health capital 
projects. That budget for ’85-86 amounted to $37 million. The 
one that wasn’t pointed out in the budget, and I have a coy of 
those Estimates from the budget of last year, is that all of those 
projects, which were announced for 1985-1986 in this new 
five-year plan, were projects that has been announced in the 
previous year, 1984-85. 
 
And it’s these kinds of examples — and I try to say that as 
positively as I can, although it’s difficult to do that — it’s these 
kinds of examples that lead to the kind of questionings that we 
have to undertake here on behalf of an awful lot of people out in 
the public who are cynical about announcements which tend to 
be a lot of smoke and mirrors. Because all of those few 
examples which I have given you are example of exactly that. 
Let me ask you this question, and it’s a pretty specific one: at 
what stage is the Regina General Hospital at now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the member opposite talks about 
people being cynical. You know, I think if you . . . And you 
mentioned the $300 million capital project. And I think you 
must agree also that that is a commendable contribution towards 
health capital. And as I said previously to your colleague, and in 
fact even invited him to come with me to certain towns around 
Saskatchewan to hear firsthand from those people about the 
facility that they have now either opened and functioning, being 
built, soon to be opened — and I can tell you, those people are 
not cynical. 
 
You go to Saskatoon — and I heard one of my colleagues 
speaking from his seat here — and you go and you look at 
University Hospital. I mean, you just drive in to Saskatoon and 
you see the cranes and you see the floors being built there. You 
go over to St. Paul’s Hospital; you see the construction there. 
The new 238 Fairhaven home — I was by it today. I mean, I 
don’t know how one could be cynical about that. 
 
I think your direct question, though, was Regina and the 
General Hospital here. True enough, there was a hole beside the 
Regina General Hospital; I don’t deny that. Certainly that 
hospital now, the contract was signed as of February 28, 1986, 
awarding a contract for $22.8 million. So the construction will 
be going very soon. 
 
But, you know, we want to talk about cynicism. And I pointed 
out — I don’t know if you were present at the time — but about 
the rehab centre in Regina. And I remember, and you must 
remember as being the Finance minister of the government 
before you went down to defeat, and you must remember of the 
hurry-up offence to design a rehab centre. 
 
Well I think you see as you drive to work and come through the 
park that the rehab centre is being built in Regina. It’s well 
under way. There’s a board in place, a board in place to build 
and to manage it. The rehab centre  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

422 
 

is . . . The piles are in; they worked all winter on it; they’ve 
excavated a large area there. 
 
I can tell you that from the plans that I have seen, and visited 
various rehab centres across Canada, that will be something that 
both you and I will be very proud of. And it’s under way and 
being constructed now. So I don’t think that there is that degree 
of cynicism, because I think people do see projects going ahead, 
especially in the health care field. Now you may have a 
different opinion on that, but that would be my explanation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, Mr. Minister, you seem to choose to 
ignore the fact that the rehabilitation centre is four years late. 
The rehabilitation centre was ready to go in 1982, and your 
government delayed it. And only after a significant amount of 
political pressure you decided it was a lot more ready to go than 
the ammonia plant which you people are talking about, which 
now turns out to be a study. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about your five-year fund, but you don’t 
address the question that you played games with the five-year 
fund, or your government did. Your former minister of Finance 
did. 
 
You announced a five-year fund. You announced the first year 
of that fund, and you didn’t put anything new in it. All you did 
is put in it $37 million worth of projects from the previous year 
which hadn’t been done. What’s new about that? 
Hokery-pokery — the kind of numbering which this whole 
budgetary process of this year is all about, where you try to 
confuse everything by mixing it up. You change the format of 
the Public Accounts so it’s harder to get information. That is the 
problem. If you were really doing that well, why would it be 
necessary to do that? 
 
But I’m glad to hear that the contract has been let for the Regina 
General Hospital. I’m not sure that people . . . not only in 
Regina, because hospitals like the General and the Pasqua and 
the Saskatoon hospitals serve wide areas of the province. That’s 
normal, understandable. They provide those kinds of services. 
 
My question is: why did it take four years to get under way a 
regeneration which was all ready to go under a stage process so 
that it could have been completed by this time? Why did it take 
four years when the need was there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think, you know, you say that 
some of the things were smoke and mirrors, and so no. I don’t 
accept that. 
 
I was up in Saskatoon just a short time ago turning the sod for 
the cancer building that’s being constructed now. Construction 
has started — something that was seriously neglected. A 
brand-new cancer facility will be treating people suffering from 
probably one of the most dreaded diseases in our society. That’s 
part of the 300 million. 
 
The rehab centre, we’ve talked about; that’s part of the 300 
million. The expansion at University Hospital, and St. Paul’s 
Hospital, and the new City Hospital that will soon be under 
construction — I’ve seen the plans for it. It looks like it’s going 
to be a very fine facility. Those were  

all initiatives that were brought in since the $300 million capital 
project. 
 
So to say that it was just the rehashing of things that had been 
announced is not entirely correct. I will admit that the Regina 
General, the contract is going now. But to indicate that 
everything was set up and ready to go, I don’t think is exactly 
correct, because there has been a change in some of the plans. I 
think you would find out that the facility that is going to be 
constructed now, the regeneration phase that is being 
constructed now, is superior to what we were looking at 
previously. So I feel that many of the capital structure in health 
are well on their way. 
 
And I’m just talking at this point in time about basically the 
base hospitals. But if we wanted to branch out and look at the 
hospital construction outside of the major cities, you know, 
there’s a number of them. Hudson Bay is scheduled to go; 
Lloydminster, Maidstone, Melfort, Watrous, Watson, just to 
mention a few. So certainly the $300 Health capital fund is 
going a long way to addressing many of the needs that are out 
there in the acute care field, was well as we have discussed the 
nursing home field. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If I may just return to the Health capital 
fund, which we have discussed for a little while here today. Let 
me take you back to the budget of 1985-86. And I have here a 
copy of the Estimates, and there are two columns. There is the 
1984-85 column, and then there’s a 1985-86 column, which is 
the new Health fund — this new Health fund that was going to 
do all these new things. 
 
Well beside the column here on ’84-85 are a bunch of asterisks. 
And the one all the way down here, grants to hospitals and 
health centres; grants to Saskatoon Cancer Clinic construction 
program; construction grants to special care facilities — the 
asterisk says that this subvote was included in the vote Health 
— ordinary, in 1984-85. Nothing new about that. 
 
There’s another set of double asterisks: grant to Saskatchewan 
rehab centre; grants to Saskatoon hospitals construction 
program. The note on the bottom — this subvote was included 
in the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, 1984-1985. Nothing new 
about that. 
 
Then there’s another list of triple asterisks. Note on the bottom 
— this subvote was included in the special projects fund in 
1984-85. And that’s the point I’m making, Mr. Minister. You 
and your former minister of Finance announced a brand-new 
health capital fund, as if it’s something that’s going to be 
brand-new and doing all kinds of wonderful things that weren’t 
done. And yet in your own estimates, it makes it very clear that 
there’s nothing new about them. 
 
All you did was you took appropriations and subvotes which 
already had been provided in previous years, and you lumped 
them in here, and you call it brand-new. It was straight 
cosmetics. And if there’s any reason why there should be doubt 
in the minds of the public about your announcements, and I 
mean the government and you on behalf of the government, 
that’s why. That’s why. 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

423 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because all of what you say, you don’t 
really do. 
 
Now if I may go back to my question . . . because after you 
finished making your speech, you did not answer the question. 
I’ll just remind you that I asked a question: why did it take four 
years to proceed with the Regina General Hospital regeneration 
which already was ready to go back in 1982? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Very simply to that answer: when I came 
in as minister, there was regeneration going on at the Pasqua 
and there was some talk about a regeneration at the General. I 
don’t know how you like to do things. Maybe you like to get 
every burner on the stove going, but I find often if you do that, 
the pot boils over. 
 
My instructions to my department was: let’s finish the Pasqua, 
which is done, and then let’s go on to the Regina General; let’s 
build the rehab centre. We look at things. Under this 
government, we plan out phases and do things, as you have 
seen. The first five-year plan was a five-year plan for nursing 
homes. The next one was a five-year plan for major hospital 
construction. I have a five-year plan, which you’re well aware 
of — you were at the nurses’ symposium the other night — for 
staffing. 
 
This is the way that we operate. And I can tell you, it is being 
very, very well received. It gives people a chance to be part and 
parcel of the planning, which was lacking very much before, 
under your administration. People appreciated, whether you 
believe it or not, people in Saskatchewan appreciate being 
included and being part of planning facilities that are as 
important to their life as health care facilities. 
 
I jut want to point out to you that in the last two budgetary years 
. . . to show that the money in the 300 million capital fund was 
certainly being put to use to build these facilities. The 
expenditure was 36.9 million in the previous year. And this 
year, as you heard in the budget, will be in the neighbourhood 
of $75.4 million. I should say to you, and I would like to remind 
everyone here, that is undoubtedly the largest capital outlay for 
health facilities in the history of this province, I would believe 
— $75 million. That is a considerable outlay for capital 
construction, and that’s what is forecasted in this budgetary 
year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, that does not answer 
the concern which people have had about your first year of the 
five-year plan, which was last year, which included nothing 
new except the restatement of your 1984-1985 estimates. That’s 
what it was. 
 
You have not addressed that issue, and maybe you’re not able 
to at this point in time. And that’s fine with me. We’ll pursue it 
again at another time. 
 
You mentioned $75 million, which you are proposing to spend 
on health care construction in this budget which  

we are considering here. I’m asking you: where is the $75 
million coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, obviously, I think those questions 
were answered quite well this afternoon by my seat-mate and 
colleague, the Minster of Finance. He and the Leader of the 
Opposition went through rather a long discussion while we 
were doing the appropriations Bill. I believe my colleague laid 
it out very succinctly and clearly where the money was coming 
from. However, if you would like to dialogue on that and 
discuss that further, if you look in your Estimates, the new 
property management Crown comes up and the estimates will 
be answered by colleague. The minister from Saskatoon is 
heading up that commission. 
 
But I believe that there . . . If you would check back in Hansard 
of today’s discussion with the Minister of Finance, there would 
be an explanation there of where he is going to be getting the 
money for the properties management Crown. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that’s just not good 
enough. You are the Minister of Health. You are responsible for 
the expenditure and you are responsible for reporting to this 
legislature for the expenditure of moneys that your department 
directly or indirectly will be allocating for hospital construction. 
 
And you should be prepared in this House . . . Because you 
have here a subvote for hospital construction beside which there 
is no number, so that makes me doubtful whether once again 
anybody can believe your $75 million figure as not being 
anything other than cosmetics. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, because as the Minister of Health you 
are responsible for the expenditure of Health funds, where is the 
$75 million, the so-called $75 million that you say is going to 
go for Health capital construction? Where is it coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Minister, if you want to go through 
all of the discussion this afternoon, we can do that. But I refer 
you to the last page, 134 of the Estimates, where it says, 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Health, 
$75,400, and I think that is the appropriate place for you to ask 
the questions as to how the financing of the property 
management Crown would take place. 
 
I do not think that it is the mandate of the Department of Health 
to try and defend how those dollars would be brought together. 
 
The Minister of Finance, I thought, today explained it quite well 
to the Leader of the Opposition. But I would refer your 
questions to the property management corporation when those 
estimates come out. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s becoming . . . Now it’s becoming 
quite clear what the object has been in sort of the changing for 
the format of some of these Estimates. 
 
And I think during the period of time after 2:30 this afternoon 
that you’re talking about, it was suggested, or it was questioned 
whether your government’s intent was  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

424 
 

actually to rationalize your operations and make them more 
effective, or whether in the year of an election it was an attempt 
to be able to put things in different categories, so that when one 
asked a minister a question, the minister instead of answering 
the question could say, oh you should go and ask another 
minister at another time. The problem with that is when we go 
to the other minister to ask the question, that minister is going 
to be saying, oh you should have asked the other minister when 
you had him in the consideration f his estimates. 
 
That, I am afraid, is what’s going to happen, Mr. Minister. And 
once again, I won’t pursue this. Some of my colleagues might, 
now or later, but we’re not prepared to give this up totally 
before your estimates are over. 
 
But I think, and I say to you, and I say to your government, that 
you as the Minister of Health — or if it had been anybody else 
of any other department such as Advanced Education — ought 
to be able to report to this House how you are going to provide 
funding for hospital construction. 
 
If you’re not prepared to do that, one has to then ask the 
question, and it’s a fair question: will some of this money that 
you talk about — in this case, 75 million — ever see the light of 
day in 1986-87? That is really a good question that people will 
be asking, whether it’s before an election is called or whether 
it’s after an election is called. 
 
Let me pursue the question in a little different way, because in 
this sense I think that you certainly should want to respond. 
Regardless of how the money will come for hospital capital, 
will it be provided to hospital boards in the form of a loan, so 
that they will then have a loan and have to repay back? Or what 
form will it take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well your question whether the money 
will be spent — certainly it will. The contracts are signed; the 
commitments have been made. It’s just a matter of the money 
going out to various facilities. 
 
I think you heard very plainly the Minister of Finance explain 
the system of how the property Crown was going to operate. I 
have nothing to add to the explanation that he gave you this 
afternoon that you heard while you were in your seat. If there 
are any further questions pertaining to the property management 
Crown, I ask you to direct those to the minister responsible for 
it. As to add anything to what my colleague said today, the 
answers would be exactly the same. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you give us a list of . . . 
will you give us a breakdown of how the $75 million is to be 
spent, and where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I have some figures here if you 
would care to take them down. This is for the seventy-five, four 
hundred of this year. For special care homes, $5.7 million; for 
all smaller hospitals that would be outside of the base hospitals, 
22.9 million; for the cancer clinic, 2.5 million; for the Wascana 
Rehab, 6.7 million; for St. Paul’s 24.9 million; for University 
Hospital, $1.2 million; and for Regina regeneration — that 
would be at the General — 11.5 million. That should total 
seventy-five, four, the same figures you see in the  

property management Crown estimate for Health. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you for that information. I think I 
heard you say before that, that this $75 million is money 
provided for projects for which contracts and agreements have 
been signed and they’re already nailed down. Is that correct? 
That’s what you said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I should correct a little bit here on the one 
figure. I thought it was a little high when I said St. Paul’s 
twenty-four, nine — that’s St. Paul’s and City. Okay. So, yes, in 
the majority and in practically all of these cases, I would say 
that the contracts are signed, under way, and construction is 
going. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just so that we do not take time in the 
House, can you have your officials — they probably have it 
there — send me a list of the small hospitals for which there are 
contracts signed, for my information. You had a category of 
smaller hospitals of 22,900,000 If I could have that I would 
appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would want to make sure that it’s 
absolutely correct, but I would provide you with the list of . . . 
as quick as I can. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to pursue for a 
moment the question of the repayment of the money, of the 75.4 
million. I gather from the comments . . . I was out of the 
Assembly at the time, but I gather from the comments of the 
Minister of Finance that the 75.4 million will in fact be a loan 
which will be repaid. Is that correct, Mr. Minister, that the 
grants now are no longer grants, they are in fact loans which are 
to be repaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Basically, as I said, my colleague I think 
explained it very well today when he said it’s basically an 
amortization of the loan over a longer period of time. And he 
and the Leader of the Opposition were through those 
discussions. So as I say, I have nothing to add to that other than, 
you know, I think if you would look at the way we finance 
nursing homes: nursing homes get a loan from the CMHC that 
is amortized over the period of that nursing home — 25 years, I 
believe it is, the life of the nursing home. That loan is paid back 
to CMHC and the nursing home gets their money from their 
grant from the Department of Health. 
 
(2100) 
 
So I don’t see anything new and . . . It’s different. It’s a 
different way of doing things. Certainly it’s a new direction, 
which . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well obviously, I mean, 
you’re opposed to anything that might be new or a new way of 
doing something. That’s well-known throughout this province. 
You haven’t changed and you have no idea about changing in 
the future. But I see no real impact upon the hospitals. They 
will operate as they are operating. The money, as my colleague 
said, will come through the property management Crown, and 
they will pay back with their grants from the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this new arrangement — and 
I’m quite sure there’s going to be some people employed in 
hospitals going to find this a bit startling —  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

425 
 

this new arrangement whereby all grants are repaid is directly 
relevant to your estimates, and I want you to answer these 
questions, Mr. Minister. I want to know: with what interest rate 
and on what terms is the money going to be repaid? And I’m 
sure the minister can anticipate the next question. The next 
question is: out of what subvote is this going to be repaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We haven’t dealt with that. Those are 
questions which the Minister of Finance will be working out 
with the minister in charge of the Crown — of the management 
Crown, property management Crown. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, that simply won’t do. 
We are dealing with your Health estimates. We have to know 
whether or not there is going to be 10 or 15 or $20 million 
payable by the hospitals to repay these loans. It’s directly 
relevant to the adequacy of the funding to the hospitals to know 
how this money is to be repaid. So I ask you again, Mr. 
Minister: what are the terms for repayment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s been indicated that the terms are 
being worked out, to be determined with the hospitals, and the 
length of the term to be worked out. But we have assured the 
hospitals — and this is no surprise to them — that there will be 
no additional burden upon them, but this will be looked after 
with the grants that come from the Department of Health to the 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I can’t believe that you 
announced this without having in mind, without having in place 
how the hospitals are going to pay it back. It makes quite a 
difference. If you’re going to pay it back over three years, that’s 
something quite different than paying it back over seven, and 
that is something quite different than paying it back over 25. 
And it directly relates to the amount of money which they have 
got. 
 
I ask again, Mr. Minister, out of . . . what arrangements do you 
have in mind? Is it current interest rates? Is it the interest rates 
at which you borrowed? What do you have in mind? Because 
it’s directly relevant to the adequacy of the funding they have 
got. I for one, I for my part, don’t see where the hospitals have 
got the additional money to pay this back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t see why you see any great concern 
to the hospitals. We will be paying it back. I don’t know if you 
know anything about how schools are built. Are you aware of 
how schools are built, how school are paid back through the 
grant? Do you understand that? Well if you do, then look at the 
same type of situation, and that’s the way it’s going to be with 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, there simply is no 
increase in the funding to the hospitals, unless you can point me 
to a subvote I’ve overlooked. There is no increase in the 
funding to the to the hospitals which would take care of this 
extra expenditure this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the payments to the 
contractors for the work that I have indicated to you will be 
coming to hospitals from the property Crown, as the figures that 
I gave to the member for Regina East. 

As far as the repayment by the hospitals . . . from us to the 
hospitals, that wouldn’t show until we have paid for the contract 
and have the capital constructed. Then we would, through their 
operating grants, be giving them the money to repay that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well when do they start repaying it then, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — After the construction is finished. And I 
understand there’d be no payment earlier than ’87-88. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So I take, Mr. Minister, there are no 
payments to be made on any of the 75 million, whether the 
projects are completed or not, in this year. Is that what you’re 
telling me — whether or not the projects are to be completed, 
there are to be no payments this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — None until ’87-88. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, are you suggesting that . . . I 
really am trying to find out, Mr. Minister, what sort of 
arrangements you intend to have with the hospitals. I suspect 
there’s going to be some hospital administrators and hospital 
treasurers who are going to be a bit concerned about this. I 
suspect they are going to fear that their grants are not going to 
increase proportionally to keep pace with this. 
 
And I ask you again, Mr. Minister: will you give us the 
arrangements, at least in general terms, which you’re proposing 
to the hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We are in discussion with them at this 
time. The indication is that it’s well received by the hospitals. 
They’re quite willing to go with this type of amortization over a 
longer period of time. I guess to them it makes sense to do this. 
As my colleague explained this afternoon, perhaps this is 
something that has been lacking, something that should have 
been done previously. It isn’t anything new. We can’t take 
credit for originating it. 
 
I believe B.C. have something similar. I think even under the 
NDP in B.C. they kept it, which is strange. They mostly 
nationalize everything and change it all. And Manitoba have a 
system similar to this. So you know, it isn’t some big mystique, 
or some strange thing that’s jumping out of a closet somewhere. 
The hospital administrators have been in consultation with my 
department and these things will be worked out, but there will 
be no repayment until ’87-88. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, what are you proposing to the 
hospitals, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the discussions have been around 
the topic that the money that they need for this year’s capital 
construction comes from the property management Crown. That 
will go directly to them, as a form of a loan, and that there will 
be no requirement for them to pay back until the completion of 
the project, or at the earliest, next year’s estimates, as I said, 
’87-88. And certainly, the length of the period of amortization, 
they’re discussing and working on that at this point in time. But 
as  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

426 
 

I said previously, it is very similar to the way that school boards 
pay back the grants that they have for the operation and the 
building of capital projects and schools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, so 
that we may be sure we understand each other, and I’ll just take 
St. Paul’s Hospital again, as an example, grants for Saskatoon 
hospitals’ construction program: last year, $7.9 million; this 
year, zero. I am looking at your Estimates, Mr. Minister. You 
tell us that there is a signed agreement, that you entered into an 
agreement with St. Paul’s. That’s what I understood you to say. 
I take it that the agreement provided that you would provide 
grants up to the given formula for their entire project. Have you 
changed your agreement with St. Paul’s or are you reneging on 
your agreement with St. Paul’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I am not sure what kind of an agreement 
you are thinking we have signed with them. We have told them 
that we would go ahead and assist then in building an addition 
to their hospital. They are going to get their money through the 
property Crown for this year. We will be working out a 
repayment schedule with them that they will pay back through 
grants from us to the property Crown when their construction is 
completed, or as I said, not prior to next year’s budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are 
you asking me to believe that St. Paul’s called for tenders and 
launched a 40 or $50 million construction program without a 
grant commitment from you in writing? And if they got a grant 
commitment from you in writing, what did the commitment 
say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They have approval for their project. 
Certainly they would have that before they went to tender. I 
mean, any responsible body would. And you realize that. But as 
far as a written agreement for repayment within the property 
management Crown, that hasn’t existed at this point in time. 
We are in consultation with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I bet 
it doesn’t exist. I bet the deal you had with St. Paul’s was that 
you approved of a project based upon a grant formula, and up to 
now they have from you a letter saying you will provide grants, 
and you are not now going to provide grants. Is not that true? 
You have given them a commitment that you will provide 
grants for the project which you approved and you propose to 
renege on that commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m not reneging on any commitment. St. 
Paul’s will be built. They know the amount of money that will 
be coming from the government. You seem to have trouble 
understanding that it’s coming through another vehicle. It is 
coming through that vehicle. St. Paul’s will have their money. 
Their addition will be built. St. Paul’s will repay that money 
and they will be funded by the Health department to do so. Now 
I don’t see anything so difficult, and there is no reneging. All 
you’re trying to play on — the word of a grant. What they’re 
getting now is a loan through the property management 
corporation, but the structure that was agreed to will be 
constructed. The money will be  

provided and the mechanism for paying it back will be provided 
to them at the completion of the project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I am attempting to 
draw a distinction between a grant and a loan. You promised 
them a grant. You’re not going to give them a grant. You’re 
going to give them a loan and St. Paul’s will owe the money 
when the hospital is built. That wasn’t what they bargained for 
and that’s what you’re going to saddle them with. Is that not 
true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Look, can you get this straight that we are 
going to provide the money that St. Paul’s has asked for. No 
question. They’re getting the money they want. You can call it a 
grant, or you can call it a loan. It’s going through as a loan from 
the property management Crown 
 
That loan will be repaid. We will be looking after the 
repayment of that loan, as we do with schools — the same type 
of system. So I don’t see anything so puzzling. It’s different. I 
know it’s hard for you to see something new and different, but 
that’s the way we’re doing it. And as far as I know, St. Paul’s 
are quite willing to go ahead with this, because St. Paul’s are 
pleased to be dealing with a government that will help them 
with an addition. 
 
I recall when I became the Minister of Health. Yes, sir. Oh boy, 
you don’t like to hear this, but I’m going to tell you once more. 
Within a few months of becoming the Minister of Health, we 
had to come with a $1 million equipment loan . . . grant for St. 
Paul’s, because the diagnostic equipment that you, as the 
premier of this province, was providing was obsolete and out of 
date and endangering the lives of people. We gave that money 
to St. Paul’s. They remember that. 
 
(2115) 
 
We’re helping them build this hospital, not you. You had a deaf 
ear. You know what your plan was? You wanted to do the same 
thing to St. Paul’s Hospital as you did to the Pasqua. You didn’t 
believe that the sisters of this province could run health care. I 
believe they can. They give wonderful care. And when we 
became into health care, we said we want the sisters to maintain 
St. Paul’s. And I still do. That’s a lot different than you, my 
friend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
may talk about your policies. You may just know something 
about them. You very obviously don’t know the policies of the 
previous government. And I don’t think anyone for one moment 
will believe your statement of our policy when they can hardly 
comprehend your statements of your own policy. And I am . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask the sisters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That’s right. Well, I will ask the 
sisters. Look, Mr. Chairman, the minister says, ask the sisters. 
Well, shall I allow myself to be diverted in this way? And the 
answer is no. 
 
I am going to ask the minister again: was not your deal with St. 
Paul’s that they had a grant coming up, and is not  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

427 
 

your deal now that they will not get the grant, but that they will 
owe the money? The sisters will owe the money. Is that not 
true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My deal with St. Paul’s was that we 
would help them build a hospital — far different than any deal 
you ever had with St. Paul’s. That was my deal with St. Paul’s. 
That deal is as solid today as it was the day we made it. The 
money will come via the property management Crown to St. 
Paul’s. They will go ahead with the construction of their 
hospital. They will owe the money back to the property 
management Crown. That money will come via the Department 
of Health so they can repay that loan. That’s how it’s gong. 
 
You can go up there. You’ll see the construction. Go talk to St. 
Paul’s. There will be no hold-up in the construction. And the 
hospital and the sisters will not suffer in any way. In fact the 
hospital and the sisters will get the addition that they have 
wanted for so many years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
are very clearly admitting what I am saying, because you will 
not deny it. And if you could deny, you would. You promised 
them a grant; isn’t that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I promised them a hospital, and that’s 
what they’re getting, and that’s what’s true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
didn’t promise them a hospital. St. Paul’s will provide their own 
hospital. They’re going to own that hospital, not you. You 
provided them only with money. When you think that you are 
owning the St. Paul’s Hospital, then you have made a bigger 
change than you are admitting to this House. I ask you again, 
sir: did you not promise them a grant sufficient to complete the 
project? Did you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You’re trying to draw the longest bow 
I’ve every seen you try to draw. When you try to say that this 
government on this side, headed by Premier Grant Devine, 
would want to take over St. Paul’s Hospital, you haven’t been 
thinking very closely what you’ve been saying. You were the 
only one that squeezed the Grey Nuns out of their hospital. Yes, 
you were, and you had the same plan for St. Paul’s Hospital. 
And don’t shake your head at me that you didn’t, because I 
know you did. One of your hidden agendas. 
 
I promised St. Paul’s that they would have an addition on their 
hospital. I have no desire to own it, because I can tell you, the 
Sisters of the Grey Nuns give tremendous care. 
 
That hospital will be built under the same conditions. They will 
get a loan; that loan will be paid back through operating grants 
from the Department of Health; and St. Paul’s will have, once 
again, let me say, the hospital that they’ve needed for a number 
of years that was promised to them, and more important, that is 
being delivered and being built today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take 
it, obviously you are conceding, since you will not deny. Let me 
try another hospital since . . . Can you name  

me the largest of the so-called small hospitals that you’re 
referring to in the 22.9 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll just pick one out of here. I can’t say if 
it’s the largest one, or the largest one is in Nipawin — Nipawin 
Union Hospital. Okay. A new 70-bed hospital, $9,805,717, 
under construction. The estimated grant is $7,881,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will you 
repeat the last words — that the estimate grant is $7,881,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That was the estimated value. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. And will that be honoured? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly. You know, I think we’re 
playing at a bit of semantics here. Certainly that will be 
honoured. Every cent of that will be honoured, but funded 
through the property management corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Sorry, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chairman, I didn’t make myself clear. You said there would be 
a grant of $7 million. I’m asking you, will the grant of $7 
million be honoured, and you’re telling me, no. 
 
Look, Mr. Minister, it is no good to talk about a loan as if it 
were a grant. I know that others opposite have confusion in 
their mind with respect to shares and bonds. Some others have 
confusion with respect to preferred shares and common shares. 
Others have confusion between grants and loans. 
 
I am asking you, Mr. Minister, are you not agreeing that there 
will not be a grant of $7 million in the Nipawin Union 
Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I am telling you that the Nipawin Union 
Hospital will get the $700,881,000 through a loan from their 
property management corporation but with no penalty to the 
hospital. It will be paid back through operating grants — paid 
back through operating grants — to the hospital. So how does it 
matter if you give it boom, in one lump sum as a grant, or you 
give it as a loan and then pay it back with operating grants? I 
fail to see your logic. I wait for your explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 
difference is that when they get a grant, they have their hospital 
free and clear, not dependent upon future budgets by future 
government of whatever stripe, of whatever stripe. But you say 
it is exactly the same whether they have their hospital paid for, 
the Nipawin Union Hospital Board has their hospital paid for — 
you say it makes no difference to them whether they have their 
hospital paid for or whether they owe a significant amount of 
money which ahs to be paid for out of future grants. Now you 
may believe that; I do not. 
 
For one thing, it means that this year the Nipawin Union 
Hospital Board will get out of this budget, nothing, nothing by 
way of grants, nothing by way of capital grants, nothing by way 
of interest on the money that  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

428 
 

they’ve forced to borrow, and nothing by way of money to 
repay the interest on the money they’re forced to borrow. 
 
So you’re going ahead with the project at Nipawin, and you’re 
not putting in a dime in the budget this year — not a dime as a 
capital grant, not a dime as to repayment of interest, not a dime 
as to repayment of principal. Just as if you were giving a grant 
. . . you were dealing with a nursing home, and you were not 
paying anything with respect to their capital — that’s what 
you’re doing with Nipawin this year. Is that not true? 
 
Is there anything out of the money to be appropriated in this 
budget — a dime — for the Nipawin Union Hospital and their 
capital program, either by way of their capital grant, interest on 
the money you force them to borrow, repayment of principal on 
the money your forced them to borrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well most certainly. It’s on the last page 
of the budget, and I’ll just read the paragraph. It says: 
 

In addition to this important role, the Corporation will act 
as the financial arm of the government in the provision of 
financial assistance to third parties for the acquisition of 
capital assets. Hospitals, schools and universities will 
receive financial funding through the Corporation. 

 
So certainly . . . I mean, for you to stand here in this House and 
say Nipawin hospital are not receiving a cent — you know very 
well they’re going to receive the money that is designated, $700 
million, through the property management Crown. I listened 
with interest, though; I listened with interest to you when you 
said, well maybe succeeding governments mightn’t pay this 
back. I have every intention, and our government have every 
intention, to pay it back. 
 
What I listen to you saying was, maybe if I got in, I’d change 
the rules, maybe I wouldn’t pay it back. That’s what I heard you 
saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 
sorry that you are not listening to the . . . I said and I repeat: not 
a dime in the money to be appropriated in this budget for 
Nipawin Union Hospital capital. And that is exactly accurate — 
exactly accurate. I am talking about the money to be 
appropriated, not . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it again to him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well look, you know what the word 
“appropriated” means. And I say, again, not a dime, not a dime 
of the money to be appropriated in this budget to the Nipawin 
Union Hospital for capital. Not a dime. 
 
And you may say, well, it doesn’t matter to the people of 
Saskatchewan whether they’re paying their bills as they come 
along, or whether they’re borrowing to pay for them. But I can 
tell you there’s a lot of people in Saskatchewan who know 
there’s a big difference between whether you pay your bills 
when you incur them or whether you borrow and pay them back 
10, 15 and 20 years from now. There’s a really big difference in 
that. 

And you are saying you want the Nipawin Union Hospital 
Board to be in the position not of having their bills paid, but of 
having to pay it back over 10, 15 or 20 years. And you give 
them your assurance that 20 years from now the government of 
the day will be sure that they get enough money. Well, you 
know and I know, sir, that neither you nor I will be here 20 
years from now, and you and I can give no assurances of that. 
And the Nipawin Union Hospital Board will be an awful lot 
more comfortable if their bills are paid rather than depending 
upon what’s in a budget 10 or 15 or 20 years from now. 
 
And this is a very major difference for the local governments of 
Saskatchewan. A very major difference that you’re asking the 
hospital boards to borrow all of the money that they need for 
their capital ventures, and you have not done that before. You 
have not done it before. You are doing it now. You are making 
them dependent for their capital, as well as their operating, on 
the annual budgets. 
 
And I say to you, sir, that this puts them in a much less enviable 
position than they were in your previous budgets, a much less 
enviable position so far as dealing with the future and money 
they have to borrow in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ve listened with interest to you. You 
were one time the premier of this province, a minister of Health. 
You funded the development of schools in this province on 
almost identical lines, not that far different than what we’re 
doing in hospitals. All of a sudden, because it’s happening to 
hospitals and other capital facilities, because it’s something new 
and something different that amortizes the loan over a longer 
period of time, you seem to think this is a terrible system. You 
were the premier of this province when you had the same 
nursing home policy that allowed communities to go out, get a 
loan from the federal Government of Canada, and you, Mr. 
Ex-Premier, paid that loan back through operating grants 
exactly the same way. I never heard you stand up and squawk 
about those. But today because there’s something different, they 
can put up facilities which you neglected to put up, you’re 
against that. You’re against that kind of progress. 
 
(2130) 
 
You would like to mislead the people of Nipawin and places 
that they’re not getting money because there’s no appropriation 
in the health care budget. I give the people of Nipawin the 
sincere pledge that their hospital is going to be built. The 
money is going to come through another vehicle. It’s gong to be 
paid back. And furthermore, to put all your fears to rest, the 
loan agreement that the hospital signs will give them this 
guarantee: that the government guarantees to pay back those 
loans. That’s what the Grant Devine government will do. 
 
If — Heaven forbid! — you should ever win, you would change 
that. We realize that. That would be your decision to do so. But 
the vehicle by which these hospitals would be built, I believe it 
sound. I don’t think it’s much different, or at all different, than 
what you had when you were building schools or also nursing 
homes. 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

429 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it occurred to me as I was 
listening to the non-answers you were giving that if you have 
signed a written contract with these institutions for the 
expenditure of 75 million the written contract must say 
something about repayment. So I ask you, Mr. Minister: will 
you give a copy of the written contract or at least tell us what 
the written contracts says about repayment of the loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ve made the commitment to the 
principle of the contract. We don’t have a written contract to 
give you at this point in time, but as I said at the start of my 
remarks, we’re in consultation; we’re working this out with the 
hospitals. They’re in agreement with this new venture, and the 
type of construction, amortizing the loans over longer period of 
time. I don’t see any problem. But I couldn’t give you a 
contract tonight. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you said half an hour ago 
that you had contracts signed for almost of these projects. What 
I’m asking you for is a copy of that contract because I believe 
that contract must say something about the repayment of the 
money that’s being given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. If you picked that up, you must have 
misinterpreted. We have approval for construction to go ahead 
with these. As the Leader of the Opposition said, that there 
would be a letter saying, I approve of your project; go ahead 
and build it; get yourself a developer; get yourself an architect. 
Those kinds of letters are common in okaying projects that 
should develop. But as far as signed contracts with the 
repayment in that, we do not have those at this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So you don’t have any agreements with 
any of the hospitals with respect to any of the 75 million. You 
have no agreements with them with respect to this money. Do I 
understand that’s what you’re saying? It’s just simply a blanket 
authorization to go and spend the money and we’ll worry about 
it later. Is that the nature of your arrangement with the 
hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well they have been given formal 
approval on plans that they’ve submitted 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Without any statement as to whether or not 
and as to whether or not the money is repayable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’re working that out with them, but I 
think you’ve failed to notice that actually we pay that back in 
the operating grants as we do in school boards. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well supposing some of these institutions 
tell you after they get the money, tell you to get lost, they’re not 
going to repay you. What’s your position then, Mr. Minister? I 
suggest, Mr. Minister, that you do have an agreement with them 
whereby they’re going to repay the money. I suggest that that is 
in place before they get the money, otherwise you and your 
government are fools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now it basically doesn’t affect the 
hospital to the degree that you’re indicating. The hospital will 
still get its operating grant, but attached onto that will be the 
moneys necessary to pay back the loan. 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have a question with 
respect to what I gather is a withdrawal of anesthetists’ services 
in Prince Albert. Is there a withdrawal of services in Prince 
Albert? And if so, will you give us the nature of that withdrawal 
of services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have a letter here which I imagine you 
have the copy of, which says: 
 

. . . at the extraordinary meeting of the Prince Albert and 
district medical society held earlier this evening, it was 
moved and passed with no dissenting vote that there will 
be no anesthesia given for non-emergency surgery in the 
Prince Albert hospitals on Tuesday, December the 8th. 

 
Is that the letter you’re referring to? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I refer to my correspondence. You 
can refer to yours, Mr. Minister. I ask you, Mr. Minister, how it 
is that this regrettable event came about, that the anesthetists 
will not be on the job tomorrow, except with respect to 
emergency cases. I ask you, Mr. Minister: how is it that this 
came about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I would assume . . . I just received 
the letter today. I would assume, though, it’s some sign of 
protest by the medical community in Prince Albert towards 
negotiations that are taking place between MCIC and SMA at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well do your officials know anything 
about it, Mr. Minister? Do your officials know anything about 
how this regrettable circumstance came about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, my officials aren’t aware of any 
reason. We anticipate that that’s maybe the cause, that they’re 
issuing a protest or concern about progress in negotiations, but 
that’s all I would guess that maybe it is. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, if that’s accurate — and I don’t 
believe it — if that’s accurate that’s a regrettable state of affairs, 
that that is all the Department of Health knows about a 
withdrawal of services by, I gather, 10 anesthetists. You gather 
it may have something to do with stalled negotiations If that’s 
the extent of your knowledge, then that really is regrettable. Mr. 
Minister, what steps are you willing to take to attempt to 
resolve the situation so that medical services in Prince Albert 
may resume? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I would assume that they are going 
to resume They say it will not be given Tuesday, April the 8th. 
By the letter I have, there’s no reason to not suspect that on 
April the 9th that they will be back at work giving anesthesia. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do you have any information which might 
suggest that this one-day walk-out might re-occur if 
negotiations don’t proceed toward a conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have no more information than this 
letter was handed to me before I came into this House this 
afternoon, and what I’ve indicated to you is all I know about it, 
that I think that they must be issuing some type of  
  



 
April 7, 1986 

430 
 

protest. They say that on April the 8th, Tuesday the 8th, there 
will not be anesthesia for non-emergent surgery. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I suggest, Mr. Minister, common 
sense suggests that if they walk out for a one-day protest on 
April 8th, then they’ll have to walk out again unless the 
problem is resolved. And the walk-outs may get more frequent 
and more severe. So I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, common 
sense suggests to you that a series of rotating walk-outs isn’t 
likely to end on the first one unless you’re able to resolve the 
problem. So I’ll go back to my original question, Mr. Minister: 
what is your department doing to attempt to resolve the problem 
so that this incident will not re-occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Our doors are open to negotiate at any 
time and the SMA realize that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it’s marvellous that your door is open 
and they can come in and negotiate. Is this, Mr. Minister, is this 
something that occurred when you got the letter? Or has your 
door always been open, as you claim — always been open? 
And if your door has always been open as you claim, then why 
didn’t that resolve the problem? 
 
The obvious point I’m trying to make, Mr. Minister, that 
whether your door is locked or unlocked does not, Mr. Minister, 
resolve the problem. I suggest there’s nothing new about the 
security system on your door. It’s what it always has been. And 
the problem doesn’t lie in your accessibility. The problem lies, 
Mr. Minister, with the inability or unwillingness of your 
department to negotiate with those anesthetists. 
 
So I ask you again: will you save us the inane nonsense about 
your door always being open, and will you tell us what you are 
doing to resolve this dispute which has the potential to be quite 
serious in Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it’s obvious you don’t understand 
again the process of negotiation. My officials do not negotiate 
with the anesthetists; they negotiate with the SMA. They have 
had 13 meetings to date. And as I say, the door is open to them 
to come and continue negotiations with the committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m delighted that your 
door is open. I would imagine, Mr. Minister, it’s open to 
Progressive Conservatives. I gather, Mr. Minister, that the 
president of the P.A.-Duck Lake PC association is one of those 
who’s withdrawing his services. Now I would have thought, 
Mr. Minister, that if an open door was all it took to resolve the 
problem . . . Ah, the member from P.A.-Duck Lake looks a little 
surprised. Aha, he just found out at this . . . He just found out 
here and now that his president is gong on strike against the 
government. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister — I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you 
save us the silly, stupid nonsense about your door being open or 
shut, and will you tell us what you’re going to do to resolve the 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again we see the member opposite 
revert to his old tactics. I remember that member  

who . . . Oh yes, yes, I remember very distinctly, when we were 
talking about the SGI sale, when that member stood up and 
made pointed criticisms with the immunity of this House 
against individuals, and here he does it again tonight. He singles 
out a doctor in Prince Albert, lays him out here in this Chamber 
— typical of his behaviour. 
 
I have indicated to you we are willing to resume negotiations 
with the SMA on any time. They are aware of that. My 
negotiation team are in place. I am going to see what is going 
on with this withdrawal of services. But as I read the letter — 
but knowing you, you probably can read more into than is there 
— it says here that no anesthesia given for non-emergency 
surgery in Prince Albert hospitals on Tuesday, April 8th. That’s 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you actively seek a 
meeting with this group? Will you or your officials actively 
take steps to commence the negotiations instead of laying in the 
weeds and saying we’ll commence negotiations as soon as you 
are contacted? 
 
Will you, Mr. Minister, take the initiative? Will you or your 
officials take the initiative and see that these negotiations are 
resumed and are resumed in a spirit of compromise? There is no 
point whatsoever in resuming negotiations if you stand on holy 
ground. 
 
Are you prepared, Mr. Minister, to initiate the resumption of 
negotiations? And are you prepared to do so with a flexible 
mind, prepared to compromise and reach an agreement in the 
way in which these agreements are reached — that is, with a bit 
of give and take on both sides? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We are prepared to follow Saskatoon 
Agreement II that was worked out in consultation with the 
medical community in this province. I do not intervene in the 
negotiations or go and meet with one group here, one group 
there. My negotiating team are on alert, ready to resume 
negotiations at any time with the SMA. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to get into, raise a series of 
questions which follow upon something that the member from 
Elphinstone, Leader of the Opposition, said a moment ago. It 
has to do with the waiting lists for the hospitals. 
 
We spent a goodly amount of time, Mr. Minister, earlier in the 
evening attempting to get out of you and your officials the 
waiting lists for the nursing homes. Is the same charade going 
to take place with respect to hospitals, or will you give us the 
waiting lists for the cities? Will you give us the waiting lists for 
hospitals in the cities in Saskatchewan? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we will gather that information 
together and provide it to you in writing. It won’t be tonight, 
but we will provide it to you as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — By Wednesday, when we resume these 
estimates, will you give it to us? 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

431 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I indicated to you that we will do it 
as quickly as we can, and that’s my comment. I wouldn’t want 
to say I can do it by Wednesday if I can’t get it gathered by that 
time. I think we should be able to, but you have my 
commitment. As quickly as I can, as I told your other colleague 
who, I think, accepted my word that I would do it as fast as we 
can. I give you that same commitment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it would strike me that with the total 
number of employees in this department, I don’t see the . . . it 
strikes me, Mr. Minister, with 2,236 employees in the 
department, another 126 non-permanent staff, it ought to be 
possible to make the requisite phone calls and provide the 
information by Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Minister, the incredible record this government has of 
answering questions gives us no confidence at all that you’ll 
make any effort to provide us with the information, Mr. 
Minister. Relatively simple matters have gone unanswered for 
two years, not because the information’s hard to get, but 
because this government has adopted a practice of not 
disclosing information that’s embarrassing to it. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, there is no reason whatsoever 
why those waiting lists cannot be provided by Wednesday. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, to undertake now to give us the waiting lists 
for the cities by Wednesday, so that when we resume these 
estimates, we may do so on the basis of some facts. And if we 
can do that, if we can discuss this on the basis of some facts, 
our debates will be a lot more meaningful. So I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, if you think 2,236 people can make a couple of dozen 
telephone calls to the hospitals and get this information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I see he’s questioning the sincerity 
of the staff. I can tell you the staff in the Health department 
work very diligently, and when I say we’ll do it as quickly as 
we can, we will do it as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the waiting lists at hospitals, 
I suggest, are a source of embarrassment to this government. 
That is why I fear that we aren’t going to get them by 
Wednesday. Mr. Minister, I can cite any number of cases of 
people who have waited an extraordinary length of time for 
treatment that should be forthcoming fairly shortly. In some 
cases, Mr. Minister, they have — the people who are waiting 
for treatment are suffering, and in some cases, Mr. Minister, 
one suspects that their health is deteriorating while they’re 
waiting. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note that the increase in the subvote for the 
hospitals is 5.6 per cent. Mr. Minister, that doesn’t appear to me 
to be anywhere near adequate to handle the waiting lists that we 
both know exist. Without getting the exact figures . . . and I 
have difficulty believing that your officials don’t have those 
waiting lists. That is basic information that your departmental 
officials work with every day. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that these waiting lists are a 
source of embarrassment. I suggest, Mr. Minister, that in many 
cases people are waiting longer than is good for their health, 
and in many cases they are suffering while they’re waiting, Mr. 
Minister. I ask you, Mr. Minister: if  

you can’t give us the figures, can you tell us what you’re doing 
to resolve these waiting lists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly we’re doing a number of things. 
As my colleague says from the back, we bought six CAT scans 
which will certainly be doing a lot in diagnosing people, 
helping pinpoint treatment where it should take place and also, 
in some cases, avoiding unnecessary surgery. And I think that’s 
very, very important, not only from a cost-containment 
perspective, but from a care perspective, that with this type of 
technology, people who may undergo an exploratory type of 
surgery now, will not have to do that. I think that it is a 
tremendous move forward and a way of addressing waiting 
lists. 
 
Also, you indicate about other things we’re doing regarding 
waiting lists. Well we’ve spend half the evening discussing 
extra beds at the University Hospital. We’re going to look at a 
day surgery unit at the City Hospital, and expanded the 
operating room facilities at University Hospital. A good portion 
of the $100 million patient care fund will be directed to 
addressing waiting lists and also supplying improved 
technology in some of the regional hospitals, so that some of 
the people who perhaps are going to the base hospitals now for 
diagnosis and for treatment may be able to be looked after in 
the regional hospitals. 
 
So I think if you take all those things together, you will see that 
there is a considerable number of initiatives in this year’s 
operation of the health department, in the co-operation with the 
hospitals, that are pinpointed to address the waiting list 
problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would admit that CAT 
scans may well improve the diagnosis which a doctor can do. I 
doubt, Mr. Minister, if they move people in and out of a 
hospital a great deal faster. I suspect that they may assist the 
doctor in giving better treatment, but the treatment doesn’t go 
any faster, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is nobody who believes that, apart from the 
53 desperate souls in the Tory caucus, there’s nobody who 
believes that the $100 million does as you put it, go a good 
distance toward adequately staffing hospitals. Nurses don’t 
believe that and they say so. The public, Mr. Minister, don’t 
believe it. Mr. Minister, there is grave suspicion as the member 
from North East suggested that the $100 million is simply a 
reannouncement of last years’ figures, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, what increase in the number of staff took place as 
a result of last years’ budget? Can you give me the figure of 
what increase in staff in hospitals took place as a result of last 
years’ budget? I ask for nursing staff, since that’s the figure that 
we have been discussing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think, in fairness to your colleague, he 
wasn’t talking about the 100 million in his debate with me: it 
was the 300 million capital fund. But I’ll let him defend himself 
against you. 
 
Actually, what the increases in last year — you asked for 
nursing staff —somewhere between 90 and 100. 
  



 
April 7, 1986 

432 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I am going from memory, Mr. Minister, 
but it seems to me you announced a $50 million . . . it seems to 
me you announced an additional $50 million for staff in the 
hospitals last year. Is that inaccurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I gather it’s . . . You say no. Are you 
saying it’s not accurate or it is accurate? 
 
I’ll rephrase the question. What sum of money was included in 
last year’s budget for 90 additional staff that were hired? My 
memory was that it was $50 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Would you turn to page 50 of the 
Estimates and look under ’85-86 estimated column, subvote — 
I guess it’s 23, item 29 — where it says Saskatchewan Hospital 
Services Plan to provide the provincial grant $473,719,700. 
That provided for the 90-some positions. There was no 
50-million-extra type of announcement. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What subvote was that? I missed that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Subvote 29 on page 50. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell 
me how the 500 new nursing positions . . . I gather that was 
what you announced in your panic reaction to the success of the 
nurses’ campaign. I gather, Mr. Minister, you announced 500 
positions if I understand that announcement correctly. I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if you’d tell me where those, and how those 500 
positions are to be distributed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, in the 100 million patient care 
improvement package that we had put forth, a portion of that 
was for staffing for facilities that are coming on stream. 
Another portion was for staffing enrichments, enriched staff or 
added staff, 500 of which will be nurses. I can tell you, at this 
point in time, consultation is going on with the hospitals, with 
the various hospitals, as to how this year’s commitment of them 
will be deployed in the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you must have some position 
with respect to where you think those nurses should go. The 
criticism, Mr. Minister, has been that the additional staff will 
not go in the places where they are needed, but they may go in 
the areas in which they have the highest visibility. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could give me the breakdown — 
if you could give me the figures, the breakdown in how the staff 
is broken down. You gave it to me in general terms. I wonder if 
you’d give it to me specifically in terms of numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I will give you this tonight, that in 
the hospitals, for enrichment for this coming year, we’re 
looking at 331 positions; for operating of new facilities would 
be 21 positions, giving a total of 352 for the hospitals. For the 
special care homes we’re looking at an enrichment of 130; for 
operating new facilities 200, for  

a total of 330 for the special care homes. That’s the highest of 
any year. Compare that with any possible time; that is the 
highest staffing enrichments that has taken place. 
 
Far different from the letter I read out earlier tonight of the July 
1, ’76, where the cut for St. Paul’s was about five or six nurses, 
and more nurses aides and certified nursing assistants, supplies, 
and so on. 
 
In direct contrast to what you were doing at a time, at a time 
when, due to the rain and the weather and so on, we were 
having better crops — things that were beyond your control and 
mine. Here we are in times when it is a bit more difficult. 
We’ve had drought and grasshoppers We’re putting in that type 
of a commitment in staff. 
 
What did you do in ’76? You cut them, that’s what you did. 
You cut staff in 1976 at a time when you thought the priorities 
of this province were to buy holes in the ground that didn’t even 
create one new job; sent $600 million down into New York out 
of our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you are the type of government that stand opposite to us 
when we make, what I believe, are common sense, very good 
deals; when we enter into barter for CAT scans, we take wheat, 
we take canola, we take high tech equipment from 
Saskatchewan, and we sell that and trade that. And those 
commodities will bring a flow-back of money into this 
province, so therefore we’re winning on two accounts. Our 
commodities are being sold and the high technology that we 
require to bring our health care and to keep it at the top of 
Saskatchewan health care is brought about by that. 
 
I’ve talked about this all around the province of Saskatchewan, 
and they tell me, they tell me, Mr. Minister, if there’s anything 
that you have done as a minister and your government — and I 
tell you it was a co-operative venture between a number of my 
colleagues, headed by the Deputy Minister of this province — 
they said, if there’s one thing that makes eminent common 
sense, it is to take commodities that are not selling and trade 
those for the state of the art, the best kind of CAT scans that can 
be acquired. And I am proud to say that we, we in 
Saskatchewan, within 18 months will have six of the top CAT 
scans in Canada. And we will lead Canada in the proportion of 
CAT scans to population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s a commitment to health care. 
That’s a commitment, and that’s a lot different than shutting 
down nursing homes, putting on a moratorium, cutting hospital 
staff — that was the record of the Blakeney government, and let 
me tell you, it will not be forgotten. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


