


















































May 15, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 15, 1986 
 

1309 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to the 
House, to you and through you, a group of 23 grade 7 students 
from Southey School who are in the Speaker’s gallery. They 
will be touring the Legislative Assembly, and I will be meeting 
with them at 2:30 for drinks and to have a little chat about 
today’s proceedings. I trust that they’ll be thoroughly impressed 
by the question period this afternoon, and I would ask all hon. 
members to please welcome them in the usual way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just received a note I have 
another group in here. This is the second group from my 
constituency, and I’m very, very pleased that they’re here. I was 
told, Mr. Speaker, that this group might have to leave early and 
miss question period, but fortunately they were able to come in 
for a few minutes. 
 
This is a group of grade 5 students from Strasbourg, 25 
students. They have already had their tour, and I trust that it was 
a most enjoyable tour. They’re here with their teacher, Gary 
Krivoshein, and their chaperons, Mrs. Sterling and Mrs. 
Gritzfeldt. Unfortunately they will have to leave before question 
period is over, but I trust that they will enjoy the portion that 
they will be able to view. And once more, I ask hon. members 
to please welcome these students from Strasbourg. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of SGI Claims 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to Mr. Premier. Yesterday you confirmed to this 
Assembly that it’s the policy of Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance to keep confidential all files under its special 
investigation unit for questionable claims being reviewed. That 
view was confirmed recently in sworn testimony before a court 
of law by the former president, Donald Black. Under oath, Mr. 
Black said: 
 

Standard policy inside SGI is that no one outside the 
organization has access to our files without a subpoena. 

 
In light of that statement, Mr. Premier, can you explain how 
your top political aide, Dave Tkachuk, was allowed to review 
the entire SGI file on the case of his long-time personal friend, 
Tom Townsend, at his home in January of 1984 on a Sunday 
evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe, as we 
pointed out yesterday and as the hon. member pointed out that 
the files were asked for by Mr. Tkachuk and received from Mr. 
Ryan, and Mr. Ryan did not get permission to give the files out. 
And so he was  

correspondingly fired and said that they shouldn’t have done 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
All right, Mr. Speaker, I make the point that people come to my 
office for help all the time, whether it’s Father Larré or whether 
it’s farmers or other people and, Mr. Speaker, we try our best to 
make sure that they do get help. So, Mr. Speaker, I will look at 
people’s cases, whether it’s Les Hainstock or whether it’s the 
Bryces or whether it’s Father Larré or whether it’s consumers 
or whether it’s anybody else, Mr. Speaker, and I do. And, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition NDP doesn’t 
want to hear what my office does because it’s wide open and 
it’s not like theirs was. I’m saying that people come to my 
office and they want to have help. Mr. Speaker, we will try to 
provide them that kind of assistance. 
 
All right. Mr. Speaker, I have had people come to my office, 
and I have helped them with respect to crop insurance; I have 
looked at cases that go back in compensation. My staff, for 
example, Mr. Speaker, has gone back 20 years in compensation 
cases to get information from the bureaucracy to see if we could 
help. All right, that’s the case. In this case, a member of my 
staff believed that the SGI should make the payment to the 
individual and said so. And, Mr. Speaker, the fire commissioner 
said the payment should be made because the case is there. 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order! I’m going to ask 
the member for Regina North West to contain himself. When 
I’m on my feet there’s to be no talking in this Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if I can continue. The judge, 
Judge MacLean, said that there should be payment to the farmer 
for his hog barn. The fire commissioner agreed; Mr. Tkachuk 
agreed. Mr. Tkachuk said to the president of SGI, you should 
pay this man. At the end of his judgement he says that he didn’t 
even think the thing should have come to court; he should have 
made the payment — on page 25: 
 

I am not satisfied that, in the circumstances, the defendant 
was justified in requiring a trial of the issue. In my 
opinion, the defendant failed to pay the plaintiffs that to 
which they were legally entitled, and as a result, the 
plaintiffs suffered damage for which they are entitled to be 
compensated by an award of interest. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all I’m saying is: people come to my office 
when they believe that they need to have some help. If I can, I 
provide that assistance, whether it’s a farmer, whether it’s a 
home owner, whether it’s a consumer, or whatever. This hog 
producer felt that he should have been paid. It was raised — the 
issue was raised. 
 
Now the only question, as the judge says, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Ryan shouldn’t have taken the files out of SGI  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1310 
 

without getting permission from the president. I agree with that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But the president told him not to take it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Right, and he was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
And as result of that, Mr. Speaker, he was fired . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I will caution the member for Quill 
Lakes that if I’m on my feet, you’re to be quiet as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make the 
point that people in my office will help individuals whether 
they are farmers or consumers or interest groups or natives or 
whatever. And they will go back through compensation cases, 
they will go back through agriculture cases, they will be back 
through crop insurance cases of all kinds. In this case they said 
the man should be paid, and he was, and the judge agreed, and 
the fire commissioner agreed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Is it the Premier’s position 
that it is appropriate for your chief political aide to provide the 
same, to provide assistance to Mr. Townsend in an investigation 
into an insurance claim with SGI, and that that is to be placed 
from the same claim as assisting a farmer resolve a crop 
insurance case, or Father Larré solve a problem he has with the 
homes? Is that your position, that a man of Mr. Tkachuk’s 
supposed salary should not be able to distinguish between Mr. 
Townsend’s request, which I suggest was a request for 
influence peddling, and a legitimate request by a constituent? Is 
it your position that he can’t and shouldn’t be able to 
distinguish between those two very different cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that my hon. 
colleague knows that the investigation was over, and the 
question as whether SGI’s going to pay the farmer or not . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes it was. The question is whether 
they’re gong to pay the farmer, all right? And the fire people or 
the chief fireman . . . fire commissioner says that there’s no 
reason that farmer shouldn’t be paid. So it goes to court and the 
judge says the farmer should be paid, and it shouldn’t even be 
in here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have people who come to my office for 
help and say, I think the bureaucracy is doing this, doing that; I 
want some help. Whether it’s a farmer, a consumer, or whoever, 
they come to me by the hundreds. We will investigate a 
compensation case that’s 20 years old, and we’ve dug up 
information 20 years ago, and we have actually had things for 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! This Chamber cannot 
operate with this amount of yelling, and I’m going to ask for 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that 
when people come to me for help, and if I can help, I will 
provide that assistance. Now my doors are always open. There’s 
people in there all the time, and I get requests day  

after day after day, and scores of them by the day. In this case, 
the individual farmer believed he should be paid. The hog 
producer who had the problem felt he should have been paid. 
The fire commissioner said so as well, and the judge said so. 
And a member of my staff said to the president of SGI, I 
believe he should be paid. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you can’t come to the Premier’s office 
and say, I believe that I need some help, I don’t know what . . . I 
mean, that’s the way the NDP would operate. All right. They 
would build a data bank on individuals but not help farmers or 
consumers or anybody else. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . I want to be clear about what 
you are condoning. Not only did Mr. Tkachuk review a 
confidential file on the Townsend investigation, which he 
should not have had, but he reviewed it with Tom Townsend, 
who had no right to have it. Under oath of law he said that. 
 
Mr. Premier, the testimony under oath is, “I told him what I had 
seen in the file, that there was nothing, and that he should be 
paid.” Mr. Premier, that’s the testimony given under oath by 
your top political aide and the man who now heads up your 
election campaign preparations. Is that the conduct that you are 
condoning and defending here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have had members of . . . 
my deputy minister, to other people who will take a hold of 
compensation files, take a hold of information on crop 
insurance, take a hold of information that goes back with 
respect to consumers, or rodeos, or whatever else it may be. 
And they look at the files and they will say, I believe this is fair 
and this is a case. Mr. Tkachuk said that this is the case with 
respect to SGI; you should pay the farmer. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if he should pay the farmer; and he believed 
he should pay the farmer, and the judge says he should pay the 
farmer, well I don’t see what’s wrong with a farmer coming to 
me and say, I think SGI should pay me. And, Mr. Speaker, his 
hog barn burned down and he said — the fire commissioner 
says, look it, the individual has no reason not to be paid. 
 
So when I look at all the information and what the judge said 
and the fire commissioner says, people can come to my office 
and say, yes, we’ll see if we can provide you some assistance. 
We will do whatever we can to help you. If it’s right, we’ll back 
you up. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, they come to me by the hundreds for 
assistance, and I do what I can to provide help and assistance to 
them, whether they’re farmers, consumers, whether they’re 
workmen compensation, or whether they’re school boards. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the same 
minister, with respect to the situation just raised by the member 
from Regina Centre: on January 24, 1984, in the judgement 
placed before the courts by Mr. Justice MacLean, he indicates 
that Corporal Beselt and Sergeant Baker met with 
representatives of the defendant and at  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1311 
 

least one Crown solicitor employed by the Justice department to 
review the file. 
 
For some time prior to this meeting, it was common knowledge 
among the participants that Mr. Townsend might be charged 
with arson. Following this meeting all thought of proceeding — 
all thought of proceeding — with such a charge was abandoned, 
and yet the defence by SGI was a defence of arson on behalf of 
my constituent, Mr. Townsend. 
 
I suggest to you that we have to be thankful . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Does the member have a 
question? Will you get directly to it. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And the question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier of the province: was he not aware that this meeting 
with the co-respondents in SGI was held prior to the file being 
looked at by his principal secretary, Mr. Dave Tkachuk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was not aware of the 
details of the case, and I’m not aware of the details except of 
those that I’ve reviewed just recently. But in a case, in my 
judgement, where there is no question with respect to a legal 
charge, and it’s finished and the investigation is over, then 
there’s a question of whether or not you’re going to pay the 
individual. 
 
And if that’s the case, there was nothing there . . . As the judge 
said — I mean, I can only go by the judge, who said the thing 
should have never come to trial. Well if he said it shouldn’t 
have come to trial, I’ll take his word for it — it shouldn’t have 
come to trial, and the farmer should have been paid. So if the 
farmer should have been paid, I’ll agree with the judge that it 
should have been done. I have no choice but to . . . I’m not 
going to question the judgement of Justice MacLean. So I rest 
my case. 
 
I mean, the only other thing that I can add, Mr. Speaker, is the 
way that we receive people into my office. I mean, my door is 
always open, and people come in from constituencies, they 
come in from all across the province, and they ask for help. 
That’s a big contrast, Mr. Speaker, and an awful lot different 
than the political data bank built up by the NDP, when they 
would take on, for example, the minister from Regina South, 
Mr. Rousseau, and they would take it all over the province and 
in the radio and everything else . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Supplementary. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Premier, I ask you: on behalf of SGI, is it 
their policy to continue to attack an individual as they attack 
Mr. Townsend with allegations of arson after their own people 
have indicated, after their own people have decided, there is no 
such substance for such a charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t comment on the 
case. I can’t comment on what SGI is doing or with respect to 
what Mr. Townsend is doing now. I understand it’s before the 
courts; there may be an appeal. I can make no comment on that. 
I can only comment on the questions that have been raised here 
with respect to me or my office trying to help people who come 
in and say, I  

believe that we’re being treated unfairly; is there something that 
can be done? And we will look at all those cases. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The question, Mr. Premier, was not relating 
to Mr. Townsend. It was relating to the policy of SGI to 
investigate rather than to compensate. That came right out of 
the fire commissioner’s mouth when I was looking into the 
background in this particular case. And is that the policy of the 
department? And after they decide that there is no further 
reason to investigate, why do they not compensate, based on the 
contractual agreement with their client? SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s a fair 
question. I don’t know the answer to it. I will take notice and I 
will go back and look at the policy and be glad to respond to the 
hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. We now have the Premier of the province defending 
the individual in his department, now the campaign chairman, 
Dave Tkachuk, influencing a member of SGI, Ron Ryan, to 
take out of the SGI investigation unit documents that the 
president has stated should only have been taken out with a 
subpoena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we could have order in this Assembly, 
or whether we only have order when the government members 
are on their feet. I’ll tell you that this issue . . . I’ll tell you that 
the members opposite with their yelling and hollering the way 
they’ve done for the past four years every time they’re 
embarrassed, of being allowed today - I think raises certain 
questions. But I want to get back, because you’re not going to 
stop questions like this from being asked. 
 
We now have you defending a member of your staff, the chief 
political adviser of the day, Dave Tkachuk, who influenced a 
member of the staff of SGI, Ron Ryan, to take out confidential 
documents out of the special investigation unit. You’re now 
defending him. Was he acting under your instructions when we 
met with Ron Ryan to review the file? Was he working under 
your instructions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, two responses: one, I didn’t 
tell him to go ask for any files. I didn’t give him any direction 
with respect to this case at all. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, is that 
Justice MacLean said, “The only conduct at all deserving of 
censure is that of Mr. Ryan for abusing his position of trust.” 
He didn’t mention Mr. Tkachuk had to be reprimanded. He 
knows that Mr. Tkachuk or other members of my staff will pull 
compensation files or ask for information, get information. 
They do it all the time. He just said that Mr. Ryan should have 
had permission from the president to share the information. And 
that’s what he says. 
 
I mean, if the Justice MacLean says the only body that needs to 
have their wrists slapped is Mr. Ryan, well then what are you 
all upset about? I mean, the thing is, people come into my office 
and they ask for help. And my staff, from the deputy minister 
down, will review crop  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1312 
 

insurance matters, review compensation matters, will review all 
kinds of things from forestry to consumers to whatever. And we 
do it all the time, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that in fact we can 
help people who we believe deserve some assistance. 
 
In this case the judge said they should have been paid; the fire 
commissioner said he should have been paid; Dave Tkachuk 
believed they should have been paid, and said so. So, I mean 
. . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. I want to 
refer you to page 9 of the judgement, which does refer to Mr. 
Tkachuk. And in the judgement it clearly indicates, and I want 
to quote from the document: 
 

He so instructed Mr. Ryan, his executive assistant. 
 
This is referring to Mr. Black’s instruction urging him not to get 
involved in the investigation. He says: 
 

Despite this, at the urging of Mr. Tkachuk, and without the 
knowledge or consent of Mr. Black, Ryan removed the 
defendant’s file and reviewed it with Mr. Tkachuk (your 
political adviser). 

 
Now I say to you that, if the judge is coming down hard on Mr. 
Ryan on the next page, saying the only conduct at all deserving 
of censure is that of Mr. Ryan for abusing his position of trust, 
what about your staff who urged Mr. Ryan to remove the file at 
your advice as you have indicated here today? - that you agree 
that this is the attitude and the actions that should be taken by 
your political staff. That’s what you’re saying. And I say to 
you: do you condone that kind of action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing wrong with 
a member of a staff or a minister to ask for a file. The question 
was that he didn’t receive the file from the individual with the 
permission of the president of SGI. So maybe Mr. Tkachuk 
doesn’t know whether the president gave him the information or 
not, or let him have it. 
 
I mean, he asked for the information. The judge says here that 
the only body that should have any deserving censure is Mr. 
Ryan, not Mr. Tkachuk. He just finished talking about: Mr. 
Tkachuk demands the file, or asks to see it; Mr. Ryan gives it to 
him. And the judge says the only guy that deserves any sort of 
censure is Mr. Ryan for not getting the permission. All right, if 
you want to laugh, you laugh at the judgement. You laugh at the 
judgement. 
 
People in my office will help people whether it’s in crop 
insurance or compensation cases or anything else. And they’ll 
come through the door and ask for it. And wherever possible I 
will give them assistance, and I believe the premier’s office 
should do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Premier. I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: are you aware that not 
only did your top political aide, Mr. Tkachuk, review the 
confidential file at his home, and not only did he then inform 
Mr. Townsend of what the file contained, but he also contacted 
the Attorney General’s office about this investigation? Mr. 
Premier, did Mr. Tkachuk contact  

the Attorney General’s office at your request, or was he doing 
this on his own? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, as I understand 
it, he did not share the information in the file with the farmer, 
Townsend. He said to Mr. Townsend, there’s nothing in the file 
as far as I know that would jeopardize your case, and I believe 
that you should be paid. That’s what he said, something to those 
lines. 
 
Secondly, whether he took it up with the Attorney General’s 
office, I have no idea, but I take notice of it. 
 
And a third, Mr. Speaker, it was not on my direction. Third, Mr. 
Speaker, it was not on my direction, and I never said that it was. 
I said that when people come into my office and they need help 
then I will . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, are you aware that your political aide and 
campaign adviser, Mr. Tkachuk, met with the former president 
of SGI, Mr. Donald Black, on at least two occasions to pressure 
Mr. Black to drop the SGI investigation of Tom Townsend’s 
insurance claim? 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from this 
sworn testimony at a court of law. Mr. Black is now describing 
one of those meetings. And I quote: 
 

During the course of that discussion the Townsend matter 
was discussed, and it was only discussed to the extent that, 
and in the context that, I was wrong. The corporation was 
wrong, in Mr. Tkachuk’s view, and that he was personally 
acquainted with Mr. Townsend. And it was his strongly 
held view, as expressed to me, that Mr. MacLean and one 
of our directors who was present at the meeting, that Mr. 
Townsend was not capable of doing anything like this. 

 
I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: When Tkachuk went to the 
president of SGI to influence him and convince him to drop the 
investigation of Mr. Townsend, was he doing that on your 
orders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’ve said at the outset that he wasn’t 
doing any of this on my orders. But let me also correct the 
member. I don’t believe that he’s accurate in saying that he 
went to him to say that we’re going to stop investigation. After 
the investigation, and there wasn’t going to be paid, then he 
said, I think it’s fairer you pay the farmer. And if you go back 
and check the record, then that’s the case. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
it’s all over . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the judge said it shouldn’t have even been 
in court, if the fire commissioner believes that it should have 
been paid, and people believe that it should have been paid and 
it was paid, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s fair if somebody can 
come to my office and say, it’s fair, and the judge agrees that 
it’s fair, and the opposition. 
 
I mean, they can stand there and complain about this, Mr. 
Speaker. They took a case in SGI that involved Paul  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1313 
 

Rousseau and took it all over the radio all over the province. 
They build political data all the time. I take people in my office 
who are farmers and consumers and others that need help, and 
I’ll help them. The members opposite, the NDP would take 
personal files and make them public all over the radio. The 
former member, Wes Robbins, would read Paul Rousseau’s 
driving record all over the place, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s a 
clear difference between that party, the NDP, and how they 
operated and how this government operates, because it’s wide 
open to the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask also a question 
to the Premier. As the Premier is aware that the former 
president of SGI, Mr. Donald Black, fired his special assistant, 
a man by the name of Ron Ryan as soon as he discovered that 
Mr. Ryan had been, indeed he had pilfered the file, a 
confidential file, which he knew or ought to have known should 
not have been taken from the office . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Can I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, or has the member from 
North West got the floor? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve cautioned the member from Regina 
North West several times, and I would ask him now just to let 
the hon. member from Quill Lakes have his time to question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I will start again, hoping that order is once 
again restored. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Premier, as you know, the executive 
assistant to Mr. Black, the president of the SGI was released or 
fired as soon as Mr. Black determined that he had pilfered this 
file from the SGI. What I want to ask you: do you not consider 
that in law, and morally, that anyone who is an accessory to an 
act which is contrary to the regulations of a corporation is not, 
in fact, a party to that illegal act? 
 
And secondly, do you not agree that a man in the position of 
chief adviser or a senior officer of your office should not, in 
fact, have taken steps to determine whether he could have 
access to that, file, and wouldn’t, in fact, going to the general 
manager been the course on behalf of your staff member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. 
member is asking whether the Leader of the Opposition is 
responsible for all the member’s actions from Quill Lakes. Well 
I’m sure that he isn’t asking that. I mean if he wants to make 
that kind of a connection, I don’t believe that it’s fair. I can say 
in law, Mr. Speaker, the only conduct at all deserving . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the members don’t want to 
hear the answer, we’ll move on to the next subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In law, Justice 
MacLean says the only conduct at all deserving of censure is 
that of Mr. Ryan for abusing his position of trust. Now that’s all 
that . . . I mean this is the court speaking. So you ask the 
question of law. Well I can only agree with Justice MacLean 
that that’s the case. 
 

So my staff, Mr. Speaker, my deputy and other people, will go 
get information on compensation, on agriculture, and crop 
insurance. Now if they get the information and somebody 
picked it up and didn’t have permission to deliver it, you’re 
saying, well are they going to be responsible. Well I hardly 
think so. They get information on hundreds of people all the 
time to help them. Every bit of information . . . Are they going 
then to take it and say, well did you get permission from this 
person and that person and this person to receive the 
information? 
 
Well in this case, Justice MacLean said the conduct of Mr. 
Ryan is deserving of censure. All right. I agree with that. 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I never told him to do 
it; I never advised him to do it; and he wasn’t under any 
direction of mine. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 - An Act respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax 
Credit 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak to an 
Act which will create Saskatchewan’s livestock facilities tax 
credit. This idea was announced by the Hon. Minister of 
Finance a few short weeks ago in his budget. Since that time the 
idea of a tax credit on livestock facilities has caught the interest 
and imagination of many livestock producers all across the 
province — and, I might add, Mr. Speaker, not only in this 
province but across Canada, and now being watched very 
closely by the United States. 
 
In that budget address, the Minister of Finance stated that hog 
production in this province must increase by some 200,000 
animals per year in each of the next five years if the full 
potential of that industry is to be realized. This facilities tax 
credit, when combined with other initiatives such as the $25 per 
hog interest-free cash advance, the livestock investment tax 
credit of $3 a hog, the 8 per cent loans from the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan — all these will help us 
achieve this potential, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While the livestock facilities tax credit will encourage the hog 
industry to expand, it also is available to other sectors of the 
livestock industry. Under this tax credit, livestock producers 
will receive a 15 per cent tax credit on any new livestock 
facilities and additions or renovations to existing facilities. The 
tax credit is applied again provincial income tax. Any tax credit 
which is not used can be carried forward for seven years. The 
eligible facilities must be used exclusively in the livestock 
businesses. 
 
To receive the full tax credit, the facility must be owned and 
used for at least three years by the producers. Assets which are 
or may be eligible for the tax credit include bee equipment, 
brooders, buildings, casing and cribbing for water wells, milk 
coolers, cream separators, dug-outs, electric motors, stationary 
engines, fences, grain storage  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1314 
 

buildings, feed grinders, milking machines, feed mixers, pumps, 
and well equipment. Expenditures for these assets are only 
eligible if they become an integral part of the livestock facility. 
 
From this partial list it is clear, Mr. Speaker, that the tax credit 
will have a great impact on many livestock operations in this 
province. As our records show, Mr. Speaker, this government is 
committed to improving the province’s livestock industry. This 
Act to create the livestock facilities tax credit is another 
example of that commitment to the entire livestock industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Livestock Facilities 
Tax Credit Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill needs to be 
looked at and I beg leave to adjourn debate on this one. I’d like 
to look at the minister’s remarks and explanatory notes. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 - An Act to amend The Livestock Investment 
Tax Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak on 
the Act to extend the province’s livestock investment tax credit 
for an additional three years. 
 
When the livestock investment tax credit was introduced and 
first discussed in this Assembly just two year ago, many 
members of the opposition scoffed at the idea of a tax credit. 
They said the tax credit would only flow to wealthy investors, 
people whom these members say didn’t need another tax break. 
Well I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite were wrong. 
 
Since the tax credit was introduced in March of 1984, 
approximately 9.3 million in credits — $9.3 million in credits 
— have been issued to some 9,500 Saskatchewan resident 
producers. Virtually all those tax credits have been earned by 
livestock producers themselves, not by doctors, lawyers, 
accountants, or anybody else in search of another tax break. 
 
For the 1985 tax year, the actual livestock producers received 
$4.1 million in tax credits while non-farm investors, Mr. 
Speaker, received 123,000. Clearly the vast majority of the tax 
credits and their benefit is going to Saskatchewan livestock 
producers. 
 
The livestock investment tax credit has had a positive impact on 
the Saskatchewan livestock industry, and extending the 
program will ensure this trend continues into the yeas ahead. 
Under the program, Saskatchewan taxpayers receive tax credit 
for eligible cattle, hogs, and lambs which are fed in the province 
and marketed for slaughter. The tax credit is $25 a head for 
steers, heifers, and virgin bulls; $3 for hogs; and $2 for lamb. 
 
The legislation which we are discussing now will extend the 
livestock investment tax credit December 31, 1989. Without 
this legislation, the tax credit will expire  

December 31st of this year, 1986. And this would put an 
ultimate end to a program which is returning enormous benefits 
to the province as well as to the livestock industry and 
producers. 
 
Livestock is an important ingredient in our provincial 
agricultural economy, Mr. Speaker, and it’s getting more 
important. Through policies such as the livestock investment 
tax credit, the livestock cash advance, the feeder association 
loan guarantee program, the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and the many disaster assistance programs 
which have been brought in to help them in difficult times, our 
government is continually demonstrating its interest in and 
support of the Saskatchewan livestock producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act which extends 
the livestock investment tax credit. It is further evidence of our 
government’s ongoing commitment to the livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We watched this Bill 
in operation over the last couple of years. As the Premier 
pointed out, I had very strong reservations when this Bill was 
first introduced. And, Mr. Premier, like the other programs that 
you have introduced to date in your government, these 
programs are designed to help the wealthy people — those that 
are paying a lot of tax. 
 
I would like to challenge the Premier, and we’ll be discussing 
this is third reading, to show me where this livestock tax credit 
has been of any benefit to a young producer starting out — any 
benefit at all. I would just like to know where he thinks that by 
not targeting programs to the people that we want to get into 
agriculture . . . 
 
As a government, we have some responsibility. You have some 
very serious responsibility. But I want to assure you that this 
Bill wasn’t necessary. Your term of office has expired; there’ll 
be an election before the old Bill ran out. There’ll be an election 
before that time, before the old Bill runs out. 
 
So all we see here today is some politicking to try and get the 
ranchers back onside that they’re losing with some of their 
ineffective programs and their non-targeted programs. Because 
the next minister of Agriculture will be dealing with the time 
frame that this Bill covers, not this minister here. This isn’t a 
Bill that deals with the situation that we needed to deal with 
today. The old Bill doesn’t run out till the end of this year, till 
December. The effects are still there. And by that time we’ll 
have a brand-new government in here, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have 
a government that will be fair to all the people of 
Saskatchewan, not just the friends who work in various 
ministers’ offices. 
 
We’re going to have a full-time minister of Agriculture. We’re 
going to have a program that will be designed to help young 
farmers, and the programs will be targeted. They won’t be 
slap-happy programs that give tax breaks to the wealthy who 
are paying taxes. They will be programs that are designed and 
targeted to help the industry and to keep it alive. 
 
And how do you keep an industry live like cattle, like the  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1315 
 

beef industry? How do you keep it alive? By fattening up the 
rich? Is that how you make that industry survive? Is that how 
you get the cattle business alive? Well I want to tell you, Mr. 
Minister, the way to have a healthy beef industry is to ensure 
that there’s new people coming into it — to ensure that there’s 
new people coming into it. This Bill doesn’t do that. This Bill 
doesn’t do that. 
 
This Bill ensures that those that are paying the tax can get tax 
credits, and they’ll get a relief from their tax. That’s what this 
Bill does. It doesn’t do anything — nothing at all — for the 
young person wanting to get into the livestock business. It 
doesn’t help them. And I think that because they are targeting 
and doing a Bill that’s taking effect up to 1989, for the years 
1987, ’88, and ’89 . . . Those are the three years we’re talking 
about - the years that this government doesn’t have a mandate 
to serve. 
 
If the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t screw up 
his courage to call an election, the Queen will before this Bill is 
in effect and before this Bill comes off. The Queen will call the 
next election. Somebody’s going to call it. But you people 
aren’t going to be . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The question before us is 
second reading of a Bill and not when we’re going to have the 
next election. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill expressly dates, 1987, 
1988, and 1989. Now if those three years, that are beyond the 
mandate of this government, have nothing to do with an 
election. Mr. Speaker, then you’re on a different wavelength . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. You can debate the Bill but you can’t 
debate whether or not we should be calling an election. That is 
not before you at this time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, we should be having an election 
and not this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I just ruled on that and I would ask the 
member to get on with his topic if he has something to say. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I can’t talk about the Bill, I 
beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting the Establishment, 
Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve 

 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the conclusion of my brief remarks I shall be moving second 
reading of Bill 40, An Act respecting the Establishment, 
Maintenance and Use of Park Land and Park Land Reserve. 
 
The Bill will establish a classification system which will 
categorize each provincial park as a historic, natural 
environment, recreation, or wilderness park. And for the benefit 
of my friend opposite, Mr. Speaker, I am delivering it in 
English. 
 

The Bill will also establish five new provincial parks: one, the 
Clearwater River Provincial Park, Saskatchewan’s first 
wilderness park. This is 50 kilometres north of La Loche. The 
establishment of this park will protect a nationally significant 
natural, cultural and recreational heritage resource. Secondly, 
Mach Lake, near the village of Loon Lake, classified as a 
natural environment park. 
 
The following three are currently recreation sites, and they will 
be classified as provincial recreation parks: (1) Candle Lake, 
north-east of Prince Albert; (2) Crooked Lake, in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley, south of Melville; (3) Blackstrap, 
south-east of Saskatoon. 
 
(1445) 
 
These five new parks, along with our existing parks, will 
provide the people of Saskatchewan and visitors to our province 
with additional, high-quality recreational experiences and 
protect examples of our natural environment. Nine historic sites 
will be officially upgraded to provincial parks status. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides the authority for the 
Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources to establish park 
land reserves, setting aside and protecting lands for future park 
status. Seven new protected areas will be established to 
guarantee the protection and preservation of significant cultural, 
natural, and prehistoric/historic resources in this province. 
 
The Parks Act will give Saskatchewan a means to better 
manage our current park resources and a framework to build an 
improved parks system for the future. The establishment of the 
new park lands will provide a more diversified park system, 
increase recreation opportunities, and protect and preserve 
significant natural and cultural areas of our province for the 
enjoyment of present and future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 40, An Act 
respecting the Establishment, Maintenance and Use of Park 
Land and Park Land Reserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: Mr. Speaker, I only have a few words to say 
right now on this Bill, and when I’m through with my short 
remarks I will be asking leave to adjourn the debate. But I see 
that the minister, under this Bill — and we are studying the Bill 
at the present time — is creating five new parks. But I find it 
quite odd that he would be talking about creating two new 
parks, and on the same hand is closing down 75 campsites in 
the province. This doesn’t really seem to me that it’s promoting 
our parks system in the province. 
 
I see he has also opened, Mr. Speaker, a wilderness park up in 
. . . north of La Loche in my constituency. And I find it quite 
interesting that the minister would not even have the courtesy to 
invite me to that announcement that he was making in my 
constituency. I know it’s a long way for me to drive, but I most 
certainly would have made an attempt, Mr. Minister, to be 
there. I had to hear it on the radio yesterday morning at 8 
o’clock on the news. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1316 
 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other 
remarks that I want to make, and we want to go over the 
remarks that the minister has made here today, and I beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 2 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my right, 
John Meldrum, general corporate counsel of SaskTel; behind 
Mr. Meldrum is George Spencer, who is executive assistant to 
the president of the corporation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a few 
questions that I have on that, and maybe I can start off by 
dealing with most of it under clause 1, or item 1. 
 
You’re saying that you’re going to . . . And I’ll just deal with a 
part of one of the clauses and it says that: 
 

. . . where the right to install the first line is not evidenced 
in writing. 

 
Does that say that you are going to have the right to go into a 
farmer’s land, if he has not given you the easement at this point 
and you don’t have anything in writing from him allowing you 
to go across his property, that this Act is then going to allow 
you or SaskTel to go through that property without having to 
get an easement from that farmer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This simply covers the old rural telephone 
company easements. Many of those are not in writing, but 95 
per cent are. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well Mr. Minister, could you just clarify: do 
you have easements from everyone at this point where lines 
have gone across? Because I’m aware of some where you did 
not get easements, where you do go through, and there was 
some fight about it. Are you saying now that this is going to 
cover off some of those problems that might be out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My officials aren’t aware of any without 
the easements now. If you’ve got a specific example, then we’d 
be prepared to take a look at it. They’re not admitting 
perfection, but they indicate that they are quite confident that at 
least 99.9. So there’s no change in policy in any of this. It’s just 
to clarify that the new individual line service will go through 
the easements that are already there and can be used for the new 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — In a situation, then, where there may be no 
easement to this point, what do you propose to do in that 
situation? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if the facilities are all ready and the 
lines have already gone through, then there’s probably an 
implied easement anyway, and we would simply use that, the 
same lines. We’re not trying to cause more problems. We just 
want to make sure that legally clarified the individual lines can 
go through the existing easements. But if we do have a situation 
— and my officials aren’t aware of any — where there was no 
easement sign and the lines have gone through, there’s probably 
an implied easement anyway. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, maybe your officials aren’t 
aware, and maybe that is covered off. Maybe there may be an 
implied easement on some of that. I know of one case where 
there was such a case where the easement was not received at 
the time when the line went through. It did go through. And I 
know there was a fight with SaskTel. I don’t know what the 
outcome of that one was, but there may be some similar 
situations throughout the province where you may have put that 
line in and maybe there was some settlement made with the 
farmer involved, but you still may not necessarily have an 
easement on it. 
 
What are you going to do in a situation where you may have to 
do that, or where you may have to change the course of that 
line? Would you be requiring new easements from that farmer 
if you have to go out of the existing right of way that you may 
have there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if there was a settlement, you can rest 
assured there was an easement, because there wouldn’t be a 
settlement without an easement subsequently granted. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well there could be a settlement for damage, 
not necessarily receiving the easement on there. You would 
have a settlement for the damage, and the farmer may still not 
give you the easement. So that would mean you’ve got a line 
there where you may not have an easement to that property. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there may have been the occasional 
expropriation historically as well where there was none granted, 
but again, that’s in the normal course. My officials advise they 
are 99.9 per cent satisfied that all of the easements are granted, 
and the historic practice of SaskTel of getting the easements is 
just being continued. 
 
If you do have a specific matter that hasn’t been resolved, then 
certainly we’re prepared to take a look at it. But let me assure 
you that they are very few and far between, and we continue the 
practice of the compensation for crop damage, that sort of thing. 
That will be continued under this. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Yes. My concern was about that last clause 
that you had in there where you do not appear to need anything 
in writing. And I can just read what my concern is here: 
 

within the boundaries of the right (of way) granted to the 
corporation in writing to install the line or within five 
metres of the line that was first installed where the right to 
install the first line is not evidenced in writing. 

 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1317 
 

Now you may have a line in there that you may not have 
something in writing on it. You’re saying that this will allow 
you to go in there, and the farmer then has no reason to 
complain because this Act is going to make it legal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But if there is a line already in there and the 
service is being supplied, then there’s probably an implied 
easement anyway. And like I say, the number of these . . . You 
know, if you’re aware of any, let us know. But as I’m assured 
by the officials that these would be very, very few and far 
between — and certainly if the line is already in there we would 
follow as much as closely the same easement rules we would 
anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well if things are not going to be any different 
than they were in the past, if this won’t make any changes, Mr. 
Minister, why would you require this specific clause in the 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane — Because the word “line” in the past may just 
be narrowly defined and interpreted as to the existing line that’s 
already in. And of course we want to put new lines in. And so 
we’re just clarifying the legal position of the corporation. Keep 
in mind, as well, that whenever it’s a condition of service in 
SaskTel, that an easement be granted for the hook-up of the 
service. So again, if there are any that are not in writing, they 
would be very, very few. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — If you however have to go off the existing right 
of way then, would you require new easements after you passed 
this legislation, or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh yes. Like I advised very carefully so 
we’re not misinterpreted, that if there are any that were not in 
writing . . . There may be some in the rural telephone 
companies, but SaskTel itself, it’s very much a term of service 
that the easement be granted. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I think, Mr. Minister, that’s probably where the 
problem did begin, where rural telephone companies buried 
some cables that didn’t acquire the easement to that area or that 
land that they went through. How does this deal with those 
situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, this is fairly clear that it again 
is just covering SaskTel. If there was a line in there, and 
supposing a rural telephone did not get in, then they could use 
exactly the implied easement that’s there, so I really don’t 
foresee any problems. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I move the Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third and passed under its title. 
 
(1500) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome 
the minister and his officials again. For starters, I’d like to 
continue on with estimates on Environment here. Mr. Minister, 
you have spent a lot of time living and working in the city of 
Regina, I understand. You are also the Minister of 
Environment, and so you should know several of the questions 
I’m going to put before you without asking your officials. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, how many pesticide 
formulating plants — or shall we say, hazardous material plants 
— are there in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: Mr. Chairman, the number of chemical 
formulating plants in Regina that we’re aware of is three. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, can you name the plants 
themselves? I was of the understanding, Mr. Minister, that 
being a resident and a former alderman of the city, and being 
the Minister of Environment, you ought to know the number of 
chemical plants located here in the city. As well, you should 
know the names by heart. And as well, Mr. Minister, I indicated 
initially, deliberately, you didn’t have to . . . Could you name 
those plants without having to consult your officials? 
 
There’s a point to be made there, Mr. Minister, and the point is: 
you, like members of the government are certainly . . . There’s a 
fundamental difference in terms of the concerns, the policy 
pertaining to environment, pertaining to jobs, for the province 
— pertaining to management. When it comes to your 
department, you know, you ought to have a good feel for what 
there is in terms of environmental issues and concerns. 
 
I don’t have a staff like you have, Mr. Minister. You’ve got all 
the technical staff over and beyond what is required. I have no 
staff. The legislature does not provide me with full-time staff - 
not one full-time staff, Mr. Minister. And I’m responsible . . . as 
critic for Environment I get correspondence from all over the 
province. I just want to make that point as well, you know; the 
imbalance here. You’ve got a deputy minister, assistant deputy 
ministers, legal advisers, professional people behind you. 
 
Anyway getting back to the question now, Mr. Minister. I was 
asking you: what are the names of the plants? And also I ask 
you how many plants there were and you said three. My 
information tells me there is four. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: Mr. Chairman, a couple of  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1318 
 

comments on the diatribe that has just been delivered by the 
member opposite. 
 
Of course it is quite true that I was an alderman in the city of 
Regina. Mind you it was sometimes difficult in those days to 
get that type of information even from the provincial 
government at the time. As I brought up yesterday, the 
provincial government at the time, the NDP, of course on many 
occasions decided not to tell the city of Regina about PCB spills 
and other matters . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the 
member from Quill Lakes may want to yell, but I mean the 
question was, the implied question was that I was on the city of 
Regina and should know these things, and I’m trying to tell the 
members opposite that although they are yelling from their seats 
again - yelling from their seats again, that the members 
opposite, when they were government, refused to tell the city of 
Regina many things dealing with the environment until years 
after the fact. 
 
Secondly, of course, that I personally should know all the plants 
in the city of Regina. There are thousands and thousands of 
businesses in the city of Regina, thanks to this government, and 
quite frankly I don’t know them all. I do know where my house 
is, however. 
 
Now the three plants that we can think of offhand are May and 
Baker, Hoechst and Shell. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Did I get it straight, Mr. Minister, did you say 
May and Baker, Hoechst, I think I believe you — if I heard you 
correctly — and Ciba-Geigy plant. What about, Mr. Minister, 
the PPM plant of Canada? Where is that situated as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that plant is not a 
chemical formulating plant. 
 
Mr. Yew:— But you acknowledge that there are three plants, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just gave him the 
name of the three plants. The plant that he just said was a 
chemical formulating plant is not. 
 
Mr. Yew: I just wanted to get that for the record, Mr. Minister. 
And again, I want to raise this with you, Mr. Minister. Do you 
know, Mr. Minister, and again I want to ask you personally, not 
your officials but you personally, do you know if any of the 
pesticide formulating plants in Regina have expanded or rebuilt 
their plants in the last two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, one. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Which one, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — May & Baker. 
 
Mr. Yew: — May & Baker was expanded or rebuilt. What 
about the other one, the Hoechst plant? Was it not expanded as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — In the past year, Mr. Chairman, we 
believe not. There may have been some exchange of equipment 
in the plant, but we don’t believe in the last  

year there has been an expansion of the plant. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My information, Mr. Minister, is that the May & 
Baker plant was rebuilt and the Hoechst plant was expanded. 
However, go on with the orders of business here. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Hoechst chemical plant is in the Ross 
Industrial area, and I just happened to tour those areas, the 
plants in question, personally. And I find that that plant is still 
too close to the city, as far as I’m concerned. But I want to go 
on, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Ciba-Geigy plant and the May & Baker plant are very close 
to the residential neighbourhoods. And also, Mr. Minister, the 
one plant is three blocks away from the Haultain School. And 
also, the other plant is also approximately just four blocks away 
from the St. Paul School. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you, do you not think that this is a situation 
that should be allowed, you know, in this time and age . . . 
Don’t you not think that it’s a dangerous situation, that 
something ought not be done about it? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — The answer, Mr. Chairman, is no. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, as you know, the pesticide 
producing plants located right within the city of Regina store 
raw products in large tanks on their properties. Do you know 
what chemicals are stored in each of the plants, Mr. Minister? 
And also, while you’re on that question, what is the most 
dangerous chemical to humans used as a feedstock at the 
chemical plants under discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not clear which 
plant is under discussion. 
 
Mr. Yew: — May & Baker, the Hoechst, and the Ciba-Geigy 
plant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the question that the 
member raises is one of some importance to the city of Regina 
and to all urban centres. We won’t know from day to day, and 
neither will the municipality from day to day, what toxic 
substances would be on site at those plants. If the member 
would recollect, in dealing with this question, last year we 
amended The Environmental Management Protection Act so 
that we could allow the municipality to enforce the regulations 
dealing with the storage of toxic substances on site at these 
plants and in other plants. 
 
We are presently working with the city of Regina in that regard; 
and that is that we’re working with the city of Regina in 
finalizing the regulations that they will enforce themselves. And 
those regulations will allow the city to have a better monitoring 
ability and capability to monitor the toxic chemicals that those 
plants would have on hand and in storage from time to time, 
depending on the time of year and what those plants were 
doing. So in this area we are making strides forward. 
 
We think that when these regulations are completed the  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1319 
 

city will have the power necessary, and the power that they’ve 
been seeking for some time, to be able to monitor and have a 
hands-on knowledge of the toxic materials, not only at these 
three plants in particular but in any other plant in the city of 
Regina that might have toxic materials involved in that 
business. 
 
And as I say, we are presently co-operating with the city in 
putting these regulations together. Hopefully we can finalize 
them soon, and this will give the city a tool that they have not 
had to date but one that they will soon acquire. 
 
Mr. Yew: — It’s interesting to note, Mr. Minister, that every 
question that I’ve asked you thus far, you have had to ask your 
officials into the status of those questions. And I’m very 
amused about that because I don’t have officials to deal with in 
terms of advisement. I simply have to go by what I have learned 
personally. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, when do you anticipate those 
new regulations to come into effect. You referred to new 
regulations that are being reviewed and possibly, presumably 
will be adopted by the cities or the municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman . . . And I must apologize 
to the member opposite; I had to talk to my officials again to get 
the information. Mind you, I do that, Mr. Chairman, for one 
reason and that is so that the information given to the committee 
is as up to date as possible. 
 
The regulations that we’re discussing now were finalized with 
the city last month. Those regulations now, in their form, are 
being sent to other cities and to SUMA for their reaction to 
them, for their input into the suggested regulations. Once we 
have that complete, we’ll be able to carry on and carry forward 
with those regulations so that municipalities will be given that 
tool with which to monitor the toxic materials within their 
boundaries. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, I understand that environment 
is under your jurisdiction, your portfolio, your responsibility, 
etc., and the regulations in discussion at the moment have not 
been adopted. But irregardless of the fact that if and when those 
regulations are adopted, environment is still under your 
portfolio. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: are insecticides produced at the 
Regina pesticide plants, and also, Mr. Minister, which 
insecticide is the most dangerous to human beings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps we should 
clarify what in fact goes on in the city of Regina. In the city of 
Regina, in the plants under discussion, those pesticides are 
formulated. That is, those pesticides are mixed here in whatever 
quantities they’re sold, but they are not manufactured here. And 
of course, the difference is that one operation creates a much 
bigger problem than the other. We have the lesser of the 
problems in that they formulate them here; they are mixed here 
into whatever quantities are required for sale. 
 
We couldn’t tell you offhand the most lethal, I suppose if  

that’s the way you wanted to put it — to mankind — pesticide. 
It’s not available in Saskatchewan, I’m told, or we haven’t 
found it. But from time to time one wouldn’t know what’s on 
those sites at any given time. That’s really the point of why we 
are putting these regulations into place, so that the 
municipalities, whose power it will be to administer those 
regulations, will know what is in their boundaries because after 
all they will be the first to be affected if something goes wrong 
with them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I am told, Mr. Minister, that of the two chemicals 
we’re talking about, herbicides and insecticides, that 
insecticides are the most dangerous to human beings. Given that 
fact, Mr. Minister, are you concerned that the Ciba-Geigy 
pesticide plant is located within only a half a dozen blocks of a 
senior citizens’ high-rise apartment? And also are you 
concerned that the May & Baker pesticide plant is also located a 
couple of blocks from occupied residential areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I am not sure, Mr. Chairman, if the 
member opposite has a good knowledge of the city of Regina. 
But the plants he speaks of are in Ross Industrial Park, which is 
an industrial park built in the city of Regina in which these 
types of things are to go and into which they have gone. 
 
But it does highlight what I am trying to get across to the 
member opposite: that given that the city has zoned and has put 
into place the industrial park into which these plants are now 
situated, we feel and they feel that there should be further 
powers given to the municipalities so that they can have a more 
hands-on knowledge of the types of toxic materials that are 
within the city. And that is exactly why we are co-operating and 
working with the city and other municipalities in putting into 
place these regulations, so that they have that tool available to 
them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I was quite concerned, Mr. Minister, just the other 
day when I toured those areas with regards to the plants that 
we’re talking about. They are situated relatively . . . Even if 
they are located at the Ross Industrial Park, they are still closely 
adjacent to schools, senior citizens’ high-rise apartments, and 
residential areas. And that is of some concern, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you: can you tell me, Mr. Minister, of the 
pesticide plants located in the city of Regina and the chemical 
plants in Saskatoon, are these plants permitted to vent chemical 
gases into the air over the plants and residential areas? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, where gases would be 
emitted from any of those plants, they would have to follow our 
air pollution control regulations which would require them to do 
any number of things to the emissions, of course. And of course 
all those plants follow those regulations, and have for years. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I should have probably asked this 
along with the previous question. I wanted to ask you - and I’ll 
raise it now - what chemical gases are exhausted into the air by 
those chemical plants in question, Mr. Minister. And well, I’ll 
ask that for now. You  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1320 
 

must have that information, I’m sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well basically, Mr. Chairman, the 
regulations of course are such that they’re put into place so that 
nothing is emitted outside of the plant, that those chemicals are 
. . . or the vapours from the chemicals would be captured, so to 
speak, and that’s why those regulations are there. 
 
Now if you want to talk about the different plants and the 
different types of chemicals used, we could provide you, I 
suppose, with a copy of the regulations — which are quite thick 
— which would describe in technical terms all of the 
regulations pertaining to those emissions. But in a general 
statement I would tell you that the reason these regulations are 
in place is to ensure that those emissions do not occur. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I am somewhat confused here, Mr. Minister. You 
say nothing is being emitted. That is not the information I’m 
getting at all. 
 
I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister: then how do you know the chemical plants and the 
pesticide plants we are talking about are not exceeding the 
limits of what they can legally release into the air in terms of 
gases and what have you? Certainly there is some emission 
coming out from the plants in question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well as far, Mr. Chairman, as the 
herbicides are concerned, as I indicated to the member 
previously, they are to be captured within the plant. Now from 
time to time if there are vapours or smells that get through the 
charcoal filters or what have you — whatever is in place to 
capture that - we have no monitoring device to measure that, I 
am advised, but these regulations and controls are in place to 
capture that before they are emitted into the air. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Now, Mr. Minister, how often do officials of your 
department, environmental officials, inspect those chemical 
plants and the pesticide plants in question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the province of 
Saskatchewan has an annual permit cycle in which we then 
have the opportunity to sit down with the industry in question, 
annually, to discuss any problems that they may or may not be 
having with the plant. We don’t have another cycle of 
inspections, so to speak, unless, of course, there’s a problem 
with the plant. But we do have an annual permit system. 
 
But having said that, as I had indicated to the member 
previously, the cities and municipalities would like to have 
more hands-on inspection, if you would, themselves, and that’s 
one of the reasons why we are formulating the regulations that 
we spoke of a few minutes ago, so that they could be given that 
tool so they could have on-site inspections as they wish. And as 
I’ve indicated, the stage we’re at now with those regulations is 
that they’ve been sent to the other municipalities and SUMA for 
their input, and when that’s finished, we’ll put them into place. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, with the terrible tragedy in  

Bhopal, India, where a gas leak killed thousands and injured 
tens of thousands, blinding some and destroying the lungs of 
others, do you think that you are taking all the necessary 
precautions to protect residents of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan cities of Saskatchewan living downwind and in 
the areas from the pesticide and chemical plants we’re talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well as I had indicated, yes, I’m 
satisfied that there are adequate safeguards and precautions in 
place in Saskatchewan so that that would not happen here. I 
think that, obviously, you can always strive for better 
regulations and better systems, and that we are trying to do, in 
co-operation with the municipalities who are as concerned 
about these things as we ourselves are, and we are constantly 
working with them to better the systems that are now in place. 
 
I think it would be a misservice to the public, however, to raise 
the question or to, in your questioning, try and put into the 
minds of the public that there is a disaster lurking on their 
doorstep . . . And I know that the member is not trying to do 
that, but I don’t think we would do a service to the public to 
leave that impression. 
 
But as I understand the member’s questioning, he is concerned 
on what systems are in place, and we are as well. We are 
working with the municipalities constantly to try and improve 
those systems. I suppose it’s a type of thing that is always 
ongoing. I mean, you can never reach the perfect system, I don’t 
think, in this type of endeavour when you’re talking about 
public safety. I think that we are continuing to strive for better 
and better systems as time goes on. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’m quite concerned, Mr. Minister. I just maybe, 
first of all, want to concur with your sentiments or what you 
stated a moment ago. I certainly don’t want to throw a scare 
into the minds of the people of Saskatchewan, but the questions 
I’m putting to you, Mr. Minister, are certainly valid questions 
that ought to be considered. You know, there is potential 
dangers in some areas. And certainly, as the Minister for the 
Environment, I am sure that you’re just as concerned as 
residents living adjacent to some of those plants. 
 
I take exception, Mr. Minister, with some of the questions that 
I’ve been placing to you. You seem to be sloughing off as not 
your responsibility and that those are the responsibilities of the 
municipality. It’s somewhat bothering me, you know, to look at 
it from one perspective where a municipality has been delegated 
that responsibility. 
 
You know, it’s fine. They themselves, as elected officials, have 
a responsibility to their electorate. Fine. But in terms of 
providing them with the expertise and the necessary funding, 
the appropriate funds to appropriately look into the . . . and 
protect their electorate, there is something amiss here, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
(1545) 
 
I look at your department. You’ve effectively cut your 
department staff by half - from a total of 172 employees, 1982 
and ’83, down to 92 in ’86 and ’87; and from a  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1321 
 

budget of 11 million down to 4 million, or is it 7, pardon me. 
You’ve effectively cut the Department of Environment’s 
functions. You know, you haven’t got the staff that is required 
to look into environmental dangers — potential dangers, should 
we say. 
 
You talk about officials of your department meeting with 
certain other officials on an annual basis, Mr. Minister. You 
know, is that enough; is that how much concern you have for 
the environment? I certainly dispute it if you think that is 
enough, one meeting per year to asses environmental concerns, 
address environmental potential dangers, etc., just to meet once 
a year. I dispute that statement that, you know, that you think 
your department is doing a sufficient job. 
 
I question, you know, just what form of support are you giving 
to the municipalities if they, in fact, are going to take over 
responsibilities of the Department of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we were getting 
along so well for a while. I think that the member opposite, of 
course — and we’ve gone through this yesterday — is 
misconstruing the figures in the blue book. He must remember 
that from the time of 1982 to the time of 1986 there have been 
60 positions transferred t the water Crown and another 16 
positions to Parks. Those positions and the jobs that they fulfil 
are still being fulfilled by government. They simply do not 
show up in the blue book. 
 
As a matter of fact, if one takes into account what was in the 
blue book for the total environment in 1982, and what’s in the 
blue book for the total environment in 1986, including a much 
expanded emphasis on water and the water Crown, and a much 
expended emphasis in Parks, in fact there are much more than 
170 people now in the Government of Saskatchewan whose job 
it is to look after the Saskatchewan environment. 
 
But I think that the point that I’m trying to get across to the 
member opposite: when we talk about regulations and the 
co-operation with the municipalities, there’s a very good reason 
for that. And perhaps I might just explain for a moment what 
that reason is. 
 
It is my belief, and my experience, that both in terms of 
response to an emergency, or administration — I’m talking 
about inspections and that type of thing — these things can be 
done better at the local level because (a) the people at the local 
level know where the problems are better than a central body, 
which would be the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
obviously in terms of response would be much closer to any 
problems that might arise than some central body, being the 
Government of Saskatchewan; so that the reason why we are 
proceedings with the regulations and with the co-operation with 
municipalities in regulating environmental matters at the local 
level is because we have a belief that the local people can do a 
better job than we can do than by building a larger, central type 
of organization. Now that’s not to say, Mr. Chairman, that I do 
not agree with the member opposite that we, as a Department of 
Environment, must lend the expertise to this function, and we 
do. 
 

The member opposite asked whether I think my department is 
doing a good job. I think they’re doing a very good job. I can 
tell the member opposite that I have in my department a body of 
people who are very dedicated to the job, who have the 
expertise to carry out the job, and have shown dedication to that 
job over the years. And I think that they’re doing a fine job, and 
they have, and I have every confidence that they will continue 
to do the job that’s ahead of us. 
 
But to put it . . . To give you the general direction of how we 
would approach the protection in the administration of 
environment as far as the city of Regina or urban Saskatchewan, 
it would be to co-operate with those local groups because they 
are closer to, not only closer to where the action is, so to speak, 
but they also have the responsibility — they also have the 
responsibility in the first place of allowing those plants to be 
built in their cities. In other words, it’s their responsibility to 
zone for them, to try and place them in their communities where 
they feel they should be, keeping in mind the regulations set out 
provincially, and that clearly is the municipalities’ — clearly 
the municipalities’ role. So it only makes sense that they have a 
greater say in the day-to-day monitoring of those activities after 
they’re put into place. And we will proceed with the 
co-operation and furnish them with those tools as soon as we 
can. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I’m not really sure what my 
reaction would be if I was an alderman or a chairman of a 
municipality. You know, I like the concept of decentralization 
— don’t get me wrong — but the transfer of a major 
responsibility of this nature without transferring any appropriate 
funds and expertise is another question. That is quite a burden 
on the shoulders of local government, wouldn’t you say? If 
they, in fact, have a responsibility to carry out the functions of 
part of your department when it relates to, say . . . For an 
example, my colleague, the member for Athabasca, yesterday 
raised the very serious issue of the crude oil spill over Lake 
Athabasca. And that is an example I use to demonstrate the 
burden that the local municipality will have, on one hand. On 
the other hand, if that municipality hasn’t got the expertise, the 
necessary funding, the appropriate funding and expertise to 
handle such a situation, you know, it’s going to be an 
impossible task. Wouldn’t you agree? 
 
You know, I take some exception to the fact that you try to 
maintain that you’re providing all the necessary financing in 
your department with regards to the appropriation on estimates, 
the funding appropriation on your estimates. And also you’re 
trying to maintain that you have sufficient people on staff. You 
know, we’ve had major problems. I could even go to the major 
spill in Key Lake which I mentioned briefly yesterday. Those 
are tremendous tasks, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you then . . . As I said before, I don’t dispute with 
you any initiative taken by you to decentralize some autonomy 
and responsibility to local government, but in doing so you 
must also provide the necessary funding and the necessary 
support and expertise. Don’t you agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — A number of comments, Mr.  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1322 
 

Chairman. I think first of all that I would disagree with the 
member opposite on the word “transfer” of responsibility. I 
think that the more appropriate word would be “share” the 
responsibility, and I’m speaking of the regulations that are now 
being reviewed with municipalities. 
 
The impetus for these regulations, that is those who wanted 
them the most, were the municipalities. We are co-operating 
with them. They have identified, that is the municipalities have 
identified, that they wish this tool to be there for them. In other 
words, it is not a case of the provincial government imposing 
these responsibilities on the municipalities, rather that the 
municipalities have asked for this tool to be in place so that they 
can better carry out their job. And it is a shared responsibility 
because we do not intend to give up the responsibility of 
monitoring or, if need be, cleaning up spills, if that’s necessary. 
 
I think that if you use the example that you did, which was the 
example in Uranium City, the initial response to that spill, to 
use your example, after it had been identified to us, was the 
Department of Environment. In other words, it was the 
department who initially responded to the first notification of 
the spill and who organized the initial clean-up in Uranium 
City. 
 
And I am advised that, for instance, of the 10,000 estimated 
gallons of oil that had spilled, they feel that about 7,000 of them 
were cleaned up last fall and hopefully the rest this week or 
next — starting this week or next. 
 
But the point I’m trying to make . . . And the point that you 
made, that you can’t transfer the total responsibility to 
municipalities and expect somehow all municipalities to have 
the capability to respond to environmental spills, is true. And I 
don’t disagree with your point at all. In fact, I use your example 
to show you that we are not transferring that responsibility. In 
your example it was our department that did respond last fall 
and get the clean-up under way, and not the municipality. 
 
But it’s more of a . . . I think the concept would be a shared 
responsibility firstly, and I’ve given the reasons why the local 
people could do it, I think, very effectively. And secondly, it 
was the municipalities themselves that had asked for this tool, 
these regulations, and we are co-operating with them and hope 
to be able to deliver that tool to them in the near future. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I’m not going to take a long time today on your estimates, but I 
do want to go back to the spill that we were discussing at 
Uranium City. And I just listened to you indicating that last 
summer when that spill took place, your department was the 
ones that had organized the clean-up of the oil spill on Lake 
Athabasca or in Bushell Bay. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister: could you indicate when you first 
organized, first were aware and you did the first organizational 
portion of getting the clean-up started, could you indicate what 
group of individuals you used, or was it the equipment from the 
community of Uranium City, or how did you first start to get 
the clean-up under  

way? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I believe yesterday in 
questions I had read the chronology to the member opposite, but 
if he missed it - I can’t find it in Hansard, but it’s there - but I’ll 
read you the chronology of events as I have them here. 
 
On October 20th of last year, the Saskatchewan spill response 
centre received a call regarding the oil spill in the bay. On that 
same date, October 20th, we contacted the mines pollution 
control branch - that is, I guess, the spill response centre 
contacted the mines pollution control branch - and they 
requested that they inspect the bay and report back to the spill 
report centre regarding the damage and the possible methods of 
clean-up. Now this was on October 20th when the spill had 
been reported. 
 
On October 21st, the day after it was reported, the mines 
pollution control branch actually and physically inspected the 
bay. Okay? So we had our employees of the department 
inspecting the bay, and the following observations were made. 
This was on October 21st. The observation was that the oil ran 
down the bank and under the metal building, and the oil was 
seeping through the bank into the bay. The other observation 
was that there was a slight sheen on the entire bay. And the 
third observation was that there was a heavy oil slick all along 
the bank and under the dock, and, should the wind change, the 
oil would be carried out into the bay and eventually into Lake 
Athabasca, which I think the member opposite has mentioned in 
his remarks as well yesterday. 
 
Now we’re still talking about the one day after the spill was 
reported. Based on the mines pollution control branch 
inspection, it was decided to respond to the spill site and 
attempt to contain the oil along the shore line and any additional 
oil seeping from the bank. This is October 21st. 
 
On October 22nd, which is two days after the spill response 
centre received the call, arrangements for air transportation, 
equipment, and contracting the spill clean-up personnel were 
made. Now they were made by the Department of the 
Environment - not the municipality, in this case, but the 
Department of the Environment made those arrangements on 
October 22nd. 
 

. . . on October 24, 1985, Saskatchewan Environment staff 
arrived at the spill site at 1300 hours. And it was 
determined that . . . oil which was being stored in a 
100,000-gallon tank, had spilled, running over a bank, 
pooling behind a metal building. The oil then seeped under 
the metal building and was seeping into the (Bushell) bay 
at the shore line. 
 
The local resource officer deployed approximately 200 
feet of boom and much oil had accumulated behind that 
boom. A black oil slick had accumulated along and under 
the main dock. The decision was made to boom as much 
of the  

  



 
May 15, 1986 

1323 
 

dock area as possible, as this was where the oil was the 
heaviest . . . 325 feet of boom was deployed by 
Saskatchewan Environment around the dock area. Oil 
staining was evident several hundred feet in both 
directions of where the oil was seeping into (Bushell) Bay. 

 
Saskatchewan Environment skimmed 100 gallons of oil from 
behind the boom area. 
 
Now this is October 25th. Lee’s Construction from La Ronge 
arrived at the spill site at approximately 1800 hours. And the 
Lee’s construction were able to move equipment and material 
from the airport to the spill site and make a quick inspection of 
the area prior to nightfall. And on October 26th Lee’s 
Construction began the clean-up. 
 
So the point, I guess, Mr. Chairman, is that not the local 
municipality was involved in the initial arrangements for the 
clean-up, but rather the Department of the Environment, which 
is fair in the case of Uranium City because we were better 
equipped to do that than they. And I would think that in future 
that that type of co-operation with any municipality would 
continue. 
 
I think if the member looks at page 1305 in Hansard, I had read 
what I have just read again to him, and so the answer would be 
there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: —Mr. Minister, you indicate that the 
Department of the Environment organized the first portion of 
the clean-up. You indicated in the House yesterday in 
questioning that it was not the responsibility of the Department 
of the Environment to get involved in this; that it was the 
responsibility of the individuals who owned the oil. And as you 
indicated, Burksen Transport were the ones who were 
responsible. 
 
I also see that you made a statement in here that you determined 
that the spill occurred because of vandalism or carelessness, one 
or the other, and I’m quoting from your own statements, Mr. 
Minister. You indicate that it was not really . . . You weren’t 
blaming the Burksen Transport but you indicate that it was 
carelessness or vandalism. 
 
Then you also went on to say yesterday that because Uranium 
City, which the local community indicate that they had the 
equipment there and still have the equipment and are still 
prepared to clean up the site, but it was not your responsibility 
in the Department of the Environment to hire any local people 
but rather it was the responsibility of the transport company, 
Burksen Transport. And I’m assuming that you must . . . You 
must assume, because you make that statement, that the 
transport company made a mistake or that, as you put it, it was 
caused by carelessness on the part of the transport company or 
vandalism. 
 
Now I don’t know how you determined that, but I just wanted 
to bring that out. And I see a quote today in the paper from the 
community of Uranium City, by one of their officials. And I 
will just indicate what he said for your benefit: “The absorbents 
needed to contain the spill were needed last year,” not this year. 
They were needed last  

year. 
 
Last fall you had an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to clean up that 
spill and hire local people to do it, and that wasn’t done. But 
you chose to hire, as you indicate . . . The transport company 
hired a local firm from La Ronge to oversee the clean-up. Was 
there any moneys involved or put out by your department for 
work done on that clean-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — There are a number of things, Mr. 
Chairman. The member is correct that last fall Environment did 
take the lead in cleaning this up. And we did that for two 
reasons: one, because we felt that time was of the essence and it 
should be done now, and the ownership of the oil at that time 
was not known. So we weren’t about to wait around to try and 
find out who owned the oil and get the ball rolling that way. 
 
We did, and we will on any occasion that we have to, undertake 
that work ourselves. The bill, however, for that will be billed to 
the owner of the oil. So he will pay for the work that we 
initiated and he will . . . Obviously now that we have 
ascertained who the owner is, he is directly responsible for the 
rest of the clean-up this spring. As I mentioned yesterday, that 
should be under way soon. So that is why we initiated it last 
fall. But the payment will be the owner’s, not the government’s. 
 
My understanding of the local employment situation is that 
Lee’s Construction Limited did employ four residents of 
uranium City in the clean-up work last fall, I guess. And I’m 
not sure what he’s going to employ now. So I think the answer 
to your question is that we will initiate any clean-up if we don’t 
know who the owner is at the time, time being of the essence. 
 
The question of why we did not clean it all up last fall: my 
notes would indicate that on October 30th, which would be 
about 10 days, I guess, after we were first notified, 
Saskatchewan Environment staff were back on site to inspect 
the spill clean-up progress. 
 
The clean-up was progressing — this is October 30th now; 
however, below zero temperatures were making it difficult to 
pump the oil-water mixture. And some shore line clean-up had 
been done around small docks located in the end of the bay. 
Absorbent materials were being used to soak oil off the water. 
So, I mean, they did have absorbents up there last fall. I mean, 
they’re not just being introduced into this clean-up this spring; 
they were being used last fall. Absorbent materials were being 
used to soak oil off of the water surface on October 30th. 
 
Now I’m not quite sure of the total bill to be sent to these 
people yet, but the bill for it will be sent to the owners of the 
oil. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yesterday in 
questioning I asked you why the Department of the 
Environment hadn’t used the local contractors who were on the 
scene with equipment and men ready to go to work. And you 
indicated to me at that time that it was not the responsibility of 
your department, that you did not hire the company from La 
Ronge. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1324 
 

Now today you stand up in the House . . . And I don’t want to 
get into a long debate on this. I think you’ve made it quite clear 
that you’re not fully aware of what’s going on within your 
department. And Hansard, which I have in my hand and I’m 
quoting from — yesterday you got up and clearly stated that it 
was not the responsibility of the Department of the 
Environment; that you did not undertake to hire any contractor 
from La Ronge, but it was the trucking firm that did the hiring. 
 
Today you get up in the House and now you say that it was the 
Department of the Environment who took the initiative — they 
were the ones who started the clean-up last fall — and that the 
trucking firm is now going to be billed for the total clean-up. 
And that’s all I was asking you for, Mr. Minister, yesterday, 
was that the Department of the Environment . . . And you did 
that. Your officials have carried out the policy of your 
department. They have taken the initiative to clean up that 
mess. 
 
(1615) 
 
But I just ask you why you did not use the facilities that you 
had at Uranium City, and then you could have contained that oil 
spill that’s up there. You say, Mr. Minister, that your officials 
have cleaned up 7,000 gallons of crude oil. And I just question 
that because I’m not too sure how they could measure the oil 
that they have taken out, especially due to the fact that the 
reports that are coming out of Uranium City now from town 
officials and from local citizens is that there is a massive oil 
spill up there, and that oil is still in the lakes, and sooner or later 
it’s going to get out into the big lakes, if it hasn’t got there last 
fall. And you stood up here a few minutes ago and said that 
they will be starting this week or next week on the clean-up. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, that that’s not good enough. 
Equipment is up there; men are up there. I say, and I say the 
same as I said yesterday, that you should take the initiative. Fly 
up there with your deputy minister and your officials and meet 
with the local community and hire local people on the scene and 
get that oil spill cleaned up before it gets into the water system 
that could lead it right down to Fort Chipewyan and up the 
Athabasca River. 
 
And there are hundreds and hundreds of citizens who use that 
water for human consumption, let alone the animals and the 
birds that are going to be affected by this type of a massive 
spill. And it’s not like you’re spilling ordinary oil. We’re 
dealing with crude oil that could be in that water for many, 
many years because of the type of weather that we have up in 
that country. 
 
And I just ask you, Mr. Minister, to reassess what is going on. 
Go up and meet with the community of Uranium City and get 
that clean7up started — not next week, as you indicate here that 
it may start next week — get that clean-up started right away 
because it’s something that we can’t let expand. 
 
The lake is starting to open up more and more all the time, and 
as a result of the dead animals floating around and the way they 
. . . You talk about a boom, but that boom doesn’t work when 
you have ice flows that come in. That boom can be here 15 
minutes and gone the next because  

of the ice flows when the lakes break up. And the dead animals 
floating around, as a result, the danger to the drinking water for 
many, many communities that get their water from that chain. 
 
And I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that the information that 
you have given is contradictory. And we can continue that 
debate if you want, because I have it in writing now and we can 
debate that, but I’m not going to debate that any more - what 
you said or when the spill took place, whether it was in the fall 
or the summer, or 1985 or 1986. All I’m asking you, Mr. 
Minister, is to use your good offices and go to Uranium City, 
meet with the folks up there, and get that spill cleaned up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I could rise 
to the occasion but I think it’s sufficient to say that what I’ve 
read into the record twice in the chronological events of what 
has happened up there, would indicate quite plainly that the 
Department of the Environment was right on top of the 
situation; that in fact as soon as they were notified of the spill 
on October 20th, they were on the site and the clean-up 
proceeded directly after we were notified. 
 
I am advised that of the 10,000 estimated gallons of oil that had 
seeped into the bay, about 7,000 gallons were recovered last fall 
until operations had to cease because of freeze-up; that 
equipment has now been flown up for this clean-up to continue. 
And I’d indicated to the member yesterday that it was our 
information that the clean-up would be proceeding this week or 
early next week. So it is under way and we have got a good 
handle on it. 
 
I won’t debate that any further with him, but I think it’s quite 
clear that, from the moment that the department was notified 
last October, they have taken the appropriate steps, and the 
clean-up is being done as quickly as weather permits. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Just one short question on that, Mr. 
Minister, then, you can assure the citizens of Camsell Portage 
and the other communities on Lake Athabasca that that oil that 
has flowed into Bushell Bay on Lake Athabasca will not get out 
of the bay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I can assure the residents of northern 
Saskatchewan that we will take all actions that we possibly can 
to recover as much oil as we can, and that’s all I can tell them 
realistically. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — So you will not indicate to anybody up 
there that oil that has spilled will be contained in the bay; that as 
far as you’re concerned you give no guarantees that that oil will 
not make its way out into the lake and down the shores of Lake 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I would love to 
guarantee to those people that the spill would have never taken 
place, but obviously that did happen. It obviously was not 
planned. The clean-up is being done as quickly as possible. It is 
being handled as well as possible. We cannot guarantee, 
obviously, anything except that we will do the best that can be 
done to recover that oil. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1325 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you indicate that 
everything is under control, that there’s no need to rush into this 
clean-up because you indicate that the clean-up will start maybe 
next week. So I think you should . . . you must feel fairly secure 
in stating that this oil spill is under control and that there will be 
no trace of crude oil on the shores of Lake Athabasca or you 
wouldn’t be making these statements. 
 
But I still urge you, Mr. Minister, to go into Uranium City. I 
think that it’s only fair when we have a major spill, the 
magnitude that we have had up there and what’s happening now 
to the wildlife in that area and the potential for damage to the 
drinking water, I think it’s only fair that you go up there as a 
minister and have a look at it, firsthand, and talk to the mayor 
and the councillors of Uranium City. And I just ask you that. 
 
I now want to turn to one more area of concern for myself and 
for the citizens of this province, and for you, Mr. Minister, as a 
minister of the Department of the Environment, and it’s a new 
policy that has been implemented by the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources to close down 75 campsites in the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ve been all through this. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well the member for Moosomin, he figures 
we’ve been all through this and it’s not important, but I say that 
it is important. And I just ask you, Mr. Minister, have you 
directed your officials to take a look at . . . I’m sorry, I thought 
the member from Moosomin wanted to . . . Did you want the 
floor? 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had indicated to your officials that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I thought I had the floor. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — No, I’m on the floor. I just asked if you 
wanted the floor. I have the floor right now. 
 
Now that the minister has indicated that he will be closing down 
75 campsites throughout the province, and I think that you, 
yourself, will realize that in his statement he said, we will not 
be shutting them down but we will not be maintaining the sites. 
And I think that when you take a look at what’s going to happen 
or possibly could happen if the sites are not maintained, that 
there’s going to be all the garbage that is going to be deposited 
in the 75 campsites and will not be picked up. I think that if this 
takes place, and I’m hoping that your minister will change his 
mind and not close down any of the sites, but I think that . . . 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that you realize that this will be an 
environmental hazard if this type of garbage is allowed to be 
scattered throughout the 75 campsites in our province. 
 
And I just ask you, Mr. Minister, if you have instructed your 
officials to watch this one closely, because I think it could 
become a very serious problem this summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well it’s obvious, Mr. Chairman, that 
the bulk of this question belongs in the estimates of my 
colleague, the Minister of Parks, whose estimates, I understand, 
are to come up shortly. 
 

But as I understand the discussion as it has gone on in question 
period over the last number of days in regards to these 75 park 
sites, they are little more, I take it, than parking lots — neither 
electrified or used. 
 
So while our litter laws are in place and will be enforced not 
only in those sites but in Saskatchewan generally, there’ll be no 
special emphasis given to this outside of the general litter laws 
that apply to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well it’s funny, Mr. Minister. You talk 
about the problem not being one of yours, and you also say that 
the 75 sites are not electrified or used. For the life of me, I don’t 
understand how your cabinet works. Surely you must get 
together on these things, because this is an environmental 
problem. And to suggest that the closing down of 75 campsites 
in Saskatchewan just because they’re not electrified, and to say 
that they’re not used, is just not true. 
 
Sure, they’re not electrified. That’s why them campsites are 
there. They’re out along the roads, off the power line, off the 
grids, and they’re there and they’ve been maintained. But if 
they’re not maintained and the garbage is allowed to build up 
and then spread around by the bears and the birds — and that’s 
what’ll happen — then it becomes an environmental problem. 
Regardless of what department is involved, the Department of 
the Environment is involved when it relates to the environment. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it most certainly is a serious 
problem regardless if we’re going to do the minister’s estimates 
right now. And the question I asked you is: if this takes place 
this summer, have you talked to your officials and have you put 
something in place that you can clean up the campsites, because 
it certainly will be an environmental hazard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to the 
member opposite, the environmental laws and the litter laws in 
the province of Saskatchewan will be enforced this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That’s 
really all I wanted to know, because we have 75 of them 
campsites that are going to be closed down, and I think there’s 
going to be a lot of litter that your department is going to have 
to move in and make darn sure that the environment is safe. 
 
Mr. Yew: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. Minister, is 
your department able to lay charges against a company or an 
individual that is responsible for a chemical spill or pollution of 
some kind, Mr. Minister? Are you able to lay charges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: Yes. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Is it The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act and the spill control regulations that permit the 
laying of charges against a polluter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Yes. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1326 
 

Mr. Yew: — During the PC government’s term of office, Mr. 
Minister, how many charges have been laid against polluters, 
and how many convictions have there been? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, there have been none. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, at the end of May of last year, 
charges against Eldor mines under the federal fisheries Act 
were stayed by a Crown prosecutor. The charges dealt with the 
company allowing pollution to enter Wollaston Lake. I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister: can you tell me what your department 
knows of the current status of the case? Are charges still 
pending? Have radiation levels on any part of that lake been 
checked and found to be high? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — There’s two parts to the question, Mr. 
Chairman. First, dealing with the charges, we’re not aware that 
charges are pending. Second, dealing with the harm to the lake, 
as you know, a study was just released some months ago which 
indicated that no harm could be found. The consultant who 
produced the study could find no evidence to say that the lake 
was harmed. 
 
Mr. Yew: — The residents of Wollaston Lake in my 
constituency, Mr. Minister, have expressed a lot of concern 
regarding the fisheries of that particular lake and the fish 
resource, and other related wildlife habitat in the area. I raise 
the question because of this high concern that has been 
expressed to me as well. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why your department to date has 
not gone as far as it should have in dealing with matters of this 
nature. It seems that you’ve suddenly become impartial when it 
comes to serious environmental hazards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve indicated to the 
member previously that a study prepared by Beak Consultants 
Ltd., which was an environmental evaluation of the effects of 
the Eldor mines, the Rabbit Lake operations, and Wollaston 
Lake, was released November of ’85. I don’t know if the 
member had received a copy but it is available. I’ll just read the 
conclusion into the record: 
 

. . . it can be stated that, on the basis of the available data, 
the operation of the Rabbit Lake uranium mining and 
milling operation has had no significant nor discernible 
effect on the aquatic ecology, fishery or any other use of 
the waters of Hidden Bay or Wollaston Lake. 

 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, how 
many spills of radioactive material or other pollutants have 
taken place in Saskatchewan’s uranium mines in the course of 
the last four years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — We do not have that information with 
us, Mr. Chairman. I’ll undertake to provide that information to 
the member. 
 
Mr. Yew: I understand, Mr. Minister, that you will  

provide that information later on, but you are aware then, that 
there have been major spills in your term of office. Knowing 
that fact, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: have any charges 
been laid as a result of those spills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, there have been no 
uncontrolled spills. All spills have been controlled, have been 
cleaned up, and there has been no basis for charges. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, how much pollution, radioactive or 
otherwise, can enter lakes close to uranium mines before 
provincial standards are breached? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, we do have emission 
standards which are included in the permits, licences, given to 
each mine. If the member has a specific mine that he wishes 
information on, and it’s a fairly technical piece of information, 
we’d be happy to furnish him with that information. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’d personally dispute, Mr. Minister, the Eldor 
mine’s report. I take exception to the fact that nothing has been 
done whereby the area residents, the people directly affected by 
this spill, are still feeling some very . . . there’s a lot of concern 
expressed in that area re the fish population. The other wildlife 
— moose, caribou, etc. — have somewhat been affected in one 
form or another. 
 
I really want to question the practice of the major companies 
involved and the Department of Environment. You know, 
surely the minister must realize that the traditional pursuits of 
hunting, trapping, and fishing are very important to the people 
of the remote northern areas; whereby we have such high 
unemployment in many of those areas, there’s a high welfare 
dependency rate. And the only means of putting bread on the 
table in many instances is by going back and falling back into 
our traditional pursuits. 
 
Once that valuable resource is gone, Mr. Minister, there’s 
nothing for us left. There is nothing there for future generations. 
I really wonder, you know, what commitment your government 
has towards environmental issues. I don’t believe there is — 
like my colleague, my seat mate, has just concurred with me — 
in terms of environmental commitments by your government. 
 
I want to go on, Mr. Minister, and deal with another aspect of 
your government’s environmental positions, or a commitment. 
 
Mr. Minister, has the provincial government completed its 
studies into the effects of the various sources of supplying water 
to the oil companies in Cold Lake, Alberta? I’m sure you’re 
aware of the issue. The oil companies extract oil by various 
means and require water, but supplying that water may have 
significant environmental implications to our province. I want 
to ask you, Mr. Minister: what have you decided to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — The company, Mr. Chairman, has 
decided to use water obtained from the North Saskatchewan 
River. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1327 
 

Mr. Yew: — Pardon me, Mr. Minister, I didn’t catch your 
response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I said, Mr. Chairman, that the company 
has decided to obtain their water from the North Saskatchewan 
River in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Yew: — How will that affect us, Mr. Minister, downstream 
from the North Saskatchewan River and into our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, it’s the preferred option for 
Saskatchewan, mainly because then they won’t be using any 
other northern water, rather than the lower quality water of the 
North Saskatchewan. Now outside of that there won’t be . . . 
which is a positive for Saskatchewan, so it won’t have a 
negative impact on Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — It seems to me that that position is not concurred 
with by area residents on that west side, Mr. Minister. I’ve had 
occasion to talk with some elected officials that are concerned 
regarding this project and I would advise the minister to check 
further into it. 
 
I want to go on to another question, Mr. Minister. As you will 
recall, last year motorists followed a truck between P.A. and 
Saskatoon while the truck leaked PCBs. The car had to turn its 
windshield wipers on at the time because of the oil that was 
being spilled. When the driver of the car learned that it was 
PCBs that had created the smearing to the windshield of his car, 
he phoned your department, the Department of Environment, 
and was told to take his car to have it washed in a car wash. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: do you not think that this is an 
indication of a need for a much better system of handling 
inquiries coming from the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The minister is having 
difficulty making his answer heard. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Chairman, while in general the 
member’s information is half correct, actually what the driver 
was told to do was take his car to Saskatchewan Power who 
knew all about this by this time, and that Saskatchewan Power 
would have the car cleaned, mainly because Saskatchewan 
Power knew about the car and knew about the PCBs, so he was 
not told to take it to — just go into a commercial car wash; he 
was told to take it to Saskatchewan Power to have it cleaned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I listened yesterday while 
you discussed with my colleague from Cumberland the 
environmental impact assessment statement with respect to the 
Rafferty dam, Shand power project. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you could tell me when you 
expect to receive the statement back, first of all, and then I have 
some other questions on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I’d indicated, Mr. Chairman, yesterday, 
mid to late summer. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Would it be your intention thereafter to 
hold public hearings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well the normal course of events will 
take place. That is, it will be released for public review. 
Depending on what reactions we have back from the public, it 
will then be decided whether to have public hearings or not, 
which is the normal course of events in these types of things. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m aware of the normal course of 
events. The normal course of events, Mr. Minister, is that you 
have a discretion with respect to public hearings. It would strike 
me that there’s ample evidence of the necessity of a public 
hearing with respect to this affair. It is most controversial with 
the ranchers; the users of the Dr. Mainprize Park and others in 
the area. So I wonder how much more evidence you need of 
sufficient public interest and concern to merit a public hearing, 
and thus give those people the opportunity to make their views 
known to the government in a public forum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve gone 
through this. We went through exactly these questions 
yesterday, which is fine. Sask Power is presently having 
hearings locally to hear the public’s concerns. The 
environmental impact study will be done. That review will be 
published. There will be a review period after that and then, if 
it’s deemed necessary after that, we would have public 
hearings. So there is . . . The opportunity abounds for public 
input, and if it’s deemed necessary at the appropriate stage in 
this process to have public hearings, public hearings will be 
held. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well public hearings are, I think, normally 
held. I think it’s fair to say they’re normally held where there’s 
a good deal of public interest and concern. Where the matter is 
not of such widespread public interest and you’re unlikely to 
elicit much response, public hearings aren’t held. But where the 
matter is one of wide public concern, of such a nature that you 
are likely to get a good degree of public interest and a goodly 
number of hearings, the philosophy, I think, which underlies the 
environmental and impact assessment statement Act, the 
legislation — I’m not sure that’s the right name — the 
philosophy underlying the legislation is that the public should 
have the right to make those representations. 
 
You refer to hearings held by Sask Power. Mr. Minister, the 
normal course in the past, unless you’re going to change the 
rules, has been that such hearings are held before an impartial 
tribunal or body, who then, on the basis of those 
recommendations, on the basis of the public representations to 
them, make some recommendations to the public. And that has 
been the course of action with respect to past public hearings. 
 
Again I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you haven’t got ample 
evidence of sufficient public concern to allow the public to 
make the representations to a relatively impartial body who will 
weigh them and report to the government and to this Assembly 
and the public with respect to those concerns and their 
legitimacy, and the extent to which, if at all, they can be 
accommodated by the project. 
 
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1328 
 

Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I had indicated 
to the members opposite yesterday on this very subject, a debate 
prior to receiving the EIS (environmental impact study) and its 
findings, a debate on this subject at this stage in this place, is a 
little premature. There’s nothing known today that would 
preclude public hearings. There very well may be, but we’ll 
await the results of the EIS and the public review that follows. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well let me then close my remarks on the 
subject by saying that I think it would be an injustice if there 
were not public hearings. I don’t recall a development in recent 
times which has caused as much concern and sparked as much 
interest among the people of an area as this particular project. 
And if there is no public hearings consequent upon the 
receiving of this environmental impact assessment statement, 
then the legislation which provides for public hearings no 
longer has much effect. 
 
Mr. Minister, I heard you say yesterday that you had not 
requested an environmental impact assessment statement with 
respect to the ammonia project in Regina. Did I understand the 
minister correct to say that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No, Mr. Chairman, he’s not correct. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well perhaps you can tell me then what 
has been requested, and when you expect to receive it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I could tell, Mr. Chairman, I could tell 
the member more when I receive that project proposal. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Sorry, I missed the minister’s comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — I said, Mr. Chairman, we have yet to 
receive a project proposal. So again, I couldn’t tell you whether 
we’re going to have an EIS or not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take it then, Mr. Minister, the whole 
project is of such an indefinite nature, and of such a tenuous 
nature, that there’s no point in doing an environmental impact 
assessment statement because you’ve no idea yet whether or not 
the project’s going ahead. Is that a fair summary of the situation 
with respect to the ammonia plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — No, Mr. Chairman, that’s the member 
opposite’s conclusion. I’m saying as far as environment is 
concerned, we have yet to receive the project proposal. I’m sure 
it’s on its way, and once it is, we’ll be able to discuss with you 
more fully what we’re going to do with it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — During the last session of the legislature, 
Mr. Minister, a goodly amount of concern was expressed by 
both the public and subsequently by members of the opposition 
with respect to the storage of PCBs in populated areas. I know 
my colleague from Cumberland raised this. I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister . . . And it appeared at that time that the then minister 
of the Environment was giving the go-ahead to the  

establishment of a storage depot within the city of Regina 
without the necessity of any environmental impact assessment 
statement — a rather strange and bizarre approach to storing 
such a dangerous chemical. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister . . . I think we all hope that the change 
in the ministers has produced a more conscientious and a more 
responsible approach to the storage of PCBs. And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, could you give us the position of this government now 
under your tutelage with respect to the storage of PCBs in 
populated areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member is 
aware, probably, since about a year ago or more when PCBs 
were no longer shipped to Alberta, PCBs have been stored on 
site wherever they are accumulated. My colleague, the former 
minister of Environment, announced that we were going to 
create a sitting board to find a site somewhere in Saskatchewan 
to accommodate the storage or eventual destruction of PCBs, 
and we would have something to announce in that regard in the 
near future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the amount of PCBs in this 
province is fairly considerable. They were of course used by 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation in, shall we call it, an age of 
innocence. Their capacity to cause illness to human beings 
wasn’t really recognized. They’re of course no longer used. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, what plans the department has for the 
long-term disposal of these chemicals. Surely they’re not going 
to be stored in cans for ever. 
 
I recognize that, given the fact that this government’s going to 
call an election, given the fact that the government is going to 
start writing its death warrant at the nomination of the member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, it may not be of great relevance to 
know what you’re planning on doing . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well I understand there’s going to be an election called on 
May 24th. And it seems to many people in the province, that’s 
the government taking pen in hand and beginning to sign their 
own death warrant. 
 
But as a matter of academic interest, if it is of no practical 
importance, Mr. Minister, I wonder what this government is 
planning on doing with respect to PCBs. Surely our plans do 
not consist of simply leaving them in cans until someone else 
thinks of a solution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Well two things, Mr. Chairman. The 
low-level PCBs - we have a mobile unit that now can destroy 
them and that, by the way, is a first for Canada. For higher level 
PCBs, and other toxic materials, we have undertaken a study 
with the other western provinces to look into the possibilities of 
what they term a mobile incinerator. 
 
The theory behind it is that rather than all the provinces 
building a rather expensive site and getting involved in the 
incineration of these things, there may be a possibility of 
sharing a unit that can be moved from province to province and 
used part of the year to get rid of your hazardous material. And 
in the case of Saskatchewan, that would be beneficial to us 
because we simply don’t  
  



 
May 15, 1986 

1329 
 

create the volumes of hazardous waste that other provinces do 
and if this thing pans out, it would be advantageous to us. We 
don’t know . . . We haven’t got the results of that joint study 
undertaken by ourselves and our neighbours, so when we get 
that study, we’ll know what our next step will be. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


