


















































April 11, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 11, 1986 
 
 

533 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Status of Husky Oil Upgrader 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Premier, I address my question to the Minister of Energy who, 
in returning from Ottawa, announced that the agreement we had 
hope for on the Husky oil upgrader was nowhere to be seen, and 
that what we have instead is a delay of a year, from 1986 to 
some time next year, the delay of the starting of the 
construction of the upgrader, and that we have called on the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to pay about $13 million for work 
that has already been done. 
 
What I would ask the minister is whether or not he’s satisfied 
with the one year delay in the construction of the upgrader that 
he got when he went down to Ottawa. And what the people of 
the province had wanted was a firm commitment from the 
Ottawa government that construction would proceed post-haste. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite obvious, to me 
at least, that the hon. member was not at the meetings in Ottawa 
because he has virtually all his facts wrong. There is no delay 
on this project. The work that’s going to be done has not 
already been paid for. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, this project is 
proceeding. The pre-construction design work and engineering 
work that must be done before cement can be poured is going to 
be done. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if it hadn’t been for our Premier, I 
would suggest that this project wouldn’t have gone ahead, but 
it’s his kind of leadership that’s propelling that project ahead 
today. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 
people inside and outside the oil patch that are very, very 
excited by that announcement that came out of Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. 
I wonder if he could, for the people of the province who are 
paying the bill, explain in detail the $90 million that the 
taxpayers of the country and the province are being called on to 
pay, how that will break down in terms of what is being paid 
out for work already done and for work that will be done in the 
future. 
 
And I say here, Mr. Speaker, the Premier clearly implied in his 
answer a couple of days ago that this 90 million was for future 
work to be done, and what we’re hearing now, it’s to pay for 
work that has been done. Now there’s two very conflicting 
reports coming out of the Premier, and I would ask you to 
clearly outline what we are paying for, what the taxpayers of the 
province are being called on to pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what we are financing 
with this $90 million is the construction,  

pre-construction, and design work, and in fact I would suggest 
that we got a rather good deal for the public purse out there. 
And not only is this project proceeding, but it’s proceeding with 
prudence, and it’s proceeding with the taxpayer in mind. 
Because the maximum $13.5 million that we in fact will 
contribute to this design work, we attached a few strings to it if 
you like in so far as that money gets paid, but it gets paid 
because jobs are maintained out there. Oil wells have to pump; 
operators have to operate those wells. So we’ve got some very 
good linkage established with our dollars. Jobs have to be 
maintained out there in the oil patch before we pay that money. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister, 
again, who refuses to answer the question: of the $90 million 
that is being called on to be paid, a good part of it by the 
taxpayers of Canada, how much of that 90 million is for work 
that is already done, engineering that has been completed — 
which now is owned by Husky Oil, which can be sold around 
the world, paid for by taxpayers — what percentage is paid for 
work already done, and what is paid for work that is to be done 
in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 
trying to warp what is going on with this project. The bottom 
line, Mr. Speaker, is this project is proceeding. It’s proceeding 
like the paper plant. It’s proceeding like the bacon plant is 
proceeding. You might be against jobs and economic 
development for north-western Saskatchewan, but we are not. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister 
again. I want to ask the minister again. Can you clearly indicate, 
having sat in on the meeting with the federal minister and other 
colleagues and the Premier of Saskatchewan — I know you 
weren’t there to take part but only to listen — but can you tell 
us what you heard? Can you tell us whether or not the majority 
of the 90 million — the majority of the 90 million — is to pay 
for work that Husky has already had done? Is that not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Oh no, that is wrong. I sat there at that 
meeting and what I saw was three governments and Husky 
sitting there, committed to go ahead with this project. And go 
ahead with it we have done. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the minister. I don’t 
believe what I’m hearing in the refusal to answer the question. 
How many dollars of the taxpayers’ money went to pay for the 
work that has already been completed by Husky Oil on the 
engineering feasibility studies of the Lloydminster upgrader? 
How much of that is being paid for work already done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 
dollars have been expended in terms of this project already. In 
fact one could argue, I think, that Saskatchewan has been very 
much the benefactor of this already, and there’s been well over 
$100 million spent on the development side in the oil field 
already because this project is proceeding. And that kind of 
money that’s been expended has maintained jobs out there . It’s 
created capital investment which in itself has created new jobs. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

534 
 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the minister. You’ve 
refused to answer how many tax dollars are going to bail out 
Husky Oil’s engineering studies and planning that was done 
over the past two years. 
 
Now what I would like to know from you, Mr. Minister, is 
whether or not, while you were in Ottawa, you were man 
enough to stand up to Pat Carney and get an agreement signed. 
Was there an agreement signed for the procedure and the going 
forward of the upgrader at Lloydminster? Were you man 
enough to stand up to Pat Carney and demand a signed 
agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
meetings in Ottawa, there will be a letter of agreement signed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the minister. You say 
there will be. Are you then telling us that no agreement is 
signed with the federal government, no agreement has been 
signed with the federal government, but yet you put $13 million 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money into the hands of Husky Oil 
for studies that were already done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, what 
I’m saying is, we’re building it. The meeting was held. The 
draft agreement is going to be signed very shortly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. I 
want to ask you again clearly. You put on the line $13 million 
of taxpayers’ money from Saskatchewan, and you’re telling the 
people of the province that no agreement is signed. You gave 
the money, $13 million — that’s more than you gave to 
Pocklington — and you didn’t get a signed deal. What kind of a 
business agreement do you put forward to the people of the 
province when you give $13 million, or $13 from every person 
in the province, to Husky Oil, and you have no agreement to go 
forward with the upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to be very clear, Mr. Speaker. 
This project is going ahead. No other governments have 
co-operated to the degree we have. It’s going to go ahead. The 
future of . . . Saskatchewan’s energy future, Canada’s future 
energy security, lies in heavy oil. We recognize that. Now some 
would have said, some would have said, oh, oil prices have 
gone away down; you’d better back off this. That would have 
been the view of those who don’t want to proceed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We said, Mr. Speaker, that we believe in five years from now 
oil prices could be significantly different. We said we would 
believe that we would be irresponsible if we did not proceed 
with this project, because in 1991 when you wake up in the 
morning, your toaster might not work because we don’t have 
energy supplies here. We are going to build it. The deal is done. 
It’s going forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I have a question to the Minister of Energy, 
and it applies to the line of questioning that has  

just been put to the floor. I would like to ask the minister, 
considering that the Syncrude project in Fort McMurray, the 
20,000 barrel addition to that project has been cut back severely 
in the summer of 1986: the fact that there is an Alberta election 
called and your election is pending — is your claim that this 
project in Lloydminster, is the claim that it’s going ahead 
simply not political rhetoric in the view that you want to win an 
election in this province, and has nothing to do with oil 
economics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, our commitment to this project 
has been clear for several months. IN fact, it was clear on the 
day in June of ’84 when this deal with signed that we’re going 
to go ahead with it. Saskatchewan’s future is heavy oil — 25 
billion barrels estimated reserves out there; conventional 
reserves estimated something in the order of 700 million. If we 
don’t get going on this, you’re going to wake up one morning 
and your car isn’t going to run. It’s just about that simple in this 
country. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Syncrude’s 
future is heavy oil as well. Although they are a private sector 
company, they realize that profits have to pay for expansion. 
I’m asking the minister: are you asking the taxpayers of this 
province possibly to pay for a lame duck in the oil industry so 
that you and the Alberta government can be re-elected in 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is 
taking a responsible and reasonable approach here. We 
recognize that we have to have an energy supply in the future of 
this country. We can’t be held hostage to the whims of some 
others outside there in the oil-producing world. For those 
reasons the project is proceeding. It absolutly flabbergasts me 
that both the parties in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, are against 
this project. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — new question, Mr. Speaker, and I direct it 
to the Minister of Energy. Will you not admit that the $90 
million study is little more than a ploy to get the heat off of 
your government and Premier Getty in Alberta in these last few 
days before your provincial election campaign? Isn’t that what 
the $90 million study is really all about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, it is not a study. This is design 
pre-construction work. The project is going ahead. It will be 
built. It makes sense to build it. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you 
stand back and you look at this project, here’s the situation 
today: every year, year in and year out, as long as I’ve been 
living in Weyburn, Saskatchewan, we can’t market even our 
light and medium crude out of that area in January and February 
because the heavy oil causes pipeline bottle-necks. Okay? For 
that reason alone, it would make sense to upgrade that crude up 
— heavy crude. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, every day that passes there’s less and 
less diluent to mix with the heavy crudes to pipeline it down. 
Those reasons by themselves are economic sense enough to 
build the project. But, Mr. Speaker, if you stand back and you 
really look at the project, if you think about it in a very 
fundamental way, does it make sense to take the heavy oil here 
and ship it into the U.S. or ship it into central Canada and let 
them upgrade it and refine it down there? Because what you’re 
in fact doing is, you’re  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

535 
 
 

shipping prairie jobs, Saskatchewan jobs, down to the northern 
tier states; Saskatchewan jobs down into central Ontario. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this project makes as much 
sense in Saskatchewan as taking barley does and putting into 
cattle and processing it, and having slaughtered beef or 
slaughtered pork just like my friend here has done with putting 
a bacon plant together. That’s what we’re talking bout, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of fundamental economic sense, and that’s the 
kind of project this upgrader is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
of Alberta has as much as admitted that this is little more than a 
stalling tactic. This morning in Edmonton he is quoted as saying 
. . . This is what the Premier of Alberta said yesterday: 
 

. . . the agreement to go ahead with the study keeps the 
multi-billion dollar upgrader . . . alive for another year. A 
decision is to be made at that time on whether to proceed 
with the upgrader . . . 

 
Or not to proceed. 
 
Will you now admit that this $90 million study simply puts off 
a final decision on the project for another year and until after 
the provincial elections in Alberta and Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what I’m 
hearing, and here’s what I’m reading about what people are 
saying in this project, and here’s what I’m hearing from people 
that’s lived and worked right in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, 
The Meridian Booster. And what does one of the paragraphs 
here on page 4 say? It asks the question, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Who deserves credit for the miraculous turn-around on 
this project? Grant Devine deserves credit because he flew 
to Ottawa with a determined look on his face and refused 
to leave until he got what he came for. 

 
We got what we came for, and we’re going ahead with that 
project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Premier 
Getty also had a rather disturbing comment with respect to the 
financial negotiations on the upgrader. He told the Alberta 
legislature on Wednesday, and I quote: 
 

The original agreement has been set aside (I’m quoting 
from Premier Getty in Alberta); the original agreement has 
been set aside without prejudice to any of the parties. 

 
In other words, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister, there is no financial 
agreement on the Husky upgrader, there is no Mulroney 
government commitment to the Husky upgrader, and this $90 
million study is little more than a  

stalling tactic while Ottawa decides whether or not it will 
participate. 
 
In light of Premier Getty’s comments, how can you deny that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the memorandum of 
understanding is alive and well. It’s still on the table, and in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to use this time of engineering 
and pre-construction work, this window, to build on that 
memorandum of agreement. And that project will be going 
ahead and, I would suggest to you, it will be going ahead under 
the same principles that were outlined in that original 
memorandum. 
 

Memorandum of Agreement 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’d like to ask a question to the 
Minister of Energy. It deals with the Husky oil upgrader, and it 
deals with the memorandum of agreement to which he referred. 
 
Now the minister will know that the memorandum of 
agreement, signed by Husky and the federal and the Alberta and 
Saskatchewan governments on June 6th, 1984, provided a fiscal 
framework for the financing of this upgrader. He knows, as he 
says, the memorandum is in full force and effect. Did the 
memorandum anywhere provide for a grant by the Government 
of Saskatchewan to Husky, such as you have agreed to in 
Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member doesn’t 
have his facts right. We haven’t given, as a result of the Ottawa 
discussions, a grant to Husky. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister agree 
that, pursuant to the agreement that was made at Ottawa, 
something more than $60 million is flowing to Husky Oil on a 
grant basis, non-repayable by Husky, and that the Saskatchewan 
government’s portion of that exceeds $13 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s not a grant, Mr. Speaker. It may 
not even be as high as $13.5 million. In fact, I would suggest 
the Premier struck rather a good deal for the taxpayers. Because 
what it will amount to, as is there provision for in royalty 
reductions, which are already in play as a result of development 
work that’s going on by Husky, and so what that tells me is, by 
structuring that kind of arrangement to get the royalty relief, 
Mr. Speaker, you have to keep oil wells pumping, and hence 
jobs, jobs for operators of oil wells, are maintained. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it true 
that Husky is going to get more than $60 million from the 
governments that it wouldn’t have otherwise got? Isn’t it true 
that they don’t have to pay it back? And you can deny that it’s a 
grant, but do you have another word for money which 
governments pay to oil companies that the oil companies don’t 
have to pay back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What we’re going to pay to Husky is 
invoices, Mr. Speaker, for work they do to get design and 
pre-construction engineering done. And you can twist it any 
way you want, and you can be against this project. You, as 
premier, never brought one upgrader  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

536 
 
 

project home in this province, and the people of this province 
know that. You are against it; the people are not. 
 
They want it to go ahead, and we’ve struck a good deal for the 
people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Do I 
understand, Mr. Minister, that you are saying that the 
governments are going to pay . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, There’s so much yelling in the 
House that it’s impossible for the minister to hear the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve just asked for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, do I understand you to 
say that Husky Oil is going to submit invoices for work that 
they have ordered, and for contracts into which they have 
entered, and you are going to pay the bills, and you don’t call 
that a grant. Do I understand that? And secondly, would you be 
good enough to indicate who else can submit bills to your 
government and get them paid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll go over the project 
again. We are advised that it will take approximately $90 
million to get the design and pre-construction work done. Mr. 
Speaker, we have very competent officials. They have designed 
mechanisms to assure that, in fact, if it doesn’t cost 90 million, 
obviously we won’t pay our $13.5 million. I think that’s a very 
wise way to proceed in terms of being the guardian of the 
taxpayers’ purse. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, that design 
work is what makes this project go ahead. You can’t construct it 
unless you get that done. We’re going to get that done, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re against it; we’re for it. It’s quite simple. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Does the 
minister deny that by last August engineering contracts on key 
high technology components for the Husky upgrader had been 
let and that financial obligations were assumed by Husky and 
that it is, among others, these obligations which you are 
agreeing to pay — obligations which were in place last 
summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we have agreed to 
proceed, and to proceed you have to get the design and 
pre-engineering work done. That’s what’s going to get done; 
that’s what we’re going to pay for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, do you 
deny that a substantial amount of that work has already been 
done for many, many months and that that is, in fact, what you 
are agreeing to pay for and that such agreement was not 
included in the June 6, 1984 memorandum of agreement. Is it 
not true that under that memorandum of agreement you had no 
obligation to pay for the contracts which you are now agreeing 
to bankroll? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as you will know, there 
was a fair number of provisions in the original  

memorandum. As I have already said, that memorandum is very 
much still on the table. And secondly, in so far as how our 
contribution to paying these bills is done, as I said, it was 
constructed so that it would be paid back through royalties, and 
those dollars will be paid back as . . . If it isn’t 90 million, if it’s 
88, obviously we’re not going to pay more than our fair share. 
But more importantly, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, because 
of what’s gone in the past, there’s been, I would suggest, 
probably in the order of maybe something close to a quarter of a 
billion dollars spent if you look at what’s gone in the 
development side out there in the Husky heavy oil patch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I take it we have now established that you are paying bills 
which husky incurred as early as last year. Do you agree that of 
the $90 million package, of which more than $60 million is 
being paid for by governments, fully $50 million of that is for 
work which has already been done, and which is for the account 
of Husky Oil, and much less than half is for work which may be 
done in the future, and that, in fat, governments have agreed to 
pay substantial amounts of bills which have been incurred by 
Husky, and that that was not in the original deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, what I know is this. I sat 
there for something close to 12 hours, along with our Premier 
and, I think, 10 other provincial and federal cabinet ministers, 
and there was a commitment to see this project go forward. 
There was also, Mr. Speaker, a clear indication that to get it 
forward, there needed to be spent something in the order of $90 
million. We sat down as reasonable and responsible people and 
figured out a way to get that project forward, to find that $90 
million. And that’s what we have done, Mr. Speaker. And 
Canada, Saskatchewan, and the people of this province will be 
better off for that deal that we put together. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I am 
puzzled. Mr. Minister, you say you want to go ahead with the 
project You say that the memorandum of agreement is still in 
place. You agree that we wouldn’t have to make these grants if 
the project went ahead as planned. Why, Mr. Minister, did you 
not make an agreement to proceed on the basis of the original 
memorandum of agreement which called for no grants by the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Why did you agree to a delay in 
what was proposed in the memorandum and agree to grants by 
the province, and no firm commitment by the Government of 
Canada to proceed with this upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, once again the member 
is trying to lead us down the path of misinformation. Number 
one, no grant; number two, no delay. But what we did get, Mr. 
Speaker, is co-operation, and with the original MOU 
(Memorandum of Understanding) still on the table we’re going 
to use this window to build around and under and over that 
framework of that MOU and this project is going to go ahead. 
You may be against it; we’re for it. 
 
We’re for economic development; we’re for helping north-west 
Saskatchewan; we’re for bacon plants; we’re for upgraders; 
we’re for field development out there in the heavy oil patch. 
We’re in favour of paper and pulp  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

537 
 
 

projects going ahead; we’re in favour of linking the oil patch 
and the energy industry. We’re in favour of refining and 
building ammonia plants and the fertilizer that can throw forth 
from those projects for the betterment, not only of the oil patch, 
Mr. Speaker, but of the farming community 
 
You see you don’t have to drive a wedge, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition . . . in this province we’re big enough that you don’t 
have to drive a wedge between those who live in the oil patch 
and those who farm — there is linkage there. We’re in favour of 
economic development for all of Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan 

Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading a Bill 
to amend The Education At. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the Bill 
to the Non-Controversial bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Education Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Department of Education Act, 1983. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the Bill 
to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Leave not granted and the bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, last 
night as we broke off the discussion of your estimates, one of 
the areas that was of concern to the opposition had to do 
specifically with the federal cuts to the established program 
funding. As I have indicated to you, Mr. Minister, that in the 
May 23rd budget, the Minister of Finance, Michael Wilson, 
said indeed that he wanted to cut the federal transfer payments 
to the provinces by $2 billion by 1990-91. And I want to say 
that he has implemented that, because if you take a look at the 
federal budget, May 23, 1985, the budget papers titled, The 
Fiscal Plan, and I’ll quote from that document: 
 

To achieve a balanced package of expenditure reductions 
and spread the burden of expenditure reduction fairly, the 
government will be seeking reduction in transfers to 
provinces, of about $2 billion by the end of the decade. 

 
And what we were asking you last day, Mr. Minister, whether 
in fact you are in a position to indicate the extent of the impact 
that this is going to have on cut-backs to the general funding of 
health care in Saskatchewan. I’d like to ask you whether you 
had an opportunity to do any research through your officials 
since we last met last evening, and whether you can indicate the 
net loss anticipated for the year 1986-87. I’ll stop there and 
we’ll proceed as you give me the particular information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, following from our discussions last 
night when the member opposite was questioning about 
activities that we had taken to address the funding of health care 
from the federal level, I would like to indicate to the member 
opposite that as recently as march 4th, I reiterated a request in a 
letter to Mr. Epp, and certainly I will be meeting with him on 
April 28th to discuss these topics again. Just for the information 
of the House, the letter of March 4th, I would quote for you, 
Mr. Chairman, to the Hon. Jake Epp: 
 

I am writing in support of the request of my counterparts 
in Ontario and Manitoba for a joint meeting of federal and 
provincial ministers of Health and ministers of Finance. 
Those of us charged with responsibilities in the health 
field are mindful of the need to contain the growth of 
expenditures on health care services while striving to 
maintain the quality of those services. 

 
We appreciate, and indeed we share the fiscal problems 
that the federal Minister of Finance is attempting to 
address. I would expect, in the spirit of co-operation and 
consultation ushered in by the Mulroney government, that 
the federal government would be prepared to participate 
with the provinces in a real effort to make the fundamental 
changes required to contain costs. 

  



 
April 11, 1986 

538 
 
 

To move forward from our discussions at last May, I urge 
you to convene a meeting at an early date. 

 
That letter went to Mr. Epp as of March 4th. 
 
I think your question was: based on the budget as outlined by 
Mr. Michael Wilson, what would be the reduction to 
Saskatchewan under EPF (established program of financing)? I 
must reiterate what I said yesterday, that certainly those things 
will be under discussion with the ministers of Finance. And as 
you can see by my letter, we’re requesting a joint meeting of 
provincial Health ministers and provincial Finance ministers 
with our federal counterparts. I think with that type of meeting 
we can work out some type of agreement. 
 
But in regards to your question, the best estimate of what 
they’re indicating is perhaps about a $13 million reduction. Of 
course, only a portion of that would be towards health as you 
understand, that’s EPF funding which is for both higher 
education and Health. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I want to assure you, as the Minister of 
health for the province of Saskatchewan, that I will be seeking 
meetings of this nature. I think it is imperative that both Finance 
and health sit down at the same time with their federal 
counterparts to map out some type of agreement that can be 
acceptable to all parties concerned 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you have indicated that there is 
going to be, in the proposal of Mr. Wilson, a $13 million loss, 
part of which will be directed towards health. I believe that’s 
what you’re saying. I want a clarification. Can you break it 
down? Under the proposal, the cut-back for funding of EPF by 
Michael Wilson, the Finance minister in Ottawa, federal Tories, 
what is the projected amount under his proposal that will be cut 
back in so far as the funding of health? What amount? You 
gave a general figure of $13 million. What is it for health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me preface my statement by saying, 
as I explain I think adequately to you last night, that is a 
projected figure. There are still negotiations that will take place. 
I can’t say whether it will be $13 million. We may be able to 
convince the federal government that it should be less than $13 
million. 
 
But let’s assume, for moving on in these estimates, let’s assume 
that it is the figure of $13 million. The hon. member opposite is 
asking: what portion of the 13 million would we estimate would 
directly affect health care. My best estimate at that would be 
about $9 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now the period that you’ve indicated to me — 
I take it you are answering the specific question that I asked — 
and the 13 million that you mention under the proposal of the 
federal Finance minister, the 13 million applied to the year 
’86-87, is that correct? Just so I’m clear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Correct. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now the basic proposal is to 1990-1991. And 
we are very, very concerned on the basic impact that this 
massive cut by the federal Tory party to the funding of  

the established program funding, and particularly as it applies to 
health. And what I ask you . . . My information is, and our 
research indicates, that the proposed net loss for health care for 
the year 1986-87 is over $10 million just to health care. 
 
Now I want to ask you: have you and your officials got a 
calculation for each of the subsequent years up to the 
1990-1991? Because Wilson is trying to extract $2 billion of 
expenditure towards health and post-secondary education. And 
so I ask you . . . Our information is that over $10 million under 
the proposal will be cut from Saskatchewan for the year ’86-87. 
I ask you: have you got it for each of the additional years, the 
projected amount of the cuts by the federal Tories in ’87-88, 
’88-89, ’89-90, and ’90-91? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, I don’t know, and I think 
this indicates some of the problems that result in estimates. I 
wonder where you get the figure of 10 million. From the 
department we figure it is 9 million. There’s a $1 million 
discrepancy at this point in time. As I said previously, these are 
not hard and fast numbers. 
 
(1045) 
 
I’m concerned. I’m concerned about any cutback, and I can 
assure you that that is the reason that I have wrote the letter to 
Mr. Epp, asking him to put together a meeting of Finance 
ministers and health ministers to address this situation. That’s 
the reason that I am going to Ottawa at the end of this month to 
sit down with my counterparts from across Canada. I hope all 
the Health ministers are there to sit down with Mr. Epp and to 
explain to him our grave concerns about any reduction of EPF 
funding. 
 
However, Mr. Chairman, I want to make one think abundantly 
clear, and I think that can be best illustrated by this year’s 
commitment to health care by this government. At a time of 
restraint, at a time when many other departments are having 
very little, if any, budgetary increase in their expenditures, 
Saskatchewan has decided to put 11.6 per cent into the increase 
for health care in this province. 
 
So certainly, as one of my colleagues says, last year in our 
budget we came with the four pillars of our provincial mandate. 
And that is agriculture; and that is jobs; and that is health; and 
that is education. You can trace the budgets of this government, 
and you will see that those commitments are strong and they’re 
solid, and we’re committed to them. 
 
So to try and indicate that even though, because of economic 
times in Canada, the federal government may see it necessary to 
cut back on some of EPF funding, that doesn’t follow that there 
will be any type of cutback in health care spending in this 
province. So I say 11.6 per cent is a very strong commitment, 
and certainly our figures at this point in time, as I said 
previously, for the next year are approximately $9 million. That 
is not a firm figure. I will do all I can in my power to have that 
figure reduced and, as I said last night, my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, is at the present time, and in the future will 
do likewise. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

539 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll come back to my specific question. You 
have circumvented it rather skilfully. My concern is to get a 
handle on what is really happening as a result of your 
counterparts in Ottawa and the intention to cut massively the 
funding to education. You have the figure — we can use your 
figures or mine; they are reasonably close — ’86-87, you have 
indicated about 9 million. My information is that it would be 
slightly over $10 million in ’86-87. 
 
Now this proposal is a compounded type of proposal, and I 
want to deal with the seriousness of it and I know that you have 
analysed it. You must have analysed it, or otherwise you’re not 
standing up for the health care of this province. And so what 
I’m going to do is to go from year to year, and to determine 
from you the intended cut in health care funding by the federal 
government for each of the years up to 1990-91, the year by 
which they intend to have cut $2 billion from federal 
expenditures on health care. 
 
I think this is a critical direction that the federal government is 
taking. And I think that you, as a Minister of Health, where the 
people of Saskatchewan respect the health care that the New 
Democratic party built here and want to continue — I think it’s 
incumbent upon you to give us the facts as to what the vicious 
cuts are intended by the Mulroney and Wilson budget in 
Ottawa, your Tory counterparts. 
 
Tories try to stand up and say they are for health care and for 
medical care and hospital care. And at the very time you have 
the first Tory government in Ottawa, and one of the major cuts 
is in respect to health care. And so I’m going to ask you: what is 
the proposed cut for ’87-88? Simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest to 
this man indicate about the great building of health care by the 
NDP government. Let me remind you again, and the member 
opposite, a moratorium on nursing home construction is 
certainly not building health care. A 5 per cent reduction in 
nursing positions — a 5 per cent reduction on July 1st of 1976 
is certainly not building health care. 
 
I will tell you what is building health care in this province. I 
will tell you, Mr. Chairman, that building health care in this 
province is introducing a chiropody program that this province 
never had; is a $300 million capital project building 1,600 
nursing home beds across this province; building major 
construction on acute care hospitals across this province. I will 
tell you what building health care is — a $100 million patient 
care enrichment program to improve the staffing levels in the 
hospitals and nursing homes of this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s building health care. That’s far different 
than a moratorium on construction and a reduction in staffing 
standards, which was the legacy of the NDP government in 
health care. There is the difference. 
 
Now the member opposite asks about the EPF funding. I have 
given the figures that we have looked at for this year. In no way 
do I say that the 9 million is a firm figure. It is a  

figure that we are going to be negotiating on. He wants to say to 
me: what is it in ’87, and what is it in ’88, and what is it in ’89, 
and what is it in ’90? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have no idea what it will be. Because if we 
don’t know what it is in ’86-87, why would one be guessing 
what it may be three years down the road? I tell you, and I tell 
the people of this province, and I tell the members of this 
Legislative Assembly, that I am on record to do what I can to 
make sure that the federal government will give us the 
necessary funds to finance health care. And I assure the people 
of this province, whether or not those funds are forthcoming, 
that the record of the Devine government is that one of our 
corner-stones and one of our pillars is in health care, and I 
challenge anyone to look at the health budgets of the last four 
years and dispute that fact. More money has gone to health care 
in this province in the last four years than anywhere else in the 
Dominion of Canada — approximately a 47 per cent greater 
infusion of money into health care than any other department in 
the government. 
 
So to stand there and to try and build a straw man, that maybe 
someone is going to take it away — the old scare tactics of ’78 
certainly don’t wash today. The record of the Devine 
government in health care leads the nation in the provision of 
that care. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, there is a proposal by the federal 
government, and obviously in order to give me what the cut 
would be for the ’86-87 year you’ve had to calculate it on the 
basis of the proposal and the intention of the federal 
government to cut back in health care. And all I’m asking you is 
that the basic proposal goes to 1990-91, and each and every 
year they’re proposing to cut more and more from the health 
care And don’t stand here in this House and cover up for your 
counterparts. Stand up for the health care of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I ask you again, can you indicate, as you have for the 
’86-87, can you indicate for ’87-88 what the proposal, what 
amount, Saskatchewan will lose under the Wilson proposal of 
cut-back in health care? A simple question: obviously it’s over 
till 1990 — on the basis of the proposal. You know; you 
calculated it for ’86-87. I ask you to do it for ’87-88, and we’ll 
take you through one step at a time. Can you give us that 
figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I listen to the member 
opposite who said we’re trying to cover up or something for 
federal counterparts. I will read the letter again of March 4th 
where I asked the Hon. Jake Epp for a meeting to discuss this 
topic. I’ve told this House at least four times that at the end of 
this month I’m going to Ottawa to discuss this topic. I have told 
this House that my colleague, the Minister of Finance has been 
in consultation and negotiation with the federal Minister of 
Finance on this topic. 
 
So certainly we do not want to see cut-backs to Saskatchewan, 
and we will stand firm to try and get the best deal we can for 
Saskatchewan. It’s evidenced day after day by this government. 
We saw the Minister of Energy down there, and the Premier, 
this last week, carving out a deal with our federal counterparts 
that benefits Saskatchewan in oil and in agriculture. And I can  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

540 
 
 

assure you that we will do the same thing in health care. I think 
our record is very plain and well understood on that. 
 
We don’t know what the figure will be for this year. I give him 
an estimate of $9 million. I would be happy if that could be 
reduced to 5 million or to zero, and that’s what I’m going to try 
and do. So for me to give an estimate of what it will be the next 
year would be simply ludicrous, because we don’t know what 
it’s going to be in this year. 
 
I’m financing health care for this year at 11.6 per cent increase, 
and I can assure you that I’m going to meet with Mr. Epp, and 
my counterpart will meet with Mr. Wilson. We’ve asked to get 
them all together in one room so we, and my fellow colleagues 
across Canada who are responsible for health care, can say to 
our federal counterparts, look it, we don’t want to see 
reductions; we don’t want to see reductions in EPF funding for 
health care And we will try and carve out the best deal possible 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
So for it to go on in questioning and say, what will it be in 
1988, ’89, ’90, I have no idea what it will be. I’ve heard a 
general, overall figure that they have talked about. My concern 
and my priority is to get for the province of Saskatchewan the 
best deal for this year. 
 
And I can assure you that following that, next year I will do the 
same thing, and next year I’ll do the same thing. And as long as 
I’m charged with the responsibility of the Department of health 
in the province of Saskatchewan you have my assurance, the 
people of Saskatchewan have my assurance, that I will fight for 
the best deal for this province to maintain the excellent quality 
of health care that we have. 
 
We are leaders. We are leaders, not only in Canada but across 
North America in health care And that leadership, a great deal 
of it, has come within the last four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, It’s hard to believe that a 
five-year proposal has been put forward by the federal 
government and you’re standing in this House and telling the 
people of Saskatchewan that you have not broken it down as to 
the extent of the cut-backs that are proposed by Michael Wilson 
and which is endorsed by the Prime Minister of Canada. 
 
I want to ask you again very simply: are you telling this 
legislature that you and your officials have not, in fact, analysed 
or received any material from the federal government through 
your discussions to date indicating year by year the amount of 
the cut-backs, the proposed cut-backs. We’ll get into whether 
there’s negotiations going on. 
 
I want to know — there is a proposal to cut back, and you know 
there is, and you know the amount for ’86-87. But I’ll tell you 
why you won’t get into discussing the figures: because it’s 
massive. It’s going to undermine the health care of Canada. 
And you don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know that a 
federal Tory government is starting the undermining of 
medicare, as we know it across Canada. 
 

You can brag all you want about maintaining health care in 
Saskatchewan. The basis of health care has been the financial 
assistance that the federal government has been giving to the 
support of the financing of a standardization of health care 
across the provinces. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you telling this legislature 
that you have, and your officials have, not done an analysis and 
you cannot, in fact, give us the total amount of loss each year 
under the proposal that you say you are discussing with Mr. 
Epp? Is that what you’re saying? I want to be clear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, last night, under questioning 
from the same member who was incensed and was hung up on 
the Nielsen report, figuring that everything that Nielsen put in 
his report was cast in stone, that it would come to pass in 
Canada — I said to the member opposite, the Nielsen report 
was a number of recommendations. Some may be good. In 
health care some are for preventative-type of initiatives; some 
are for life skills; some are for new programs. I don’t deny 
those. I’m willing to look at all of these. 
 
But I give one as an example — and I’m going to deviate a wee 
bit from health, just to prove my point. One of the 
recommendations of the Nielsen report was to do away with the 
Churchill line That was a recommendation. 
 
(1100) 
 
The Nielsen report came up about a month and a half ago. The 
federal Minister of Transport, the Hon. Don Mazankowski, 
didn’t accept the Nielsen report; said he’s wrong; the Churchill 
line should stay; upgrade the Churchill line; I’m putting in (I 
believe) between 14 and $17 million to do so. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Chairman, that member opposite would like 
to take things and say, oh, they’re falling apart. I get the feeling 
today he’s trying to say that the federal government in this year 
are hurting us in health care through EPF. I can tell you that the 
EPF as is in the Estimates of this government, on page 10, if 
you look there, it says EPF funding estimated in 1985-86 was 
441.455 million, and for ’86-87, it will be 466. That certainly is 
not a decrease. 
 
Now he makes much of what may happen in subsequent years. I 
tell you, and I tell this Chamber, and I tell the people of this 
province that we have put 11.6 per cent increase into the health 
care budget this year. I have written to the federal Minister of 
Health telling him that I am concerned if there would be any 
cut-back. I want to sit down with him and discuss this. I’m 
going to Ottawa within two weeks to do this and, certainly, I 
think it is more important to work out what we can in the spirit 
of co-operative federalism that the Prime Minister spoke about 
that helped him sweep this nation to power. 
 
People want to see their legislative members at — whether they 
be federal or provincial level — whether they be from the 
Liberal or the NDP or the Conservative Party or the Parti 
Quebecois or whoever — people want to see legislators sit 
down, and in view of the times that  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

541 
 
 

are here — the economic times — cut out the best possible deal 
they can. That’s what I’m willing to do. 
 
I’m charged with health care. It’s a major responsibility in this 
government. And once again, let me assure you that I am going 
there to talk eyeball-to-eyeball, man-to-man, with Jake Epp, to 
try and cut out the best deal possible for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I will do that this year. And we may come up 
with a figure of 7 million; it may be 9 million; I can’t say at this 
time, but I can tell you that that will be the stance of this 
government year after year. So to sit here and try and guess 
what it may be in the year 1990 — may be important to the 
member opposite — maybe that is one of his priorities, to 
speculate on what might happen in 1990. I believe that the 
mandate that I’m charged with, and what is in the best interest 
of the Saskatchewan people, is to cut the best deal for 1986-87 
and that’s where my priority is. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, obviously you’re embarrassed to 
put forward the basic facts of the Wilson budget to the proposal 
to massively cut back on the federal funding and support of 
universal health care programs across this nation. That is the 
intention of the federal Tory budget, is to cut back massively on 
the financial support, the health care, which gives universal 
programs across Canada. And that includes medicare and the 
hospitalization services. 
 
And what I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, I’ve asked you: have 
you, in fact, received a proposal which we have read from the 
Wilson budget that he wants to, in fact, recoup or cut back $2 
billion by the year 1990-91? Have you, in fact, received that 
proposal? And if you have, I want to ask you: is there indeed 
such a proposal? Have you, in fact, the figures for each of the 
years? 
 
Why are you covering up? If you’re going to go meeting with 
them, surely you have the information that’s set out in the 
budget — that he is going to cut it back. And so I ask you: can 
you, in fact, provide the figures, under the proposed Wilson 
cut-back, for each of the years to 1990-1991? Can you do it? 
Have you the proposal? 
 
Have you worked out the details of how it would affect the 
funding here in Saskatchewan? Have you, in fact, reviewed the 
proposal? Have you looked at, down the road, the impact? Can 
you tell us the cumulative effect of the cut-back would be to 
Saskatchewan? And can you give a breakdown for each of the 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can tell you that certainly every 
province in Saskatchewan has received that. I mean, it was in 
the Wilson budget. Mr. Wilson said it publicly. I mean, there’s 
nothing there that anyone is trying to hide from anyone. It was 
in the federal budget. 
 
But certainly my officials and the officials from Finance are 
sitting down, analysing this, looking at a game plan that we can 
use for Saskatchewan. And the two ministers will be going to 
negotiate with our federal counterparts We’re looking at this 
immediate year. I think a lot hinges on how we do this year. If 
we’re successful this year, then perhaps we will be very 
successful in years to come. 
 
The member opposite I suppose doesn’t really realize  

how EPF funding operates. It’s a pool of money that comes to 
the province from the federal government for the financing, to 
assist the financing of higher education and health. Certainly 
not all the things that we have in Saskatchewan here in our 
health care are funded through EPF. Certainly not. We have 
many programs that are completely funded by the provincial 
level. Many of them. 
 
And there is no dictate that a certain amount has to go here or 
go there. So Finance and Health will sit down and will work out 
the best arrangement that we can see for Saskatchewan. My 
colleague and I will articulate that with our colleagues in 
Ottawa. I’m sure every other Finance minister and every other 
Health minister across Canada is doing exactly the same thing. I 
don’t think they’re worrying about the year 1990. They are 
worrying today about the year 1986-87. And that’s what we’re 
going to be doing, and our officials are working it out at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to follow up on the 
. . . trying to get some answers out of the minister on these 
proposed cut-backs that have been put forward by the Mulroney 
government in Ottawa. And we have got from him that the 
1986-87 cut-back proposal is, in his terms 9 million; in the 
analysis we’ve done, 10 million. If the proposal goes forward, it 
will be $9 million cut-back if the federal government has their 
way. And if you watch what has happened in the last week on 
the upgrader, they wanted a year delay and they got it, even 
though the Premier and the Minister of Energy went there to try 
to convince them to go forward and get an agreement signed. 
The federal government on that issue got their way. 
 
On the deficiency payment for farmers that we should have 
been asking for with the federal government, a $6 a bushel price 
for wheat, we didn’t get it when we went to Ottawa. And there 
are many people who are concerned that when you meet with 
your federal counterparts that you’ll not be any more successful 
in getting the cut-back removed. 
 
Now my colleague from the Quill Lakes has been asking, with 
the cut-back in 1986-87 of $10 million, what is the cut-back 
proposal for ’87-88? What is the proposal that Mulroney has 
put forward to you that they propose to cut back in the 
agreement they’re proposing? And I understand that you will be 
trying to put forward that you don’t want the cuts to take place. 
I know that, and I’ve been a minister, and I know how those 
meetings go. But what is the federal government proposing to 
cut in ’87 and ’88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly that’s rather difficult to 
ascertain because I can’t say with certainty what the cut-back 
. . . And I don’t like the word cut-back. There may be no 
cut-back. I’m going down there to say, look it, fellows, I don’t 
believe you should be cutting back at all. I understand that 
there’s concerns in controlling the deficit in Canada. I think 
every Canadian does do that — understand that. I think people 
realize that there are going to have to be certain surgeries made 
at the federal level. I think Canadians support that. Certainly, I 
believe that health care is a priority, and as Minister of Health 
for Saskatchewan I’m going to go there and argue my best  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

542 
 
 

case. I can’t say whether I’ll be successful. I hope my other 
colleagues from other provinces support my initiatives; I’m sure 
they will. 
 
Our best estimate is that this year, taking the figures they’ve 
given, it may be $9 million. I’ll do everything in my power to 
see if I can get it less than $9 million. We see the total figure 
that came out in the Wilson budget. You can carve it up 
however you want — so much this year, so much next year. 
That is sheer speculation, sheer speculation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it would only seem right to me . . . Until we 
know how it impacts this year, how in heaven’s name would 
you know what will happen in subsequent years? I don’t know. 
We can guess; we don’t know what will happen. It is this year, 
and that is what we’re working on now. And I can give you my 
assurance that my officials here, along with the Finance 
officials, are working out a strategy for my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, and I to put forth the best fight we can for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to get back to the 
question I asked you and that is what the proposal is. Other 
governments . . . And we know that the NDP government in the 
last six months has clearly outlined to the people of that 
province what the Conservative government in Ottawa has been 
proposing year by year to cut out of their health budget. And I 
say to you that it is not good enough for you to say that the 
provincial part of the Health budget is increasing. What you’re 
not saying is that the federal part is going to be decreasing and 
that the net result is that we have less nurses in our hospitals 
and that there’s a shift of taxation from the federal government 
to the provincial. 
 
Whether you raise the taxes or run a deficit, the impact that is 
occurring from these kind of cut-backs will be devastating to 
the taxpayers of the province. And to some provinces they 
simply won’t be able to raise the taxes, and you’re going to see 
the health care system in places like Prince Edward Island and 
Newfoundland completely collapse without the kind of support 
from a central government. 
 
What we’re arguing about is having a health care system in 
Canada. Because if the federal government goes forward with 
these proposals that you refuse to talk about, what you will have 
is one kind of health system in Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
where we have a resource base, and no health care system for 
our neighbours and friends and Canadians in the Maritimes 
where the resource base isn’t there. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, very pointedly, what the 
proposal is at this time in terms of cut-backs for ’87-88. You 
know what they’re proposing. You know what your friends and 
party members in Ottawa are proposing to cut in ’87 and ’88. 
The people in Manitoba, the Finance Minister and the Minister 
of Health there, who you already said is a good Minister of 
Health, he told the people of the province what the cut-backs 
were going to be, year by year by year. He laid it out and he let 
the people in the province decide whether they liked that or not. 
 

You are hiding information again about proposed cut-backs 
from your cousins in Ottawa, the Mulroney government, who in 
1984 promised that health care was a priority. Then when he 
gets elected he says, here is a proposal: we intend to cut 
millions of dollars, in fact over a billion dollars, in health across 
Canada. That’s what was the proposal. And what we’re saying 
is to break it down. What is he proposing in that time period to 
be cut from the Health budget of Saskatchewan? And I want to 
go through year by year, 1987-88, what the proposal is. 
 
And I know you’re going to go to a meeting and argue that that 
cut shouldn’t take place. I can concede that point to you. The 
public will make a judgement on how successful your 
government has been in dealing with Ottawa and whether or not 
we think you will be successful in this area. 
 
But leave that as it may be, that you’re going to go to a meeting 
and argue the point that the cuts shouldn’t take place. I’ll give 
you credit that you’ll go to the meeting. I don’t know what the 
results are going to be. The record of your government hasn’t 
been great . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it hasn’t been 
great. 
 
We wanted the upgrader to go ahead; the Premier went down 
there this weekend and got nothing. He spent $13 million to get 
a year delay. That’s what it cost the taxpayers of the province 
— 13 million bucks. We wanted a deficiency payment for 
grain; he got nothing. He got an 81 cent reduction. Now you’re 
saying you’re going to a Minister of Health conference to try to 
get a cut. 
 
(1115) 
 
What many will assume is that instead of a $10 million cut this 
year, you’ll come back with a 13 million cut. Now I’m not 
saying you will, but watching the record of this government 
with Ottawa, it isn’t a shining success. So what I want to know 
is what the proposal is, what the Michael Wilson proposal is for 
’87-88, what he has told you they intend to cut in this formula. 
We’re going to stay on this for some time until you answer 
some of these questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think the member said something 
in the introduction to his statement about a cut-back in nursing 
positions. That simply is not true. Not true at all. There has been 
no cut-back in nursing positions and the member knows that. 
There has been an improvement in nursing positions every year 
since this government took power — every year since this 
government took power. 
 
Let me indicate to you, the cut-back in nursing services in the 
province of Saskatchewan was on July 1, 1976. Each year there 
has been an increase in the number of nurses into the hospitals 
and nursing homes of this province and there is a substantial . . . 
a $100 million patient enrichment program which is going to 
put in over 500 — 500 — new nursing positions over the next 
five years, with about 300 of them going in this year, Mr. 
Chairman. So to stand here and try and mislead the people of 
this province that there’s been a cut-back in nursing is simply 
untrue — simply untrue. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

543 
 
 

Now regarding the EPF funding: as I’ve said, I’m going down 
there. We’re going to put forth our best case. The member 
realizes that. He says that we haven’t had much effect in 
Ottawa. I would ask him or anyone else to compare the action 
and the input into agriculture by the federal government since 
we’ve taken over, since Grant Devine has become the premier 
of the province. There has been more changes, more money 
flowing from the federal treasury into the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I heard the Prime Minister just the other day 
say there will be more. 
 
So for the member opposite to stand up in this House and say 
that the negotiations with the federal government and of this 
government have not been successful, again, is simply not true. 
It is not true. Negotiations with the Prime Minister and our 
Premier have been perhaps the best that have ever taken place 
in the history of this country. So I’m going to go to Ottawa with 
that same type of “stand up for Saskatchewan.” Let’s protect 
Saskatchewan. We will work our best to try and get the most 
EPF funding we can in the coming year, and for subsequent 
years we will do exactly the same thing. 
 
The member in Manitoba, who is a colleague and a friend of 
mine — the Health minister of Manitoba — it may well be that 
he is willing to take any proposal by the federal government as 
gospel. I’m not willing to do that. I have illustrated in this 
House how, even within their own caucus, the Nielsen report 
suggests certain things be cut, other ministers said no, that 
suggestion isn’t right. We’re going to keep that; we’re going to 
build on that. So although the Finance minister says he’s going 
to look at these kind of reductions, I am going to go there and 
talk man to man with my counterpart to try and reduce whatever 
reductions may be indicated by the federal Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I don’t want to discourage the 
minister from his meetings, but I wonder whether or not he’ll be 
taking all the Tory hacks along with him that the Premier took 
when he went to Ontario — Staff Barootes and Ron Barber and 
Pringle and Dave Tkachuk and George Hill. I mentioned Staff 
Barootes. But you can go to your meetings, you can go to your 
meetings. You can go down and meet with Conrad Black to try 
to raise some money for the next election. That’s fine. I don’t 
argue with that. 
 
The point that we would like to know is what the proposals for 
cut-backs by the federal government are in the health care area. 
That’s the issue. That’s what we’re talking about. That’s what 
they talked about in Manitoba, in Ontario, and in other 
provinces. They’ll be talking about it today in Prince Edward 
Island where there will be an election in the very near future, 
about cut-backs from Ottawa in the health care area. 
 
I understand why you don’t want to talk about it. You’re 
embarrassed about it. You, sir, are embarrassed that you have a 
federal government that’s attempting to wreck the health care of 
this country. You’re embarrassed about a government that was 
elected in ’84 on the commitment to health care, that is now 
saying we’re going to take 1.3 billion out. I know why you 
don’t want to give the answers — you’re embarrassed. But 
that’s not a good  

enough reason. 
 
You’re being paid to provide these kind of answers and we 
would like to know what the cut-backs are going to be in ’87 
and ’88, what the proposal is of the Michael Wilson proposal. 
We know that this has been floated by you at a number of 
meetings. Deputies have met, and they have discussed the 
proposed cut-backs, and they will be putting forward, I’m sure, 
solid proposals of why they shouldn’t take place — why they 
shouldn’t take place. But the question is: what is being 
proposed? What does the federal government want to take out 
of the budget in 1987-88 in the health care for this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again . . . I just want 
to give a little more information on the topic of nursing because 
I heard some calling from the seats and so on. I’d just like to 
read this out for you and to indicate the commitment of this 
government to health care in this province. I want to at this time 
indicate to you, Mr. Chairman, that the figures that I will be 
giving you today are figures where hospital boards have 
themselves also increased the nursing capacity over and above 
the expenditure from SHSP. I gave you some of those figures 
the other day. But I want to congratulate the hospital boards 
because they certainly are responding to some of the needs that 
they see out there. 
 
So I would like to, for the clarification and the information of 
all members in this House, give you these statistics. These are 
the increases from March 31st, 1982, Mr. Chairman, until 
January 31, 1986. Now these are the increases in nursing, 
professional nursing positions. The total for small community 
hospitals is 44.68. That is the total increase in professional 
nursing component in small community hospitals. In the large 
community hospitals — that’s the Estevans and the Humboldts 
and Melforts and the Melvilles and so on of this province — 
there have been 34.44 actual nursing position increases, nurses. 
And in the regional hospitals, and those are the bigger ones like 
Moose Jaw and North Battleford and Swift Current, there have 
been 55.44 increases in nurses in those hospitals in that period 
of time. And in the base hospitals, and that’s the ones in Regina 
and Saskatoon, the six big hospitals, there have been 229 nurses 
added into those hospitals over this period of time, a total in 
general hospitals, of 363.57. Add Wascana to that and it will 
come up to a grand total of 365.61 nurses put into the hospitals 
of this province since March 31st of 1982. 
 
I wanted you to understand that and to know that because there 
have been allegations and murmurings from the seat that there 
hasn’t been positions put in. Those are the positions that have 
been put in through SHSP funding and also with the boards 
taking some of their reserves and using them to enrich the 
staffing components. So I just wanted the members to know 
that. 
 
As far as the EPF, as I pointed out to you, I can’t understand 
this line of questioning or reasoning. Whatever may be in 
’88-89, ’90, is only speculation. The Finance minister of 
Canada has said he wants to reduce. He’s given a gross figure 
of what it may be. I don’t take his target for each year, if he 
does have those, as being carved in stone. I said that even this 
year’s is not carved in stone, and we’re going to negotiate for 
Saskatchewan the best  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

544 
 
 

deal to try and reduce any type of cut-back from the federal 
government to health care in Canada. 
 
The members opposite seem to want to spread a bogyman that 
there will be different types of health care across Canada. I want 
to tell you there are different standards of health care across 
Canada at this time, Not every province has a chiropody 
program. Certainly not. Saskatchewan has, I believe, the best 
system of health care in Canada, and I believe it is my duty to 
see that that remains. And I give you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
members of this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan, 
that commitment that we will maintain Saskatchewan as the 
best health care system in Canada. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I guess what’s hard to believe is 
when the nurses are demonstrating on the steps of the 
legislature for the first time in the history of the province that 
your commitment is worth anything. That’s what they’re telling 
us . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there were no nurses 
demonstrating any time when we were in government, on the 
steps of the legislature. They didn’t do it. They didn’t have to 
do it. But they are now. 
 
And you’ll say how bad it was in the 1970s and how good it is 
in 1982. But the problem with that argument, Mr. Minister, is 
that nobody believes it. And part of the problem with your 
government, and part of the problem with your election being 
postponed, is the fact that nobody believes you any more. 
 
And the other part of the problem is that you don’t give out any 
information. You’re a very secretive government. When it 
comes to travelling around the world and the cost of these trips, 
you don’t tell us. And even on what the federal government is 
planning to cut in health care, you won’t tell us what their 
proposals are. There’s a hidden agenda here until after the next 
election. That’s what it is. There’s a hidden agenda. We know 
what the cut-backs are, and you’re afraid to tell the people of 
the country and the people of the province until after the 
election. 
 
Because you know what happened in Manitoba when they came 
out. The people in the province of Manitoba told the Tories in 
Ottawa and in Manitoba: we don’t want cut-backs in health, and 
we don’t trust the Tories to go to Ottawa to fight for health care. 
That’s what they said. And I say to you that we want to know 
what the cut-backs are proposed for ’87 and ’88 by the 
Mulroney government. 
 
You know what’s being proposed; you’re hiding it. You have a 
hidden agenda till after the election, the same as you had when 
you were planning the April election; you were hiding the price 
of wheat. You had a little deal cooked with the federal 
government on the 81-cent drop in the price of grain. And you 
were going to try to hold that up until after an April election. 
And then when the April election got postponed, then you 
released it. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that here is again another issue 
that you’re trying to hide till after the election. This is the 
massive cut-back in health to the province by the federal PC 
government. And I say to you: what is your intention, and what 
is the federal government’s intentions for cut-backs in ’87 and 
’88? How much money are they telling you they want to take 
from us? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how a 
credible member of the opposition could stand in this House 
and talk about any type of cut-back in health care when the 
book in front of his face, the Estimates, the blue book in front of 
his face, the Estimates of the province of Saskatchewan, 
indicate that for the coming year there’s an 11. 6 per cent 
increase in health care spending in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And he can go back each year since we became 
government and he will see substantial increases to health care 
spending in this province. It’s well understood that if there’s a 
pillar of strength of the Devine government, it is in providing 
quality health care and in providing leadership in health care in 
Canada today. That’s understood, not only in Saskatchewan, 
that is understood across Canada. 
 
I meet with my counterparts in the Maritimes and in B.C. and 
they say to me, sometimes, how do you get as much money out 
of your government for health care? We have trouble. And I 
said, because it is a priority of our government. It was a priority 
when we fought the election in ’82, and it will be a priority 
whenever the next election comes, and the people of this 
province know full well that if there is one thing that the Devine 
government has done that is outstanding in leadership in 
Canada, it is maintaining and building and providing the best 
health care system in this dominion. That’s something I’m 
proud of, and my colleague are proud of it. And we will put our 
record against anyone else. 
 
So for these people to stand up and try and raise the spectre of 
cutting back in health care, of cuts, is simply untrue. There is no 
cut in health care by the Devine government, and that is the 
government of which I am the Health minister. Our record 
shows that has never happened, and I can indicate to you that I 
will fight with the tenacity that I have with the federal 
government or anyone else — opposition, NDP, Liberal, you 
line them up — I’ll take them all on and I’ll defend the health 
care of this province. 
 
(1130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Another little Rambo over there, another 
little cheer-leader that’s going to go out and attack the federal 
Tories. The federal Tories, yeah, he’s doing a great job. But 
interesting, we have doctors on strike in Prince Albert, we have 
nurses rallying on the steps of the legislature, and we have 
chiropractors who are saying that you’re running the health care 
system into the ground. And on top of that we have a federal 
government that’s talking about cutting $1.3 billion out of 
health — Tory government. 
 
Now you may be proud, sitting with your little crew of Tories 
here in this House. But I’ll tell you, you won’t go out and meet 
with the nurses, you won’t meet with the chiropractors, and 
doctors are telling us that you don’t consult with them. You 
send them speeches at great expense, but you won’t go talk to 
them. And I say to you, sir, that when you talk about defending 
health care, your record is less than believable. And you say the 
Estimates, that what you’re putting in the book, is record. Yes, 
and I  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

545 
 
 

know what you’re saying you’re going to spend. 
 
But your record on spending hasn’t turned out to be exactly 
accurate. And I go back to two years ago when your estimate on 
nursing home construction came in 40 per cent below what you 
told us in the House you were going to spend. You misled the 
House in estimates on how much you were going to spend, and 
you, sir, are not believable by the nurses — not by the nurses, 
not by the doctors, not by the chiropractors, and I’ll tell you, not 
by the 6,000 people who are waiting for a bed in Saskatoon. 
 
Now, I know what you’re trying to do by hiding these numbers 
on the health care cuts here. I know what you’re doing. This is 
the Mulroney government who said they had a sacred trust with 
social programs when they were elected in 1984. And the first 
thing they did was take on the senior citizens to see if they 
couldn’t cut their pensions — until the old seniors got together 
and told Brian Mulroney where to get off. And Grant Devine 
goes to Ottawa and what does he say, tough old . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. The member knows 
very well that in referring to members of the legislature you 
refer to them by their seat and not by their proper name. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, if I said Grant Devine I should have 
said Premier Devine. When Premier Devine went to Ottawa he 
said to Brian Mulroney, keep up the good work. That was at the 
same time the seniors were fighting to keep their pensions in the 
province. That’s what he said. That’s what he was saying. He 
won’t fight with Brian Mulroney. He wants to fight with Sheikh 
Yamani in Saudi Arabia, and people are laughing at the man. 
And he hasn’t shown up in the House here for four days. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I realize and appreciate that 
the discussion during estimates of Health can be wide-ranging, 
but they shall be adhered to regarding the health issue, not 
political issues that range afar from this country. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But what we’re talking about is in the 
area of health care, the Premier standing up for health care. And 
I’ll say that rather than fighting with oil ministers in Saudi 
Arabia that he should be in Ottawa fighting for health care, and 
fighting against these cuts. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, you will realize, even though you’re not 
running in the next election . . . And I can well understand why, 
with these kind of health cuts, why you’re not running in 
Saskatoon. With 6,000 people waiting for beds in Saskatoon, I 
wouldn’t run again in Saskatoon either, and I understand that 
and I appreciate you for that. 
 
And there are a number of other Saskatoon, or near Saskatoon 
people, from your party who will not run for the Conservative 
Party, and I appreciate your integrity in not being tied into these 
people who would cut the health care program, who would cut 
the pensions of senior citizens, and when it happens go to 
Ottawa and say to the Prime Minister, keep up the good work. 
Keep up the good work — that’s what he said to Brian 
Mulroney. Now this Minister of Health says he’s going to  

go to Ottawa. He’s going to go to Ottawa and fight to keep the 
health care funding that is proposed to be cut. 
 
Well, I tell you, sir, in the province of Saskatchewan you folks 
are not believable when you talk about going to Ottawa to fight 
Brian Mulroney’s cut-backs. Because the Premier has said to 
him, keep up the good work. That was after these proposals had 
come forward. After these proposals have come forward, 
Premier Devine went to Ottawa and told Brian Mulroney, keep 
up the good work. Now how much credibility will you have, sir, 
when you go to Ottawa and argue that these cuts shouldn’t take 
place, when your Premier has said to keep doing what you’re 
doing? That’s the problem. That’s the issue. 
 
And when Husky Oil and the provinces want to sign an 
agreement on an upgrader, and the federal government won’t 
sign it . . . Why should they? They know they have a Premier 
here who has already said, keep up the good work. They know 
they don’t have to do anything for this province. 
 
And what I’m saying to you very clearly is that we have a 
problem of credibility. And it’s really hard to stand up to the 
federal government when you’re down on our knees. It’s hard 
to kick the doors of the office of the Prime Minister when 
you’re down on your knees crawling around. 
 
And I remember the Premier saying over and over again: this 
close relationship between myself and Mulroney, I’m going to 
exploit it. He says, I’m going to exploit this close relationship 
Well I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan believe that Brian 
Mulroney is exploiting Grant Devine, or Premier Devine, and 
they’re having a difficult time believing that he is a strong man 
and that he’s going to fight with Ottawa, let alone go to Saudi 
Arabia and get the cartel set up again. They’re laughing at him. 
 
And all I would say to you, Mr. Minister . . . And I don’t know 
whether you have any control over the agenda any more, 
because the Premier and the Prime Minister have a deal made. 
And they have clearly told you, don’t release these health care 
cuts that are proposed. That’s why you’re not giving it out. 
That’s why you’re not giving it out. 
 
The people of the province in Manitoba knew what the 
cut-backs were, and they told them. But you, sir, are on a 
mission for the Premier not to tell the public what these 
cut-backs are going to be. And I understand what your role is, 
but I don’t think that’s good enough. I think the taxpayers of 
this province deserve to know what the proposal of Michael 
Wilson is. You’re being paid; both you and Michael Wilson are 
being paid. You’re servants of the people of this province. They 
want to know what the cut-backs are that are proposed by the 
federal government, and what are they for 1987-1988. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think there’s something 
that has to be cleared up, and that is that the member opposite 
does not always tell things exactly as they are. He indicated in 
the beginning of his statements, he said that I haven’t met with 
the chiropractors, I haven’t met with the doctors, and I haven’t 
met with the nurses. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

546 
 
 

Well let me tell you, let me tell you, nobody believes that 
member opposite, because I remember just a few months ago 
when the member tried to make an allegation — a completely 
false allegation about the funds of the PC party in Pioneer Trust 
— he was proven to be exactly false. That member falsified . . . 
He didn’t have the integrity to do the honest thing and resign. 
He wouldn’t do that. So for that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, order, order. You also know 
full well, Mr. Member, that when the Chairman or the Speaker 
is on their feet, that there’s supposed to be order in this House. 
Order. Order. 
 
I would advise the minister that he is ranging well off topic with 
the discussion regarding Pioneer Trust, and I would ask the 
minister to come back to estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we just wanted to establish the 
credibility of the member opposite, because he says that I 
haven’t met with doctors. I will tell you, Mr. Minister, I have 
met with doctors more times than any other Health minister in 
the history of Saskatchewan; more times in my tenure as 
Minister of Health than any other Health minister in the history 
of this province. 
 
We worked out Saskatoon Agreement II. We did it in 
consultation. We did it without any disruption to the medical 
care of this province; far different — far different from the 
savage battle that raged this province in 1962, that destroyed 
relationships even to this day because of the inability of the 
government of that day to deal in a professional and 
co-operative way with the doctors of this province. 
 
My officials last night met with the chiropractors. We’re, as a 
caucus, meeting with the chiropractors on the 16th of this 
month. I have met with the nurses at the same meeting the hon. 
member showed up at. I’ve indicated that both the SRNA and 
SUN have been in my office many occasions on meetings. So 
for him to stand in this Chamber and try and insinuate, try to 
give the allegation that this government does not meet with the 
professional bodies in health care, is simply untrue — simply 
untrue. 
 
Therefore, let us turn to the topic we’ve been discussing for a 
couple of minutes, and that is the EPF funding. Let me indicate 
to you once again: he says I’m on a mission. You bet I’m on a 
mission. The mission I’m on is to provide and protect the health 
care system of Saskatchewan. I don’t apologize for being on a 
mission on that. We are on a mission on that, and we will go to 
Ottawa with that mission and we will argue the best case we 
can for this province of Saskatchewan. We’re going to do it for 
this year. 
 
They might like to speculate: what is it going to be in ’88, ’89, 
or what is it going to be in ’90. I think the issue the people of 
Saskatchewan want decided is what is it going to be this year, 
and are we going to have health care protected. And I can say 
unequivocally with 11.6 per cent in the increase in the budget in 
this province, one-third of the budget of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, $1,200 for every man, woman, and child that’s 
out there today, we are protecting health care, and more 
important than that, we’re building on health care  

and we will continue to do just that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, you talked for a 
moment about Pioneer Trust and Tory money in Pioneer Trust. 
I think you pulled the money before it went down. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I’ve already indicated 
to the minister that the topic of Pioneer Trust is ranging wide 
afield. Therefore, in all consistency and fairness, I would have 
to rule that you also do not bring up the matter of Pioneer Trust. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Chairman allowed the minister to get 
through his statement on Pioneer Trust. But I understand how 
you will protect the integrity of the House, and I understand that 
that is his role. But I would have appreciated it if he would have 
given the same courtesy to the members of the opposition to 
respond to the full statement that was made by the minister. But 
understand why the minister does not want to talk about funds 
and where they were allocated before Pioneer Trust went down, 
and the day that they were pulled out, but will . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. You have heard my ruling regarding 
Pioneer Trust. It is not the issue of whether the minister wishes 
to speak about it or not. It is the ruling from the Chair that it 
shall not be discussed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The issue, of course, Mr. Chairman, is the 
funding cuts that are proposed by the federal government. This 
is the issue we have now been on for an hour. And here again I 
know full well that the minister’s staff have the information 
about the spending cut proposals by the federal government. 
They have handed it to the minister any number of times. 
They’ve advised him, I’m sure, before they came into the 
House; they’ve had meetings about it, because as he says he has 
had any number of meetings with officials from the federal 
government and consultation. They know what the cut-backs 
are going to be. He has admitted that the cuts proposed for 
’86-87 are 10 million. And this is . . . Nine million. Our number 
is 10 million. But he has admitted that the area of $10 million is 
being proposed to be cut by the federal government this year. 
 
But he refuses to give the numbers for subsequent years, and I 
understand why, because he would appreciate that these 
numbers did not come out before the provincial election. 
 
Now I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you can us if the 
numbers for ’87-88 are in the area of $18 million. You’ve told 
us that the number for this year, the proposed cut, is 9 million. 
Is the cut for ’87-88 in the area of $18 million that Michael 
Wilson is proposing to cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know if that’s the figure or not, 
because, as I say, we don’t know if 9 million is the figure for 
this year. It is suggested. We’re going down there, and perhaps 
we’ll be able to reduce that to 7 million, maybe to 5 million, I 
would hope we could get it down to zero. 
 
I’ve said that is the mission that I am on. My colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, is having those discussions with Mr.  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

547 
 
 

Wilson. I give, as an example, the Nielsen report where one 
federal minister said we should not go ahead with the Churchill 
line. And I showed the other one responsible for it put money 
into it. 
 
(1145) 
 
So any of these things may just be projections. And if they’re 
just projects, I don’t put a lot of faith in them. I am more 
inclined to deal with the negotiations right now and what is 
going on. And on the 28th of this month I will be sitting down 
with Jake Epp discussing these things. And I hope I’m 
successful. I may not be. I may not be successful, but I will give 
my best try for Saskatchewan, as will my colleague with Mike 
Wilson, to see if we can hammer out the best deal in EPF 
funding. That is the priority. That’s what we’re looking at this 
year. 
 
So to look at ’87 or ’88, ’89, ’90, why would one waste his time 
worrying about that when the issue at hand is the one that you 
want to deal with? That’s what we’re going to do. And as I’ve 
said, I’ve written to him on March 4th to let him know my 
concern. We’ve discussed it at the last Health ministers’ 
conference that I have attended as four years as the Health 
minister in this province. And we will be talking about it on the 
28th of April in Ottawa with the Hon. Jake Epp. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you waver on the number 
— whether it’s a proposal or a suggestion — the $9 million cut 
for this year. But I think we all know that it’s a hard bargaining 
position that the federal government has taken, that they want to 
cut $9 million in health care funding this year. Your number is 
9 million, ours is 10 million. And we won’t quibble over the 
million. The principle is, is the federal government has put 
forward a solid position that they would like to cut this money 
out of the provincial spending on health. 
 
What I’m wanting to know is why, if you are concerned about 
these cut-backs, you wouldn’t announce them to the public so 
the nurses who are concerned about it would rally behind you; 
so the doctors would rally behind you; so the 6,000 people who 
are waiting for hospital beds in Saskatoon would help you in 
your fight in Ottawa; so that the million people in the province 
would rally behind you to try to fight to save this health care 
that we have built in this province. 
 
You see, what the people out there will be saying is, the 
minister isn’t being totally truthful when he says he wants to 
fight in Ottawa. He’s got a deal. He wants to cover up these 
numbers till after the election. Otherwise you would blow this 
up. You would make this an issue. You would say, look, I want 
everyone to write the federal minister to say, look, go to hell 
when it comes to cutting health care costs to Saskatchewan. 
That’s what you’d be doing. 
 
And you would be rallying nurses — instead of fighting you on 
the steps of the legislature, get in there with them. Say, look, we 
don’t want these cuts from Ottawa. They would come with you. 
They would go with you to Ottawa. Doctors would go; hospital 
administrators would go; the people on waiting lists — and you 
could  

have a selection of them from across the province. Take them to 
the meeting rather than the Pringles and the Ron Barbers and 
the Tory hacks who you’ve been taking to meetings. Take some 
of the people who will be impacted on by these cut-backs in 
health. That’s what I’m asking you. 
 
And I’ll tell you that you could win this argument if you would 
fight, if you were serious. I don’t believe you are. I think you’re 
in the same boat as you were when the seniors were fighting to 
keep their pensions. You birds on the side said not one word to 
the federal government about pension cut-backs. You didn’t say 
a word. You didn’t only not fight the federal government, you 
didn’t even support the seniors in their fight to keep their 
pensions. 
 
So when you say here, we want to keep this quiet, and I’ll go to 
Ottawa with my political staff . . . And I’m not talking about the 
people in this room, but I’m talking about the ones Devine takes 
when he goes — Ron Barber and Staff Barootes and Pringle — 
when he goes to meetings, that you’re not being totally truthful 
with the public when you say you want to fight Ottawa. 
Otherwise you would be telling them, year by year by year, 
what the cut-backs are proposed by the federal government, and 
how you want every person in Saskatchewan to stand up and 
fight to keep medicare. You’re not doing that. You have a 
hidden agenda with the federal government that after the 
election you’re going to allow these cuts to take place. That’s 
what’s going on here and you know it. 
 
And I say to you, clearly, we have to have these numbers out. 
They’re an issue with the people. It’s not a point of whether 
you’re doing a better job in nurse staffing than we did. The 
issue is, it’s going to get much worse if these health care cuts 
come to Saskatchewan and to other provinces. 
 
And we can help in that fight. Whether we’re in the opposition 
or in government, we can help in this fight if the numbers are 
out there, what these people in Ottawa are proposing to cut out 
of the health budget here in the province. And everyone would 
give you a hand in this fight. 
 
But you’re being secretive. You’re hiding the numbers for one 
reason, and that is politics — pure politics. One, at the federal 
level you don’t want to embarrass the federal Tory party; and 
secondly, you don’t want these numbers to come out before a 
provincial election because you know the impact would be 
devastating if you had to go to the rural constituencies and tell 
them that there are major health cuts coming from the federal 
government that over the next five years are going to be 
massive. That’s why you’re hiding these numbers, and the 
people of the province know. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you’re not going to get away with hiding 
them. They may as well come clean now, because we’re going 
to stay here until these numbers are firmly implanted in the 
public’s mind. Because it will be devastating if this plan goes 
through. We won’t have a medicare system in Canada if this 
strategy of Michael Wilson and Brian Mulroney goes through. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

548 
 
 

The other point is, is we’re not confident that you and your 
political cronies are going to go do the fight. We’re not 
confident in that. And so what we want to do is lobby the 
people of Saskatchewan to fight with us. And I say to you: what 
is the cut-back for ’87-88 as proposed by Michael Wilson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again the member likes to 
try and mislead. He indicates some kind of a fight between the 
nurses and I. There is no fight. The nurses came the other day 
with some concerns. I’m having my staff analyse those. I want 
to make the record very straight and clear. We had a very 
amicable meeting. It was a good relationship that flowed at that 
meeting. So for this member to stand in this House and try and 
mislead . . . And that is all the member tries to do, to mislead, to 
try and spread allegations of things that just exactly aren’t true. 
 
Mr. Minister, he accuses me of taking political people with me. 
I have never taken political people with me on any venture to 
Ottawa at any time. The person that I’ll be taking with me is my 
deputy minister and perhaps one of my personal staff. We will 
be going there to put forward Saskatchewan’s case, as we 
always have. We will continue to do that. 
 
He talks about hidden agendas, cut-backs. Mr. Chairman, how 
evident does it have to be, when you see year after year after 
year, four successive budgets, in each case health care in 
Saskatchewan has been the major priority of expenditures by 
the Grant Devine government? Why would a person try and get 
up and try and mislead and try to scare or spook people that 
there may be cut-backs? I mean, if there was reduction in the 
budget, he might have some credibility. There’s no reduction. 
There is an 11.6 per cent increase. 
 
He’d like to raise the spectre of the federal government pulling 
the rug from under us. I don’t know what’s going to happen in 
the year 1989 or 1990. I don’t know what the economy of 
Canada is going to be like; you don’t know; and they sure as 
heck don’t know. 
 
Now I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the realm of the 
world that I deal in, the practical world of today and this year, is 
that there is some speculation or some indication that we may 
be $9 million short on EPF directed towards health — may be, 
may be, nothing definite, nothing in stone. 
 
I have said time and time again in this House, and I will say it 
again, that I will go to Ottawa and irregardless of who is the 
Minister of Health, regardless of who is the Minister of Health, 
I will fight for the best deal for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I happen to know the federal Minister of Health. I happen to 
admire the federal Minister of Health. I think he is the kind of 
person that really has the concerns of the Canadian people at 
heart . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh they can laugh. They 
can laugh about a man of the stature of Jake Epp. I like to see 
that. You mock and make fun of one of the most credible 
Canadians, Mr. Jake Epp. You go out in Steinbach, Manitoba, 
and you laugh about Jake Epp and see the reception you’ll get, 
where he has an  

outstanding record, an outstanding record as a man of integrity, 
as a community leader, as an excellent teacher, and as a very, 
very strong representative of the people of that part of 
Manitoba. 
 
I have been with Jake Epp and I can tell you . . . And I would 
challenge you to go to the gentleman who is the health care 
minister in Manitoba. If you have the courage, you go to the 
phone right now. You go and phone Larry Desjardins, your 
health care minister in Manitoba, the NDP, and you ask him his 
personal view of Jake Epp, and he will tell you exactly the same 
thing that I have said. He will tell you that Jake Epp is probably 
the best health care minister that we have had in Canada in 
some time. He will tell you that over the past four years while 
we have been colleagues, that the only time that the provinces 
have had an opportunity to put forth our case, and to be listened 
to, is under Jake Epp. 
 
So I take exception when I see people mocking and making fun 
of a man that I think Canada is proud of, and I am proud to call 
my friend, and I believe is an outstanding Health minister in 
this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So getting back to the EPF funding. I 
think it’s understandable, with that kind of a relationship 
between Jake Epp and I, that we will go down and we will talk 
reality. It may well be that Jake Epp will not have the latitude to 
reduce the figure. That is a possibility. It may well also be that 
Jake Epp might be able to be convinced to do it. It may also 
hold true that from those discussions that new directions, new 
programs, new types of ways of addressing health care needs in 
Canada will develop from that kind of dialogue. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, the chance of the latter taking place 
is a lot stronger with one of my colleagues or myself, somebody 
from this side of the House, talking to Jake Epp, than the 
constant lack of new ideas, ridicule that comes from the other 
side. 
 
Certainly, we will be doing all we can for EPF funding in this 
current year to strike the best deal for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Anything beyond there is not carved in stone. I 
don’t pay any credence to that. I believe in going step by step, 
year by year, defend, build, produce, and have and ensure the 
best health care services for the people of this province. That’s 
what they want; that’s what they tell me; and that’s what they’re 
getting. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we heard a five-minute 
ranting about Jake Epp. And the people who will be following 
the proceeding will know that no one had mentioned Jake Epp’s 
name up to that point, but I think it clearly indicates how this 
government operates. When you’re on thin ice, you set up a 
paper tiger, and then you attack it with great diligence. No one 
had mentioned Jake Epp in a derogatory or positive manner 
before the minister gets up and rants and raves for five minutes 
about someone insulting the federal minister. And I hadn’t 
heard anyone even mention his name. But it’s not unusual 
because their leader, Premier Grant Devine, does it all the time. 
When they have a problem in the oil industry he goes over to 
Saudi Arabia and attacks  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

549 
 
 

the sheikh over there. And here the Minister of Health, when 
he’s on thin ice about federal cut-backs by the federal Finance 
minister, he attacks the opposition for insulting Jake Epp who 
they hadn’t mentioned. 
 
I’ll tell you, this is one reason, Graham, that you’re not credible 
any more because you keep doing things like this. The people 
watching, and even people in the gallery, say what is the man 
talking about? What is he ranting and raving about Jake Epp? 
No one had mentioned him in the conversation. I say to you, 
let’s get back to the issue of the federal cut-backs that are being 
proposed. 
 
Now we all know that federal governments like five-year plans. 
We heard it from the former Finance minister last year on 
health, and education, and whatever the other four pillars were 
that they announced last year. Everyone else in the province has 
forgot as well. But you have a five-year plan in Health. I don’t 
know whether you believe it’s credible or not, but the federal 
government also has a five-year plan. The federal government 
also has a five-year plan of how they’re going to cut costs. 
 
Now you’re saying that your five-year plans are credible, but 
their five-year plans aren’t. They have a five-year plan, and the 
five-year plan includes massive cuts to health spending and 
grants to the provincial governments, or transfers to the 
provincial governments. This is their five-year plan. And you’re 
saying, well we don’t have to worry about it. Well if we don’t 
worry about this Tory five-year plan, why would we pay any 
attention to any of them? Which ones are credible? Are you 
saying that Michael Wilson’s five-year plan has no credibility; 
that his five-year plan to increase spending in one area, which is 
based on taking 1.3 billion out of health, that all of that doesn’t 
make any sense? 
 
(1200) 
 
The issue, Mr. Minister, is the fact that we have announced 
proposals to cut spending in health by the federal government. 
Your job is to fight those cut-backs, and part of it would 
logically be that you would include the public and the 
opposition in the discussion so they could give you support in 
Ottawa. I would like you to go back to the question of: what is 
the proposed cut for ’87-88 in health care spending from the 
federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member called me by my name I 
guess, which is really not kosher in here, but said something 
about credibility. I’ll just make one statement on that I would 
put my credibility against his any time, any place, anywhere in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But, Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate to 
you and to the members of this legislature some of the 
initiatives that we have taken in Saskatchewan that clearly 
indicate that Saskatchewan is a leader — not only in our own 
province do we have the best health care system, but is 
acknowledged by the federal government and other 
governments across this province. 
 
I want to indicate the non-smoking initiatives. We have  

led the nation in non-smoking initiatives designed for the young 
people of this province to the extent that the federal government 
have joined with us, and other governments have followed in, to 
come forward with the “breakthrough” generation. Those 
initiatives that have been developed across Canada were first 
developed here in the province of Saskatchewan and picked up 
by the federal government. 
 
A second one, that we discussed yesterday with the member 
from Quill Lakes, the alcohol education program — the 15 per 
cent life-style advertising, positive health life advertising — has 
been followed by the federal government adopting, almost in its 
entirely, the Saskatchewan plan. 
 
I put forth to the federal government three years ago an idea for 
an innovative plan called the seniors health plan. It fell on deaf 
ears at that time. The Liberals were in power. Each succeeding 
meeting I’ve had, I’ve talked about this and pushed for it. My 
understanding is that the federal government are looking at 
perhaps developing that initiative. 
 
Elimination of extra billing — we were one of the first 
provinces to grapple with that, and I suppose most recently, 
coming out of the consultation meetings that we discussed in 
our estimates the other day, the improvements to our home care 
program. We have probably — and other people say this — the 
best home care program in Canada. The National Council on 
Ageing have indicated that they believe the home care program 
— as it exists today, with many new initiatives, new funding 
arrangements whereby the areas with the greatest elderly 
population receive more funds, new initiatives for heavy-care 
patients so that they can stay in their homes — that that home 
care system is the best in Canada. 
 
So I think there are a few examples to show that Saskatchewan 
is not without considerable scope on the federal scene when it 
comes to health care. And I believe that a province with that 
record, a province who is acclaimed by other provinces as being 
the leader in health care provision, will certainly be able to take 
a leading role in discussing with the federal government the 
necessity of continued federal financing in the provision of 
health care. 
 
That’s what we’re going to do. That’s what I’m going to do on 
the 28th of April. So to speculate what may happen in the year 
’88, ’89, and ’90, would be nothing more than sheer speculation 
and, Mr. Chairman, I prefer to be more practical and deal with 
the matters at hand. I’ve outlined as succinctly as I can what we 
are going to be doing to address federal spending on health care 
in the coming year. Anything other than that is sheer 
speculation in years to come. My interest is for this year, and 
we’re going to go down there and we’re going to put forth the 
best possible fight we can for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you . . . You say, 
to give us any of the details from beyond ’86-87 would indeed 
be speculation. On what basis did you make your calculation to 
give us the figures for ’86-87? Is it on the proposal that we are 
referring to, the five-year proposal of cuts? And why then, if 
that is the case, why  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

550 
 
 

can’t you then in fact give the ’87-88 cut-backs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is what the Finance staff have 
indicated as a preliminary; and as I said, it’s not in stone. It is 
what they think might be the area for this coming year. They 
have, in their discussions with my officials, come up with the 
approximate figure of $9 million. That’s why I put out that 
figure. We’re dealing with this year. 
 
Finance and health are working diligently, as I have said before. 
Our officials — and very capable officials — are in contact 
with each other and working out a strategy and a game plan that 
is best for Saskatchewan also. My colleague, my fellow 
minister and I, will be articulating those stances in Ottawa. 
 
Now one may question whether the Hon. Gary Lane is going to 
be able to negotiate that. I said last night I believe there is no 
man other than the Premier of this province that can go down 
and articulate the financial case of this province any better. I 
feel from the activities that I have had, and with my relationship 
with Jake Epp, that I will be able to put forth the health issues 
of Saskatchewan in a very credible form. So we’re dealing with 
this year. We think it’s around $9 million, but you have our 
commitment that if we can make it lower, we sure as heck will. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, let’s start from the beginning. 
Would you indeed outline to the people of this province what in 
fact is the nature of the proposal that you’re looking at and 
studying — from the federal government, the details, the 
proposed cut-back? Would you outline the ingredients of the 
proposal that has been given to you to study and which you say 
you’ll e meeting with your federal counterpart? Would you 
outline the nature of the formula that they’re proposing for the 
massive cut-backs to health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I’ll just answer as I did in his first 
question, is that — and these are just estimates; there’s nothing 
carved in stone — $13 million approximately. That’s the 
indication. The portion at the present time that may impact on 
health is $9 million. That is the best estimate that our officials 
can come up with. 
 
We’re going to go there for this year to try and get the best deal. 
As I said before, if we can get that down to 11 million, we’ll be 
very happy. If we get it down lower we’ll even be more happy. 
But that is the estimated figure, and that’s what we’re dealing 
with. Anything beyond that is sheer speculation, and we are 
concerned to deal with this year. Those are the approximate 
figures. I gave them to the member some half-hour ago. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll ask you again, Mr. Minister: can you 
outline the nature of the proposal that you’re looking at, the 
federal proposal? Is it indeed . . . stretches over a five-year 
period to 1990-1991? That’s the question that I’m asking. And 
would you indicate the basis of their proposal detailing the 
reduction in the funding of the established program funding for 
health care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the member knows, as 
does any other member, and I suppose anyone else that follows 
budgets and so on, that the Wilson budget  

indicated a five-year reduction. We’re dealing with this year, 
and it is upon the basis of this year that we may be able to 
change their mind. We may be able to establish a better deal. 
That’s what we’re working with, and that’s what our officials 
have been instructed to do. And that’s what they’re putting their 
minds to. Next year we’ll work with the year after that, and 
subsequent years — year after year. 
 
But to say, what is it in 1990? How would I know? I don’t 
know what it is for this year. I’m going down to get the best 
deal I can for the province, and I assure you we will do that. So 
you know, for him to think there’s some master plan, from our 
point of view there’s a five-year statement by the Minister of 
finance. We’ll do all we can to try and talk him out of that, and 
we’re going down to try and establish the best deal for 
Saskatchewan for this year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We’ve established after almost an hour and a 
half, you agree now that it’s a five-year program . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, you did. You said the proposal of the 
federal government is a five-year proposal: it goes to 1990-91. 
You said it. And are you saying to us and to the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . You have to be doing one of two things: 
either you’re misleading the House by not providing the 
information of the proposed cuts using the same basis of 
establishing what the decrease will be in ’86-87. If you use 
exactly the same basis of determining what it is in ’86-87, and 
using the basis of the formula that is established by the federal 
government, are you saying that you cannot provide what it 
would be projected to be — the loss in income to the province 
of Saskatchewan in ’87-88? Are you saying that you’re going to 
go to Ottawa without even having calculated out the full impact 
of the proposal over the five years? Are you saying that — that 
you haven’t done that, and you don’t have those details? Is that 
what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I am saying again that we are 
concentrating on this year Michael Wilson made a statement in 
his budget about five years. We don’t know what each year 
would come down at. 
 
We’re concerned for this year. This is the year we’re living in. 
This is the year we’re financing health care, and a lot will 
depend on how we make out in the negotiations in this year. We 
may be able to, as provinces, with Saskatchewan probably 
taking the lead, indicate to the federal Minister of Finance and 
to the Minister of Health that the project of the statement that he 
said in his budget is not acceptable to Canadians. We may be 
able to convince him of that. 
 
So we’re going there for this year to see if we can get the $13 
million reduced. That’s our agenda. That’s what we’re working 
on. Anything further than that, we haven’t put our minds to it, 
because we believe on dealing with things year by year, and 
certainly the priority is to get the best deal for Saskatchewan 
this year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All I can say, Mr. Minister: that if you’re 
going, you better go and you better deal with only one year — 
because you won’t be around if you call an election, I’ll tell you 
that. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1986 

551 
 
 

Mr. Minister, what you’re doing here is a total cover-up for the 
convenience of the Tory party — the provincial Tories here and 
also for the federal Tories. What is really happening, Mr. 
Minister . . . And I’ll tell you, the Premier of Manitoba stood up 
for his province. He told everybody in the province what was 
happening in the way of cut-backs in health care in the province 
of Manitoba. He spoke to the people of that province, and they 
supported him on it. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not fair that you stand in this House and not 
provide information which you have. What you are doing is 
trying to deceive the public until you get by the next election. 
Because I’ll tell you here, you are not going to be able to 
continue to provide the health care that the people of 
Saskatchewan want on a provincial income alone because you 
already have run up a $200 billion deficit. And you’re charging 
up services to the people. You aren’t paying for them. And now 
you’re standing by and watching the federal government cut 
back on funding. 
 
(1215) 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, the people of this province 
won’t allow you to destroy medicare and hospitalization. That 
is sacred. And I’ll tell you, the party that they say will defend it 
is the New Democrats, not Tories. Watch any poll. Find out 
who the people of Saskatchewan trust when it comes to health 
care and medicare. It’s the New Democrats, not Tories. And I’ll 
tell you; we’ll take you on, if you want to, on this issue here of 
not standing up while the Tories in Ottawa are cutting 
massively for the support of health care. 
 
Do you realize, Mr. Minister, that the total amount of transfer 
payments established program funding to this province, is $466 
million — $466 million? And what I want to ask you: out of 
that $466 million that you’re getting in transfer payments this 
year, I ask you what amount of that is designated by the federal 
government towards health care financing. 
 
I want to illustrate to you that it’s a major contribution to 
Saskatchewan health care and the quality of health care that we 
have been providing, and you are not going to defend it. And I 
submit to you, if you allow the Tories in Ottawa to cut their 
basic funding, that the quality of health care cannot be sustained 
totally by the province in view of the massive debt that you 
have run up here in this province — $2 billion in debt. Interest 
alone on the debt that you have created is more than what 
medicare costs in this province — to pay the interest alone. 
Interest on our accumulated debt in this province is $200 
million. That’s more than medicare. 
 
And he is standing up saying that he’s going to defend the 
financing of programs when he has a debt that he cannot even 
sustain the programs that are in existence. And he won’t go to 
Ottawa and fight for the continuation of good health care across 
this province. He’s going to duck and hide the facts, hopefully 
getting by the next election. That’s what he’s trying to do. 
 
There’s no doubt about it, it’s in the budget. The plan is there. 
There’s going to be a massive cut by the federal  

government. Hundreds of millions of dollars are going to be cut 
from the support of the established program funding, which is 
the health and secondary education. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know how massive the cut is going to be. But 
you’re hiding it from the public. You know you can’t sustain 
the health care. You’re on the ropes because of your fiscal 
mismanagement of this province. Two billion dollars in debt — 
$200 million in interest alone. And he’s standing up saying he’s 
going to be able to continue to maintain a health program 
without massive taxes or without deterrent fees. 
 
There’s no possible way, Mr. Chairman, that it’s possible for 
this minister to guarantee to the people of this province a 
continuation of high standard health care in view of the fiscal 
mismanagement of this province. And if he doesn’t get 
consistence from the federal government I will warn the people 
of this province to watch for two things: to watch for a premium 
on health care; to watch for deterrent fees after the next 
election. It cannot, it cannot be sustained under the system. 
 
And I’ll tell you what they’re doing here. Four hundred and 
sixty-six million dollars is the amount in established program 
funding. And this minister here is going to stand by and allow 
our health care to be eroded by Wilson and Mulroney. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, there were a lot of sacred trust that were 
floating around during that last federal — indeed in the last 
provincial. But I’ll tell you, no one believes the Tories’ sacred 
trust because you broke the sacred trust that you gave to senior 
citizens in Ottawa when you went about de-indexing their old 
age security. And I’ll tell you what is more. You broke your 
trust . . . The Tories are breaking the trust in bringing in a 
massive cut in financing, federal financing of health and 
secondary education. 
 
I ask you a question, Mr. Minister: do you believe that to have a 
well-funded and sound health care program that a continuation 
of a federal commitment is an essential ingredient? 
 
I say that there’s going to be a massive erosion of the health 
care across this nation unless you have a commitment for 
increased funding by the federal government I ask you: from a 
philosophical basis, do you believe that in order to provide for 
Canada a high quality health care system, that it’s absolutely 
essential that you have a commitment by the federal 
government, and a continuing and an increasing commitment to 
funding of health care across the nation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I listened to the 
member opposite and, you know, they haven’t changed. They 
haven’t changed at all. The same doom and gloom philosophy 
that has prevailed in that party for the last eight years, doom and 
gloom and everything’s going to get worse and Canada’s going 
to hell in a hand basket — that’s his belief. 
 
Nobody supports the initiatives of the federal government. It 
seems strange that 41 per cent of the people in the latest polls 
support the federal government. But no, Mr. Doom and Gloom 
has to get up and try new  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

552 
 
 

scare tactics, say, you’re going to put on deterrent fees, things 
of this nature. That’s what he said — deterrent fees and costs 
and going to make health care disappear from this scene. 
 
He says: can you give us a guarantee that health care will 
continue in this province? I will point back to the record of the 
Devine government in health care. I will go back to successive 
increases in budget, far beyond any other province, and this 
year leading the nation at 11.6 per cent. I will go back to the 
construction of 1,600 nursing home beds. I will go back to a 
$300 million capital health project putting major additions on 
the acute care hospitals of this province. I will go back to $100 
million patient care improvement fund for new staffing and new 
technologies. I will go back to the purchase of six CAT scans, 
by barter — making eminent common sense — getting goods 
that we have in our province that are not selling and trading 
them for the best up-to-date technology in the world, coming 
into Saskatchewan, into our base hospitals, which will put our 
ratio of CAT scans above anyone in Canada. 
 
But let me tell you one other thing. He talks about deterrent 
fees. I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan a fact that may have been forgotten. 
 
When I came in as Health minister of this province, under the 
MCIC Act, The Medical Care Insurance Act; The Medical Care 
Insurance Act under the Blakeney government that were in here 
for 11 years and failed to eliminate extra billing . . . They didn’t 
have the guts to eliminate extra billing, not the moral courage. 
They talked out of one side of their mouths. 
 
They’re the government that want to invite the Morgentaler 
free-standing abortion clinics into this province. That’s the 
record of the Blakeney government. Free-standing abortion 
clinics, afraid to eliminate extra billing, and on the books of this 
province there was the capability, on the books of this province, 
up till 1984 was the legislation — listen to this, Mr. Chairman: 
legislation existed in this province up until 1984 . . . You can 
laugh because you don’t know about this. You didn’t even pay 
attention to what went on in this legislature. You can laugh 
about this but here was the legislation of the NDP. 
 
Legislation under The Medical Care Insurance Act that 
permitted the use of premiums and user fees in this province. 
That legislation was there. In 1984 . . . Laugh; laugh if you 
want. Check the records if you so wish. Mr. Chairman, the 
changes to The Medical Care Insurance Act in 1985 brought in 
by the Devine government was to change that legislation so that 
user fees and premiums cannot be instituted in Saskatchewan. 
That was the change. They had legislation. Talk about a hidden 
agenda. They had legislation allowing the institution of 
premiums and user fees at any time. 
 
Under the existing legislation of Saskatchewan, that can’t be 
done. Who then is protecting health care? Which government is 
standing up and saying, we will not put in user fees or 
premiums? The member opposite again tries to bring about the 
doom and gloom. No ideas — they haven’t changed one bit. Let 
me tell you that. They didn’t  

have the guts to eliminate that legislation because they had a 
hidden agenda that they would have brought in. 
 
Mark my words, had they become government after the election 
in 1982 — thank goodness they didn’t — I believe that hidden 
agenda was there to bring in premiums and to bring in user fees. 
That was the Blakeney government hidden agenda. We found 
that, and we said, that won’t happen, and we took it off the 
legislation of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked the minister a question. I indicated to 
you, Mr. Minister, that in the estimates, some $466 million are 
provided by the federal government to Saskatchewan under 
EPF. I asked you: do you believe that the continuing 
commitment of funding from the federal government is 
absolutely necessary to provide a high quality health care 
system to Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the EPF funding is used to 
provide health care. It certainly is an assistance. And as I have 
said time and time again, we want it to continue. We’re going to 
go down there to negotiate the best deal we possibly can. 
 
No one disputes the fact that the federal government has a 
commitment to health care. Sure, there may be some changes in 
the wind on that. There may be new programs, as the Nielsen 
report indicates. There may be new programs that will benefit 
many people in Saskatchewan. I’m willing to sit down and 
discuss those things. 
 
But I’ll tell you that my guide-line in discussing them will be 
just simply this: that I will be there fighting for the best deal for 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the mandate that was 
handed to our government. That’s the mandate that the Premier 
of the province gave to me, to try and safeguard and to build 
and develop the best health care system in Canada. I believe we 
have done that, and certainly we will be down there defending it 
and trying to get every available dollar we can to provide that 
system in the future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You have indicated that federal funding is 
important. I say it is vitally important. I say that it’s absolutely 
necessary. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, what is happening, and the 
proposal is, that the federal government is going to cut back. 
That’s the proposal, for them to cut back in a massive way the 
funding of health care across Canada. So what I ask you, Mr. 
Minister: can you give us the details, out of the $466 million 
estimated in EPF funding, can you indicate what amount of that 
is allocated towards the payment of providing health care in 
Saskatchewan. Some of it is post-secondary education and some 
of it goes to health care. Can you give me the percentages of the 
apportionment used in the formula by the federal government, 
and can you give me an estimated amount, out of that $466 
billion, the amount that you in fact will be using towards 
supporting the health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is rather interesting, Mr.  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

553 
 
 

Chairman. We’ve spent a good time this morning discussing 
EPF funding when it first came in. I just want to put something 
straight for the record so that we get the historical perspective 
of how this all came about. I think it would be interesting; 
we’ve spent a lot of time discussing it. 
 
It is interesting to know that prior to 1977, prior to 1977 the 
method of funding health care by the federal government to the 
provincial government was 50-50. It was 50-50. You added up 
your costs for doctors and for hospitals. That was it. You 
submitted it to the federal government and it was shared 50-50. 
That was up until 1977. 
 
But in 1977, EPF funding came in. The member, the now sitting 
member for Regina North East was the minister of Finance at 
that time . . . the minister of Health in 1977 when that came in. 
And continually since that change in 1977, where the 
commitment by the federal and the provincial was 50-50 each, 
it has declined progressively down to where it is about 40 per 
cent by the federal government now. So to see the opposition 
stand here and make gross protestation about the EPF funding, 
when actually they were the government in power when the 
change in rules came in between the federal government and 
them. 
 
(1230) 
 
So there, I think is a point that can be well taken, is that if they 
were so concerned, why didn’t their Health minister at the time, 
and their finance minister, put up a good fight with their bed 
partners, the Trudeau Liberals, and try and avoid the whole 
change to EPF? The question of the 466 million that the 
member was asking, my best estimate is that about 186 million 
is allocated to health this year. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question 
for the minister. In listening to the minister in his tirade about 
what this government is doing for health services in this 
province, Mr. Minister, he talks about facts. Well, Mr. Minister, 
the fact is that this province now has a $2 billion debt — that is 
the fact — over four years, which it didn’t have before. The fact 
is also that we are paying $200 million a year to service that 
debt. That, Mr. Minister, is a fact. We’re not preaching doom 
and gloom; we are saying that this government is irresponsible 
in what they have been doing for four years. 
 
And Mr. Minister, the federal government in their budget — 
Prime Minister Mulroney in their budget — said that they have 
to try to get their deficit under control, and in getting that deficit 
under control they were going to be making some cuts in 
various areas. One of those areas that they propose to make 
some cuts in was in health care or the EPF funding. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is what they proposed. That is what they 
proposed, Mr. Minister. Other provinces know it; you know it. 
You said yourself that you could be having a shortfall of about 
$13 million. You are going to go and negotiate. You are going 
to negotiate and you are going to hope that the federal 
government will increase their funding to Saskatchewan, and 
that somehow it’ll only be maybe $9 million. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, there is no question that there is going to be 
a shortfall here and that the federal government is making cuts 
to Saskatchewan and they run their budget and their proposal on 
a five-year proposed plan for Canada, the same as your 
government is doing in your budget. You are planning 
everything on a five-year program. Well, Mr. Minister, you are 
saying that somehow that five-year plan that the federal 
government is proposing doesn’t mean anything in their budget; 
that you are going to go there and they are going to change their 
mind, and there won’t be any cuts. You are going to convince 
them to change their mind, and you are going to tell them that 
what they said in their budget is really not important. 
 
And if you are saying that, Mr. Minister, you are also saying to 
the people of Saskatchewan that your five-year proposals don’t 
mean anything. They should not be believed because Tory 
governments can change their minds at any time. That is what 
you are trying to tell the people, Mr. Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I think it’s quite obvious that you are trying 
to keep some information away from the people of 
Saskatchewan. There is going to be a cut-back in health funding 
from the federal government. They have told you what it is, 
what’s in their proposal, and I’m sure that you have looked at it 
because you said yourself, you’re looking at $9 million, but you 
are going to try to convince the federal government to change 
their mind on it. 
 
For ’86-87 you say there’s going to be a $ 9 million cut. Well, 
Mr. Minister, all we are asking you to do is tell us what, under 
that five-year proposal that the federal government is making, 
what impact that would have on health care funding for 
Saskatchewan. That’s all we are asking. And surely you have 
looked at it for ’86-87, ’87-88, and all the way up to ’90 and 
’91. You must have looked at what those cost cuts would be and 
what impact it would have on health services for Saskatchewan. 
 
And all we are asking you to do is tell us what impact it would 
have on health care services. And if you told us that the federal 
cuts are going to create some problems for us down the road, 
then you would get people behind you in demanding from the 
federal government that they not make those cuts in the area of 
health care. But, Mr. Minister, you are not telling us that. You 
don’t want to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the federal 
government is preparing to make cuts in health care, and that if 
they go through with their proposal, then what that’s going to 
mean is that the people of Saskatchewan are eventually going to 
be faced, if a Tory government is elected in Saskatchewan, they 
are going to be faced with deterrent fees, or they are going to be 
faced with user fees. The people of Saskatchewan are going to 
have to pick up that shortfall. That, Mr. Minister, is what is 
going to happen with the federal government’s proposal. 
 
So why don’t’ you just tell us what those numbers are, what 
impact it’s going to have on health care funding in 
Saskatchewan. And then if you did come forward with all of 
those figures, you would have some people from Saskatchewan 
supporting you. You would have us supporting you in going to 
the federal government and  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

554 
 
 

saying that we can’t afford those cuts in health care, that if they 
have to make cuts, they should be making them elsewhere and 
not in health care for the people of this country. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, why don’t you just tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what those cuts are going to be — you’ve told us 
that they’re going to be in ’86-87 — what they’re going to be in 
future years, or what you anticipate they may be in future years 
if that federal program continues as they have proposed it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, we’re dealing 
with this year. I’ve given an indication of what they would be 
for this year. I have no idea, until this year is decided, what 
subsequent years will be. It may well be, as I said before, we 
can have this reduced. I don’t know if we can or not. I can tell 
you we’re going to try our best. But to be speculating what the 
year 1990 would be, there’s a lot of factors in this country that 
can change within three or four years. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Chairman, we, the members of my staff, the 
members of the Finance staff, are working together to carve out 
the best deal for Saskatchewan for this year. And that’s where 
our emphasis is focused. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s fine to talk about this 
year, and you have suggested what it possibly could be for this 
year, and you are going to try and negotiate with Ottawa to 
change that. But, Mr. Minister, if you know what it is for this 
year, I’m very certain that you and your staff — if not you, at 
least your staff — your department has looked at what the 
impact may be for the next five years, as proposed by the 
federal government. Surely they have looked at that, and I don’t 
believe you if you say that they don’t, or they haven’t looked at 
it. I’m sure they must have put numbers together as to what the 
impact may be in future years, Mr. Minister. 
 
And all we are saying is, tell us what that could be, what those 
numbers would be in future years. And even if it does change in 
the future, if you can convince the federal government to 
change their mind, then those numbers will be irrelevant. But 
what we should be telling the people of Saskatchewan is that 
there is a crisis; there is a problem shaping up that it could be a 
problem this year, and it could be a bigger problem next year, 
and it could be an even larger problem two years from today in 
the services that we provide in health care. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, don’t tell me that your people or your 
department is not looking at what impact those cuts would have 
in that five-year proposal that the federal government made. 
And just tell us what it is and what could be happening to our 
health care system if that funding is cut the way the federal 
government proposes. Just tell us that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, once again, very simply 
and very slowly. We do not know exactly what it is for this 
year. We believe it may be in the neighbourhood of 13 million 
EPF total. Approximately 9 million of that will be for health. 
 
But until we go down, and until we sit down and talk  

eyeball-to-eyeball, man-to-man, from our province and other 
provinces in Canada, who is to know what the first year is? 
How would I be able to say with any degree of certainty what 
the second or the third year would be, or if there is going to be a 
second or a third year, until we establish exactly what it is for 
the first year? 
 
I’ve told the members over and over again, and I’ll tell you 
again. I will go there. My colleague will go there. We will put 
forth the best case that we possibly can for Saskatchewan. It 
may be I come back with less than $9 million. It may be that it 
is $9 million. But until that exercise has been gone through — 
and I have written to the Minister of Health to ask for that type 
of meeting — until that has taken place, to try and guess what 
may happen in two years, in three years, or in four years, I 
believe is nothing but sheer speculation, hypothetical. It may 
not happen at all. 
 
So I don’t use the abilities of my staff to be dreaming about 
something that may not happen. I tell them: you sit down, and 
you work with the situation today, and you carve out the best 
deal for Saskatchewan. And I can tell you that that’s what 
they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have all had 
to suffer through this sanctimonious NDP rhetoric for the last 
hour and a half in this legislature and certainly across this land. 
I’ve just had an opportunity to examine the ’82 budget, just for 
the information of the House and the information of the 
minister. And it does relate to what’s happening today. 
 
In 1982, the NDP, after legislating hospital workers back to 
work, tried to buy an election in Saskatchewan through the 
actual expenditures in health care, which were increased from 
524 in ’80-81 to 604 million in ’81-82. At that time they didn’t 
give us in their blue documents information on actual 
expenditures in prior years. 
 
I look at this year’s budget document. We’re debating Health at 
the present time. We have another election year increase by 
another government, the Tory government of the day, and the 
election year increase, as the minister just enunciated a few 
moments ago, is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 11 per 
cent. 
 
Since 1982 I must suggest that the Tories have increased 
budgetary expenditures in Health by close to twofold. I don’t 
think that can be supported, certainly, with expenditures on 
people who are working at the bedside, or nurses and staff 
income. It reflects more so I think on expansion on capital 
expenditures within the health field as well as expenditures on 
things like typewriters and computers for hospitals, and other 
hardware that certainly is required from time to time for 
diagnostic therapy and for the upgrading of technology within 
the hospital setting. 
 
But I do ask, and I believe a lot of taxpayers in our province 
wonder how and why the budget in Health has doubled since 
1982. And I realize when the Conservatives took power in 1982 
it was demonstrated very aptly that under the leadership of the 
NDP that we  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

555 
 
 

stood in Saskatchewan number eight in health care in Canada. 
The minister now claims that we’re number one, based purely 
and simply, I believe, on expenditures. We’ve bought ourselves 
seven places in the horse race for health care in Canada. 
 
(1245) 
 
I suggest to the minister that we have gone from bad to as bad 
in 1982 with response to bedside health care in Saskatchewan. 
At the Regina General Hospital, admissions spend up to three 
and four days in stretchers waiting for hospital beds. We 
received information yesterday that in many hospitals across the 
province there are waiting lists, and certainly Regina is no 
exception. Saskatoon is the worst, and we have waiting lists 
approaching 6,000 patients in Saskatoon. So the system is under 
a great deal of pressure. 
 
And there isn’t any question that, I suppose, additional 
expenditures are required. But to suggest that doubling our 
health care budget since 1982 has addressed all those problems 
is only political rhetoric and comes at a time just before an 
election campaign, one that you were in desperate need of 
collecting some goodies that people can at least support your 
government for. 
 
I ask you, sir, to explain how you have anticipated that that 
doubling of expenditure has, in fact addressed the health care 
needs of this province when, in fact, nurses across the province, 
through their own union, and at several meetings that I 
attended, are indicating that staffing problems are down from 
the Canadian average by at least 22 per cent by their estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly you’re correct, and I’m glad 
you realize that we have doubled the expenditure on health care 
in the time that we have been in government — a 47 per cent 
increase over other budgets. 
 
You mentioned why I say that we’re number one in health, and 
is it totally on expenditure. Well expenditure is one aspect, but 
certainly the scope of our program, the scope of the program in 
Saskatchewan exceeds, I think, any other province. I mean, 
there are a number . . . There are other plans that don’t have the 
chiropody programs, things of this nature. There are other 
systems that don’t have the continuing care within Health. 
There are other areas that don’t have the ambulance system 
within Health. 
 
So if you look at the total scope of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well as the funding, I think you would — the 
per capital funding — I think you would see the basis why I say 
that we are a leader in health care. 
 
As well as you . . . I don’t know if you were here when I read 
out some of the federal initiatives — and I understand that you 
have to be in your office getting some research done, so I don’t 
say this in any derogatory way to you — but I don’t know if 
you were here when I read out some of the initiatives that have 
been accepted federally because of Saskatchewan’s lead. And 
I’ll just run through them for you. 
 
Number one is our smoking initiatives. We have led the  

nation in non-smoking initiatives. And the federal government, 
with all the other provinces, have come out with the Break Free 
campaign. But Saskatchewan was the initiator of that. I tell you 
that sincerely. 
 
In the alcohol advertising, yesterday I think you were in the 
House when you heard me mention that the federal Minister of 
Health is using the Saskatchewan model of the 15 per cent 
positive type of ads that have to be there, and approaching the 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) to have that enforced across Canada. So that’s 
another one where Saskatchewan has led the way. 
 
Since becoming the Health minister, at each meeting I have 
asked the federal government to look at an innovative idea of 
what I call a seniors’ health fund. It fell on deaf ears with 
Madame Begin, but with Mr. Epp I think it is being considered. 
And certainly with the additions we’ve made to home care just 
the other day, the national council on ageing said that 
Saskatchewan has the best home care system in Canada — as 
well as we were one of the first provinces to eliminate the 
extra-billing. 
 
So I think, looking at that, you would see that . . . You know, 
one can quibble. I suppose you can say we’re second or 
somebody’s better, but I believe, and maybe I’m a bit biased, 
that we do have the best health care system in the nation. 
 
You asked about the General Hospital. I’m concerned about 
that. I know that in Saskatchewan there are two hospitals where 
the emergency . . . the demands of the emergency wards are far 
in excess of others. That happens to be the General in Regina 
and St. Paul’s in Saskatoon. Some of that comes from the . . . 
because they’re down-town city core hospitals. And I won’t go 
into a detailed explanation. I know you understand that and you 
know the factors that lead to them having more demand on their 
emergency services. 
 
I’m happy to say, with the regeneration of the General that is 
going on how, that some of this pressure, I hope to see that it is 
totally alleviated in the future. So I think we are doing things to 
address some of the things that I believe you have sincerely 
stood here and indicated to me. And I thank you for your 
comments. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Just one further question on the estimates for 
’85-86. I believe, sir, you must know the figures, the actual 
figures for Health expenditures for ’85-86. In this document we 
only have the estimated figures and based on your estimated 
increase for ’86-87, I would ask what the actual figures, the 
expenditures for the year ending March 31, 1986 for Health 
were; and based on that I would like to know if there were any 
additional expenditures in ’85-86 that haven’t been reported in 
this document. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate to me that at the 
time of publication not all the expenditures were in. There’s a 
special warrant of about 17 million. So I would take the 
estimated ’85-86 expenditure, add 17 million and you’d be 
very, very close. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Your actual expenditures for the year  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

556 
 
 

past, you’re saying, were somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
1.65 billion. And that’s what you based your estimates for 
’86-87 on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figure that my officials come up with 
is approximately 1.1 billion in ’85-86. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — So in fact your increase for ’86-87, as 
estimated, isn’t the 11 per cent you claim but is closer it looks 
like to 1 per cent rather than 11 per cent as this budget 
document would indicate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — To correctly assess that, you have to go to 
the back page of the document where it has the new property 
management Crown and you see 75 million in there for Health. 
You wrap that in also into your figure of the total increased 
expenditure. The capital is not in the estimates for Health, it’s 
under the property management Crown. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — But that would be an expenditure on the 
expenditure side, you’re saying, and it would be added to this 
figure of the Health estimates, which is basically part of the 
sophistry of this whole document, sir. You’ve removed the 
expenditures for health care, for capital expenditures in health 
care, from the actual deficit for ’86-87. And you’ve done that 
throughout the document. 
 
Also I notice — and I would like an answer to this question — 
we could get into it in the step by step, but your grant to the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission . . . You 
mentioned earlier your example in alcohol advertising is being 
used across the country. You have a very slight increase in 
budgeting for the grant to the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission. On the other hand, you’re reporting an 
increase of about 91 million to the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. 
And I wonder why you haven’t accordingly increased the grant 
to the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, 
because the problem is a huge problem out there and does 
require as much funding as can possibly be allocated from the 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Normally SADAC got 7.5 per cent 
increase and the alcohol advertising costs are not shown under 
SADAC — that’s the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission — but under the health communication subvote of 
the Health department, if you follow that. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — So you’re saying the actual figure for the 
commitment to programs of that nature is much greater than 
indicated in your Health budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m saying that the commitment is more 
than what the SADAC budget reflects. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would just like to indicate, we’ve been 
discussing briefly the EPF financing and how it’s flowing into 
this province. I would like to suggest to you that under the NDP 
administration in 1982, 55 million did come in under that 
program, and this year it’s indicated the increase will be 18 
million, so that the funds coming from Ottawa have, in fact, 
tapered off. 
 
I think the question was asked earlier with respect to  

projected loss of income from that source. I’m asking you, sir: 
has this been consistent through your administration and do you 
expect it to continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s been quite standard over the past four 
years; the EPF funding has been quite standard, they tell me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to . . . I got out of 
the discussion here for a few moments, but I want to go back to 
the issue we were raising when I left off, and that is the major 
cut-backs in health funding by the federal government. 
 
Now what we have been talking about, very clearly, is the 
amount of money that is being transferred from the federal 
government, through taxpayers from across Canada, which 
comes back through EPF to the province for health care 
funding. I wonder . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve been questioning all morning. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we’ve been questioning all morning, 
and for the member from Regina Victoria, we’re going to keep 
questioning because funding for health care is very important. 
And I would say, Mr. Chairman, that the member from 
Victoria, Regina Victoria, can get up and ask questions as well 
if he likes. He can get up. 
 
I can remember there was a time when members of our 
government got up and asked ministers questions. And I know 
why the member won’t, is because he chooses to chatter from 
the seat. 
 
But I want to ask the minister, and I know you’ve had some 
time to talk to your advisors who are there: what will the 
cut-backs be that are proposed if they go through, if you lose 
your argument as other ministers have done in dealing with the 
federal government? What would they be for 1987-88? You 
have told us that the proposal for 1986-87 is a cut of $9 million. 
Our numbers say $10 million, but for now we’ll accept the $9 
million cut you’re talking about. What is proposed for next 
year? Certainly you’re now at the point where you’re making 
plans for next year, and you will have to have your people 
dealing with the five-year plan of the federal government in the 
event that it is forced on to us. What is the cut planned for 
’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the only hard figures we have is the 
increase from 441 million to $466 million. We’re working 
within the confines of those figures for this year. I’ve indicated 
I’m going to Ottawa to talk about the total 9 million figure. 
We’re going to put forth our best argument, but anything 
beyond that would only be speculation. I have no figures 
worked out and I haven’t instructed my department to look at 
that. We’re working out a game plan for this year, and I hope it 
will be a very successful one. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask the minister whether he 
thinks it would help his cause in the fight if he would make 
public what the proposed cut-backs are. Do you think that it 
would be a good strategy to make public what they’re 
proposing in terms of cut-backs, and get behind  
  



 
April 11, 1986 

557 
 
 

you the nurses and the doctors and the public? Is that a 
reasonable proposal, or do you reject that out of hand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — How would I put forth a proposal when 
we don’t know what it is? We know what we’re dealing with 
this year. I’m going there as the Minister of Health for 
Saskatchewan. I believe that there are nurses and doctors and 
people out there that have faith that I will strike the best deal I 
possibly can for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So certainly I believe that that support is there, and I’m going 
down as the minister. Part of the duties of this office is to carve 
out the best deal possible for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask the minister: are you trying 
to lead us to believe that the federal government has not laid out 
to you what the proposed cut-backs will be over the next five 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’m saying the same thing as I did in 
regard to the Nielsen report. The Nielsen report lays out a 
number of initiatives, a number of things that maybe could take 
place. Those are only suggestions. 
 
What I’m dealing with is the actual thing that is happening this 
year. I’ve said time and time again, and I will say it over and 
over, as many times as they want to ask their repetitive 
question, is that I’m going down there to carve out the best deal 
I possibly can for the people of Saskatchewan, so that we will 
have as many funds as possible to provide the valued health 
care that is appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, the question here is: one 
minute you say you don’t know what the proposal of cut-backs 
is; the next minute you say you do know but you’re not going to 
tell us because you don’t believe the proposal. Is there a 
proposal for cut-backs for the next five years, or isn’t there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
heard the federal minister give his budget the same as anyone 
else in here. But what I said: I am not even sure that the $9 
million figure is hard and fast. I hope it isn’t. I’m going down 
there to use every ability that I have to try and talk them out of 
that. I don’t’ know if I’ll be successful. 
 
But for the members opposite to think that — when we don’t 
know hard and fast if the 9 million is a hard and fast figure — 
what it will be three years hence, how would one know? You 
deal with one year and you see what you get in that year and 
you deal with another year and another year and another year. I 
don’t know what the conditions in Canada will be four years 
hence, and I’m sure they don’t know. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Memorandum of Agreement
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act
	Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Education Act
	Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of Education Act, 1983

