


















































April 17, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 17, 1986 
 
 

655 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I wish to present the 
14th report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 

Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial 
Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 17, An Act to amend 
The Land Titles Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in committee of the whole on the said 
Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Builders’ Lien Act 
 

Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial 
Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 18, An Act to amend 
The Builders’ Lien Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in committee of the whole on Bill 
No. 18 be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial 
Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 20, An Act to amend 
The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in committee of the whole on the said 
Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan 

Act 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 
21, An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and to the Assembly today, two gentlemen seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Edward Ruru, consul of Indonesia, 
stationed in Toronto; and Mr. Sudarmadji, vice-consul of 
Indonesia, stationed in Toronto. 
 
These two gentlemen are on their first visit to Saskatchewan, 
familiarizing themselves with our province, are interested in 
increasing trade relations with our province and, perhaps, 
investment opportunities going both ways. They will be 
meeting with departments of Economic Development and 
Trade, Agriculture, Energy and Mines, and Science and 
Technology. 
 
I would wish that all members of our Assembly give them a 
warm Saskatchewan welcome and hope that in the future our 
trade relations will improve with that particular country. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure on two accounts to be able to rise today to present to 
you and to the members of the Assembly a group of students 
from Father Vachon School, which is literally an arm’s throw 
away from my house. 
 
On the first account, as I said, it’s always a pleasure to 
introduce students from a visiting constituency. They come 
down every year, and I’m grateful and thankful that they do, as 
they are accompanied by three of their teachers, Carol 
L’Heureux, Tim Prytula, and Glenn Hunks. 
 
As to the second account, Mr. Minister, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to pass on a particular sentiment from my 
colleagues. I realize that singularly time does not permit  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

656 
 

for all of my colleagues to pass on this sentiment so that I will 
pass it on collectively for them, and that is I would like to wish 
a happy birthday to Mr. Glenn Hunks, one of the teachers. It is 
his birthday today. 
 
I will meet with the students at 3 o’clock for pictures and 
refreshments. I trust and know that you will find the 
proceedings informative. I look forward to meeting with you, 
and I ask the Assembly to please join in with me in welcoming 
my students from Father Vachon School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, and through 
you, and to the members of the Legislative Assembly, I would 
like to introduce to you a group of eight people from the Leask 
senior citizens level 3 and nursing home committee. They have 
met with the Minister of Health this morning. I hope that they 
find this half an hour of question period interesting and 
entertaining. Please welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the legislature a group of 31 students, 31 grade 12 students 
from the Birch Hills High School in Birch Hills, Saskatchewan. 
They are seated in the west gallery. They are attended by their 
teacher, Grant Getz and, as well, Bill Yeaman. 
 
I do want to wish the students and the teachers a very warm 
welcome here to the legislature. I will be meeting with you for 
photographs and drinks at 2:30, and I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Prices 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, earlier this week your Minister of Consumer 
Affairs met with oil companies, and later your minister told 
reporters that she was confident Saskatchewan consumers are 
not being overcharged for gasoline and diesel fuel. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, how can she and you say that when 
Canadian refineries are selling their product to United States 
customers for one-half the price that they’re charging Canadian 
customers for the same product? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I never said that the 
refineries were operating in any fashion that I thought was 
appropriate or inappropriate or anything else, so the hon. 
member shouldn’t put words in my mouth or anybody else’s. I 
said I was glad to see that the price of fuel is coming down, and 
it is. 
 
Two weeks ago I forecast that fuel would be down to 30 cents a 
litre in this city, and it is, Mr. Speaker. And the members 
opposite laughed and they hollered, and they didn’t  

believe it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I forecasted it, and it’s continued 
to fall. We have the lowest priced fuel that you will find any 
place in Canada right here in Regina and in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I suspect that you are going to see that fuel 
prices will go down. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that oil companies or 
refineries in Canada or in Saskatchewan should be selling fuel 
cheaper in the United States than they do here. Anything that 
they do and they sell with respect to people in the United States 
should be offered at the same price here. 
 
We have met with the oil companies, and the minister has met 
with the refineries, including Imperial Oil, the Co-op, others, 
and saying, if you’re going to have lower fuel prices, 
Saskatchewan prices have to be as low as any place else in 
North America. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you should have a conversation with your Minister of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs. She told reporters after her 
meeting that she was confident Saskatchewan consumers are 
not being overcharged for gasoline and diesel fuel as is 
reported. 
 
Whose side are you on, sir? You’re supposed to be representing 
the interests of Saskatchewan consumers, but from the actions 
of your minister and yourself it sounds like you bought the oil 
companies argumented position, hook, line and sinker, and you 
didn’t press them to drop their prices at all. Will you please 
respond to that, Mr. Premier, and explain the position of your 
Minister of Consumer Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite had an 
opportunity to do things about gasoline prices when they were 
in power and you did nothing but tax . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . You don’t want to talk about that, but we’ll talk about it, 
okay? One, your record; secondly, Mr. Speaker, gasoline prices 
and fuel prices in this province have been falling for the last 
month and a half to two months. In Kelvington and in Wadena 
today the prices are down to 32 cents a litre — 32 cents a litre. 
In the city of Regina they’ve been down to 30 cents a litre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in power they taxed people 
on gasoline and fuel. I have here, Mr. Speaker, the NDP policy 
alleged during the campaign in Manitoba that said that they 
were going to give a 9.5-cent-a-litre break to consumers and 
farmers. That’s what they said during the campaign. You flip it 
over today, Mr. Speaker, and what does Mr. Pawley do in 
Manitoba? He said he’s not going to be able to keep his election 
pledge, and he’s not going to be able to provide 9.5 cents a litre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP whether in Ontario, the NDP whether in 
Manitoba, the NDP whether in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
they charged consumers and farmers for gasoline; they took off 
the rebates; they didn’t live with their campaign promise. Mr. 
Speaker, everybody knows in Regina, in Kelvington, around 
Saskatchewan, gasoline prices are lower here, and fuel prices 
are lower here because there’s a Progressive Conservative 
government in power and not an NDP government, because 
they’ve been taxing them through the nose. 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

657 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They don’t like to hear that. They want to 
make a little bit of noise. But the truth is simply that it’s lower 
under a Progressive Conservative government than any other 
administration in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Premier as a supplementary, and I continue to 
refer to the comments made publicly by your Minister of 
Consumer Affairs. And she spoke of the different methods by 
which American and Canadian prices are set, and she said that 
the Canadian method cushions consumers from wild price 
fluctuations. 
 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: how many consumers 
have asked you to cushion them from price drops that are being 
enjoyed by American consumers but are not being enjoyed by 
Saskatchewan consumers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, an awful 
lot of Saskatchewan consumers said to me that they appreciate 
the fact that we took the tax off gasoline and removed the 
administration that taxed them all the time. That’s what 
consumers said. 
 
Consumers now appreciate the fact that you can buy gasoline at 
30 cents a litre in the city of Regina — and they haven’t been 
able to do that for decades — and the fact that you can buy it 
across the province and it’s going down. And now for the first 
time farmers will be able to receive, in addition to that, 4.5 
cents a litre rebate, which can drop it well into the 20s, Mr. 
Speaker, and they appreciate that. 
 
They know they won’t get it from Howard Pawley in Manitoba 
because he refused to live up to his campaign promise. He just 
said that he would provide a 9.5 cent a litre rebate, and then 
after the election he wouldn’t do it. If you can compare gasoline 
prices or fuel prices in Manitoba, or in Ontario — any place 
where the NDP has got anything to do with the government — 
it’s higher than it is in Saskatchewan, because we have taken 
off the tax, we have provided the rebate. And, Mr. Speaker, 
consumers still appreciate the fact that there’s no tax on 
gasoline in the province of Saskatchewan, and there will not be, 
as long as we are sitting right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I deal 
now with the question of diesel fuel and diesel motor oil used 
by farmers. And I want to ask you, sir, whether you or your 
minister sought an explanation from the refineries as to why 
these prices have not gone down — virtually not a penny — 
notwithstanding the fact that world crude oil prices have 
dropped by 60 per cent. 
 
Did you seek and did you obtain an explanation as to why you 
can buy in Chinook, Montana, Canadian diesel at 19 cents a 
litre, when you have to pay across the border in  

Coronach, 33.8 cents a litre for the same Canadian-refined 
diesel fuel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s simply not true that 
diesel fuel prices haven’t come down. They have come down. 
And if you look at recently in Weyburn and in southern 
Saskatchewan, they announced a 3 cent a litre decline already. 
So they have been going down, Mr. Speaker. And as I said two 
weeks ago and three weeks ago in the House, fuel prices and 
diesel fuel prices will be going down — and they are. 
 
And we will be making sure that the benefits received from 
anybody, from refineries in Saskatchewan, are passed on to 
farmers and consumers. And we will not, Mr. Speaker, like the 
member opposite, tax them. We are not going to tax consumers 
in this province like the NDP did. We are not going to tax them 
on the diesel fuel; we’re not going to tax them on farm fuel; 
we’re not going to tax them on gasoline. They do in Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker, and they do in Ontario, but not in Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP, they don’t even have the right to raise the question, 
Mr. Speaker. Under their administration they taxed all the time. 
They would tax clothes and they would tax utilities. They 
would tax gasoline. They would tax insurance rates. Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t even have the right to raise it. When you 
give them the answer, they won’t even be quiet long enough to 
listen to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplement, Mr. Premier. Are 
you saying, Mr. Premier, that you are not going to take any 
steps to see that farm diesel prices drop in Saskatchewan to 
something comparable to what they are in Montana for the 
same Canadian-refined diesel fuel? Are you saying you’re not 
going to do anything but wait until the refineries make their 
own move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am saying that the price of 
diesel fuel was coming down. I’m saying we’re providing a 4.5 
cent a litre rebate to farmers. And I’m saying that refineries in 
this province and refineries across Canada should not be selling 
fuel in the United States cheaper than they can sell it right here. 
 
Now you put those three together, Mr. Speaker, and farmers in 
the province of Saskatchewan are going to get the lowest price 
fuel that they will get any place in Canada — any place in 
Canada — as a result of what we’re doing, as a result of the 
rebate, and as a result of the decline in the prices, and because 
refineries are advising us, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not going to 
be selling fuel cheaper in the United States. They are going to 
be selling it here at the same price as they’re going to sell it any 
place else. 
 
Relocation of Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation 

Office 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the head office of this public 
company is to be relocated, and can you tell us, tell the people 
of this Assembly, what location that office  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

658 
 

is going to be moved to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, first of all it’s not a public company, 
it’s a Crown corporation. My understanding is public 
companies are those that have publicly-issued shares. I think 
most people would recognize that, and I’m very much surprised 
you don’t know the difference. 
 
My understanding is that the offices will be moved to the . . . 
You can interrupt and shout and scream from your seat as 
you’ve been doing for the last two months, but I would like to 
answer the question. 
 
My understanding is that the corporation is moving its office 
from the old SaskTel building to the building at Hamilton and 
11th . . . dental building — I forget the name of it — the 
Canada Trust building. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the minister responsible for Sask 
Computer Utility Corporation. Mr. Minister, you’ve just 
confirmed that you’re going to be moving the office to the 
Canada Trust building on 11th. Mr. Minister, I think when you 
look at it, would you not agree then that this company, the 
company that leases — the leasing agent for Canada Trust 
building — is run by Koyl Real Estate of Regina? Mr. Minister, 
I think if you check you’ll find that that is the case. 
 
The company owned by Saskatchewan Computer Utility 
Corporation, this company that is going to be leasing this 
building for the corporation, is owned by the chairman of Sask 
Computer Utility Corporation, D. Gavin Koyl. That is the 
leasing agent. That is the leasing agent for the Canada Trust 
building — chairman of the board of Sask computer utilities, 
Mr. Speaker. Would you agree that that is true? And does the 
minister not see this set of circumstances as being somewhat of 
a serious conflict of interest between the public company and 
the responsibility of the chairman of Sask computer utilities? 
Or, Mr. Minister, do you consider this to be just somewhat of an 
unfortunate coincidence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. The choice of the building and the 
location of the property, as the hon. member well knows, is 
done by the space allocation committee, and that was the 
decision made by the space allocation committee. Secondly, the 
Koyl Realty is the leasing agent for the Canada Trust building. 
The chairman of the board of SaskCOMP Utility Corporation 
made that clear to the board and absented himself from the 
discussions and on the choice in the meeting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you 
now confirming, Mr. Minister, that the offices of SaskCOMP 
are going to be moved to the building, the leasing agent of 
which is Koyl Realty, the firm of D. Gavin Koyl, the chairman 
of the board of SaskCOMP? Are you confirming that, and do 
you not see that as involving any conflict of interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. And I’ve made it clear . . . I’m 
assuming that the names are correct. But the allegation you’re 
making is that the leasing agent and the chairman of the 
SaskCOMP board, if it’s going into that building, there is a 
conflict of interest. And what I’ve indicated — that, according 
to the conflict of interest guide-lines, that  

the chairman of the board complied with the conflict of interest 
guide-lines, absented himself from the discussion, absented 
himself from the decision. The choice, however, was made by 
the space allocation committee. 
 
Commitment to Introduce a Tax on Pornographic Materials 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier. My question is this, and it deals with the commitment 
which his government made in April of 1985 in the provincial 
budget. 
 
In the budget speech the former minister of Finance said, and 
I’ll quote: 
 

It is the intention of this government to introduce a tax on 
the distribution and the purchase of these (pornographic) 
materials . . . 
 
The government will consult widely during the next 
several months to determine how best to proceed . . . I 
expect that the tax will be in place later this year. 

 
That was said more than a year ago. Can you tell the Assembly 
what consultations your government has had on this question 
and what is the status of the promised tax on pornographic 
materials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can only briefly say, Mr. Speaker, that 
we had consultations with the public and the decision was no, 
not to tax it. And as a result we didn’t. I can take notice and get 
more information with respect to the number of people that we 
talked to, but I would refer to the minister and the minister can 
respond if he want to provide any more information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, you have 
indicated in the budget speech, a rather formal document, that 
the tax would be imposed. You now, I gather, have indicated 
that yet another initiative of the former minister of Finance will 
be replaced, along with the minister. I ask you now, sir, and I 
quote again from the minister’s speech in April of 1985: 
 

The government is not in a position to prohibit the 
distribution of these materials (and I’m quoting in part) 
but it will take steps to make their distribution less 
profitable . . . and to significantly increase the price to 
those who continue to purchase them. 

 
I ask you, sir, what steps have been taken to make distribution 
less profitable and to make prices higher. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member was 
against the tax to start with, and now he’s for the tax. I’m not 
quite sure what he would like, if he would like us to tax 
pornography or not tax pornography. I mean, he’s been on both 
sides like he has on many other issues, Mr. Speaker, that one 
day he’s for royalty holidays and the next day he’s against it. It 
depends on what town he’s in or what community he’s in. He 
was against pornography tax, and now he’s for pornography 
tax. I said to the hon. member, we reviewed it with the public 
and we decided  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

659 
 

not to do it. Now I can’t provide any more information at this 
time than that. I’ll leave it at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier asks what I want. The answer is: a simple answer to a 
simple question. 
 
You have said in your budget speech, Mr. Premier, that you 
were going to make the distribution of pornographic material 
less profitable, and you were going to increase the price to those 
who purchase them. One year has gone by. I ask: have you done 
either? Do you propose to do either? That is, do you propose to 
make distribution less profitable? Do you propose to make 
prices higher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we consulted with 
the public, and we decided not to impose the tax. 
 

Finances of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for the Sask Transportation Company. Mr. 
Minister according to the annual report for the company tabled 
in this legislature, it confirms your government’s total 
mismanagement of the public’s bus company. Your government 
has shown in that report a huge loss in each of the last four 
years, totalling some $8 million, Mr. Minister, including $1.7 
million for last year. Mr. Minister, why does your government 
continue to be trying to run this Crown corporation — public 
utility, bus company — into the ground so badly? Why are you 
doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to 
the financial management of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, I think it’s fair to comment that the loss that was 
sustained by the corporation in 1985 was somewhat less than it 
was the year prior, and that, due to very, very sound financial 
management and new systems in place, new computerized 
systems, the company is decreasing its loss each and every year. 
And in the following years you can expect that loss to be 
decreased, and in very short order a profit will be made by that 
corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New Question, Mr. Speaker. You say there 
will be a profit in the next short while, whenever it is. Four 
years you've run it into the ground. Is that not true, Mr. Minister 
You’ve been going into a deficit position to some $8 million. 
Mr. Minister, you’ve sold off the highway equipment; I 
understand that. Now we see the same thing happening in 
buses. When, Mr. Minister, will your government provide some 
new buses for this company so that it can provide a service, the 
required service to the people of Saskatchewan, where it can 
start to make some money; because the service required is there, 
but they need some equipment. When will you get some new 
equipment for that bus company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, due to a great 
deal of noise on the other side I was not able to fully get all the 
details of the question. But I can tell the member this: that there 
will be sound management of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 

And I know I mentioned the word profit. Now that is 
something, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite know 
nothing about. They feel that profit is a dirty word. And, Mr. 
Speaker, just the mere utterance of the word profit, I know is 
upsetting to the members. But I will give them the assurance 
that under the direction of myself as minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, it will be well 
managed financially, and you can rest assured that that 
company will be very, very stable for a number of years to 
come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
asked: when do you intend to purchase some new buses, or will 
you be doing it this year for this bus company so they can 
provide that service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We are presently reviewing, Mr. 
Speaker, the whole fleet acquisition program for the coming 
months. And I will let the member know in due course when we 
plan to purchase buses. And as a matter of fact, if the member 
would like, I would invite him to come with me when we go to 
review proposals from different suppliers. I believe the former 
minister had made that same invitation to the member opposite 
to come with him to help him select some new buses. He asked 
for co-operation, but there is no co-operation from the other 
side. The only things that the members — the career critics — 
on the other side can do is complain. They can offer no 
constructive help whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I heard that same story last spring. And I did go — for 
your information — I did go with the former minister to see 
some of the buses. But what happened? None of them were 
purchased. There were no buses purchased, Mr. Minister. And 
I’m sure you would agree with that because we haven’t seen a 
new bus in the company. Mr. Minister, you have, however, 
purchased a number of used buses from Murray Hill of Quebec 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . junkers, as some of you people 
refer to. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you inform this House, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, of some of the buses that you purchased. I’ll 
give you some of them here which I would like some specific 
information on: a 1980, MC9, bus number 739 — how much 
did you pay for that bus? What did you trade in on it? And the 
cost of the trade-in — the value of the trade-in. In 1983, MC9, 
bus number 740 — how much did you pay for that bus, and 
what was the value of the trade-in? And Mr. Minister, while 
you’re at it, will you bring to this House how much was paid for 
bus number 741, 742, 743, and 744? And what the value of the 
trade-in . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. When the member is asking a 
question and his colleagues are making as much noise as they 
were today, it was impossible for the minister to hear that 
question. I would ask for order. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I’ll repeat it and I’ll shorten the question, Mr. 
Minister. Can you give us the cost of the buses that I referred to 
— and I’ll go through them quickly — and the  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

660 
 

value of the trade-ins? Bus number 739, the value of it, the cost 
of it, and the value of the trade-in; bus number 740; bus 
numbers 741, 742, 43 and 44 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Some of your members are asking if I can give them the serial 
numbers. If they want that, I’ll give them that. Could you give 
me the cost of those buses and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to ask for . . . Order, please. I’m 
going to ask for order on both sides of the House. It’s 
impossible to hear here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the question 
asked by the member opposite is very, very indicative of the 
attitude on that side of the House. I could not possibly be 
expected to know what the cost was of bus number 739 and 
741. I can give the member the assurance that in estimates I will 
be pleased to provide the precise information — or in Crown 
Corporations. But I am not prepared here today, Mr. Speaker, to 
carry those precise details in my back pocket. And the question, 
I believe, is very, very out of order. I think the member should 
have more respect for question period than to ask such a 
specific question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I would like to rise on a personal point of privilege 
which I view as a very, very serious matter. 
 
On Tuesday, April 15th, there were certain allegations made by 
the member from Quill Lakes. Today is the very first 
opportunity that I have had to address those certain allegations. 
I would like to quote from Hansard of Tuesday, April 15th. 
And the quotation says: 
 

But before they appointed him Minister of Highways, they 
let him auction off the sale of the highway equipment. 
 

Referring to myself, Mr. Speaker. That statement, Mr. Speaker, 
is totally untrue. It is a falsehood. The member knows full well. 
And I would ask the member for an apology, or I would ask the 
member for his resignation, or I would ask the member to step 
outside of the Legislative Assembly and repeat those words 
where he is not protected. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you would review that case that I put 
forward. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a correction. I 
should have said, auction off some of the equipment or some of 
the property of Sedco, rather than Highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — In Beauchesne’s, paragraph 19, it says that: 
 

A dispute arising between two Members, as to allegations 
of facts, does not fulfill the conditions of parliamentary 
privilege. 
 

I think, under that terminology, it’s not something that can be 
dealt with from the Chair. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say at the outset 
how . . . that we’re disappointed, I guess would be an 
understatement, with the minister’s ability or willingness to 
answer the questions that have been put to him in the Assembly 
on his Health estimates. 
 
We have now been here for a number of days and a great 
number of hours trying to get out of him — as my colleagues 
from Regina North East and Athabasca and Cumberland and the 
Quill Lakes have been asking a good number of questions, 
reasonable questions, about nursing shortages and the promise 
of the minister to increase funding of bedside nursing and 
where these nurses will be located. He has refused over and 
over again to give that information. Even though information at 
this time is going out to individual hospitals, he refuses to give 
that information here in the Assembly. 
 
When it comes to the important issue of alcohol advertising, the 
minister rises in his place and indicates he knows nothing about 
where the pressure was coming from to allow alcohol 
advertising on television, which many people believe uses 
young people to increase the consumption of alcohol — or 
brand preference, as he says — of the young. And when we ask 
him for studies that would indicate whether the trend is to 
increase the alcohol consumption among young people, he says 
he doesn’t have the information, even though everyone knows 
that that information is available to the minister and he could 
and should bring it to this Assembly. 
 
When it comes to transfer payments, the documents that are 
being released by other provincial governments about the 
proposed changes that were included in the federal budget — 
the Conservative federal budget to health care funding by the 
federal government — the minister says that he doesn’t have to 
give it here in the Assembly, that it’s irrelevant. He says we 
don’t have to know, because we will stop it from happening. 
 
And even though we know very well what happens when this 
government goes to fight with their friends in Ottawa — that 
they continually get beaten up by the federal government — he 
will not give us the numbers as it would apply to how much 
money will be lost over the next five years by changes that are 
proposed and changes that are presently being implemented by 
the Michael Wilson budget and by the Mulroney government. 
 
When it comes to advertising, I say here again, when it  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

661 
 

comes to the advertising and polling being done in this 
department, important questions about the kind of questions that 
were asked, the making public of the questions that were asked 
and paid for by the taxpayers, this minister fails to and refuses 
to give the information to the committee. 
 
And I say that in many other areas . . . My colleagues from 
northern Saskatchewan, both of them, when they were talking 
about very important construction programs — and I use only 
the hospital and nursing home construction at La Ronge 
yesterday — not only do you not give the information, but you 
rise in your place and act indignant about having to be here 
answering those questions. And I say that’s an unfortunate 
position for the minister to be taking. 
 
And I want to say as well that, when we’ve been travelling 
around the province in the last year, what we’ve been finding is 
one department where there are a great deal of difficulty, 
whether it’s ambulance care coming out of northern 
Saskatchewan — or I would refer more directly to Meadow 
Lake — we find that there is a problem, and they tell us about it 
very clearly. And the member from Meadow Lake will know 
full well what we’re referring to. He will know that the nursing 
staff who are continually arguing with the minister about 
meetings and about staffing, have held meetings across the 
province, all-candidates meetings, to which the minister has not 
taken the opportunity — and I understand if he can’t make it to 
every one — but I can tell you that the MLAs, when you have 
53 of them, you have no excuse for not sending a representative 
to every one of those meetings to express and to debate whether 
or not, in fact, the nursing shortages are there, as we believe 
they are and as the people of the province are telling us. 
 
(1445) 
 
I say when we find and see nurses demonstrating on the steps of 
the legislature, as we saw last week in Saskatchewan, it causes a 
great deal of concern to many people as to what is happening to 
the medicare system in this province, when you have nurses for 
the first time coming and demonstrating against the minister’s 
inability to apportion nurses to the hospitals where they’re 
needed, or to come clean on where his promises of nursing staff 
will be located. 
 
And I say that in many other areas . . . My colleague from 
Cumberland has talked a good deal, and my colleague from 
Athabasca, about the food subsidy cut that your government 
allowed to take place. And you, as Minister of Health, certainly 
had a responsibility to stand up in cabinet and argue the point 
that that food subsidy should have stayed in place for the health 
of northern residents. 
 
I say that if the people of the province were given an 
opportunity right now, you would find that you would be on the 
outs and those two members, who have spoken loudly for the 
North, would be sitting on that side of the House. And I would 
challenge you to convince the Premier to call an election on the 
health issue. 
 
I say, as well, the waiting lists in the hospitals in Saskatoon of 
8,000, by your own numbers that you sent across the  

other day, are putting people in this province in a position 
where they can’t afford four more years of this kind of 
mismanagement of the health care system. I have the numbers 
here which you sent over. The city of Saskatoon: University 
Hospital, 2,070 people waiting; City Hospital, 3,036; City 
Hospital, 2,902. 
 
We were using the number in the House of 6,000 and asking 
you whether or not that was close to being accurate, because 
those were the numbers we had gotten from the hospitals. And 
at that time you were saying that we were exaggerating the 
numbers when we were using 6,000. And now we come into the 
Assembly in estimates and you send across a piece of paper that 
indicates there are 8,000 people waiting for surgical problems 
to be solved at the hospitals in Saskatoon. And that doesn’t 
include any of the problems and waiting lists in Regina. And 
this list that you sent across, prepared by the SHSP on April 9th 
of 1986, summary of surgical waiting list, indicates there are 
8,000 people waiting for surgical needs at the city hospitals in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And I say to you that when we look at all of the areas where 
you have failed to do your job, including coming into this 
Assembly and defending the record of your government’s 
stonewalling day after day, I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, 
that we’re tired and fed up with this kind of a minister who will 
come here and treat this important matter with that kind of lack 
of respect and disdain. 
 
And I want to tell you that when I look at other areas like the 
Nielsen report, which proposes that the federal government 
would get out of funding altogether of Health in Saskatchewan, 
and you refuse to make a statement on it, I say that’s 
unfortunate. The area of mental health in the province — and 
we look at the cuts in the budget, of your budget this year — I 
think is shocking and disturbing that you would take advantage 
of those people, who can’t fight back, and cut back in the staff 
and the program in that area. 
 
And I want to say that there simply will be many people in this 
province who will look a good deal different on you than they 
did when you were elected in ’82 because I think that you 
created optimism in people, that you were going to do 
something in Health, particularly in mental care health, and you 
haven’t done anything. In fact, this budget proves that you are 
cutting back very significantly and that is unfortunate. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I have a great deal of 
difficulty trying to get answers out of this minister. The people 
of the province are saying that they can’t get meetings. The 
doctors over the last weekend, shortly after the minister rose in 
his place, I believe it was last Friday, and said how he was 
meeting with doctors on an ongoing basis, and he had met more 
than any other minister. The doctors went publicly to the press 
and said, well that is a different story than what we have and 
they said, and I paraphrase, we are getting fed up with the 
Devine government and their inaction and their inability to meet 
and consult with us. That's what they said. 
 
And that’s not an NDP line. That, I believe, was the president of 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association. That  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

662 
 

was his word over the weekend, if I was listening closely and 
got the line right, is that they are fed up with the Devine 
government’s ability to handle health care issues in this 
province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that because of all of these 
reasons that I have listed, and because of the days we have 
spent here trying to get answers out of this minister — and I 
don’t for one minute blame the people who are advising him 
because I know they are professional people — but I am going 
to be moving a motion: 
 

That the salary of the Minister of Health be reduced to $1. 
 
Because I feel that even $1 for this individual, who is 
destroying the health care system in this province, that it is too 
much. 
 
But I am going to move this motion, seconded by the member 
for Regina Centre, and then I want to have a chance for 
members opposite and others to get involved, because they’ve 
been sitting very silently, and debating this most important 
issue of Health. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say a few words 
on this. I don’t recall having been put through an exercise of 
this sort in the years I’ve been in the legislature. I don’t recall 
having spent . . . I don’t recall, in the 11 years I’ve been in this 
legislature, having spent two weeks on the estimates of any 
department. I may be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well we spent two weeks on Pioneer Trust, and the member 
from Kindersley will no doubt recall that with relish. But with 
respect to the estimates, I don’t recall having spent two weeks 
on the estimates of any department and getting — I don’t recall 
having spent that long on a department, period — but we have 
not got any information out of this minister. 
 
I can understand, Mr. Minister, that some information is going 
to be politically damaging to you. But I don’t understand the 
arrogance with which, and the disdain with which, you have 
treated this legislature. Simple, routine questions, that I don’t 
think have a lot of political content but are important to the 
public and perhaps important to members in serving their 
constituents, are routinely sloughed off. 
 
I swear, Mr. Minister, if I were to ask you the time of day, 
you’d turn and you’d say, well now I’m proud of the way 
Saskatchewan people can tell the time, and time is an important 
subject, and away you’d go, and you’d never give us the time of 
day, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to recall . . . I haven’t been in this House 
continuously for the last two weeks, but I want to recall some of 
what you have put us through, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have asked you for — I recall, and very early 
in these estimates — we asked you for the waiting lists. You 
said you would try to have it ready on Wednesday. I had, 
frankly, difficulty believing that you  

didn’t have it before you. If you didn’t you’re the first Minister 
of Health who ever came to do estimates without that 
information. Monday came and went; Wednesday came and 
went; and we got the same silly, pathetic answers from the 
Minister. 
 
With respect to every conceivable subject we have raised, you 
have either told us you don’t have the information, or you just 
don’t bother to deal with it, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we have 
asked you, I have asked you, for waiting lists; we have asked 
you for staffing levels; we’ve asked you for where the new staff 
positions are going to be; we’ve asked you critical questions 
with respect to federal funding, and what seems like a thousand 
other questions. Every time we ask you, Mr. Minister, we get 
some silly speech on a subject which is only barely related to 
what we asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know what it takes to get your attention, 
and I don’t know what it takes, Mr. Minister, to induce you to 
deal with this Legislative Assembly for what it is: a duly elected 
body of representatives who have every right to ask questions 
with respect to the way their constituents’ money is spent. This 
is not some exercise, Mr. Minister, designed solely to make you 
uncomfortable. We are fulfilling the most basic responsibility of 
any parliament or legislative assembly, that of control of the 
public purse. You, Mr. Minister, have spent two weeks trying to 
thwart us in doing our duties. 
 
I don’t recall a single, significant bit of information that you’ve 
given us in two weeks. I don’t know what you think you’re 
doing. I don’t know what your game plan is. I don’t know what 
you think you’re accomplishing. I certainly don’t understand. If 
you think there’s any good politics in this charade, that has 
certainly passed me by, too. But I’ve never seen it, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And it’s particularly critical this year. I and my colleagues have 
spent more time on the highways and byways of Saskatchewan 
in the last year than I ever have. I have, I think, been in the 
accompaniment of each and every one of my colleagues in the 
opposition. I have not been in a major community in 
Saskatchewan where the issue of health care hasn’t been raised. 
It is raised in every community. 
 
It’s a matter of serious concern. And I and my colleagues heard 
about this from July 1st, when we adjourned last year, until 
March 17th, when we re-adjourned this year. I don’t think there 
is a single other subject that I have heard as much about over 
the last year as health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, in a last-ditch, sort of gasping last effort, you 
announced a program to provide more nurses. Mr. Minister, that 
didn’t satisfy us. It hasn’t satisfied anyone. I don’t know anyone 
who has said to you, Mr. Minister, well we want — we think 
that’s grand; that’s all that’s needed. 
 
Without exception, nurses, doctors, those administrators of 
hospitals that you haven’t intimidated — every one has said, it 
isn’t enough. Every one has said, in addition, Mr. Minister, we 
don’t know what it means; we don’t know where these 
positions are going; we need more information. 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

663 
 

It is on behalf of those people, those professionals in the field; it 
is on behalf of the public of Saskatchewan; the people who are 
ill, waiting for hospital beds, who can’t get in; the people who 
are in hospitals who are alarmed about the lack of staff to look 
after ill people; it is on behalf of the public of Saskatchewan as 
a whole that we have asked these questions. 
 
And you, Mr. Minister, haven’t given us any information. You 
have . . . If the minister . . . If Mr. Minister has answered any 
questions, I would like you to stand up and list them. Because I 
haven’t heard you answer anything. I have never seen as 
arrogant a display as anyone — by anyone, Mr. Minister. I have 
never seen a charade like this. 
 
It would be bad enough, Mr. Minister, if it were not on so 
important a subject. There are some things which come before 
this Assembly, some of which are more important than others. 
This, Mr. Minister, is a key issue with the public of 
Saskatchewan. I suppose our own good health is foremost in the 
mind of virtually every living human being. And the good 
health of this province is a concern to people. 
 
When they see hospitals, when they see the fresh food subsidy 
taken off a northern Saskatchewan, when they look at the other 
institutions which your department funds, people do not feel 
secure about their own good health, and with good reason. 
 
Mr. Minister, there may be some reason why our health care 
system should have been allowed to deteriorate the way it has. 
We don’t know what those reasons are and certainly the public 
don’t, but if you have them, this is your opportunity to defend 
what you have created. You’ve done none of that, Mr. Minister. 
You have stood for two weeks and told this Assembly how 
grand things are when that is patently false. That is patently 
false, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Premier yesterday accused the members of the 
opposition of wasting time, of not getting on to important 
subjects. I say, Mr. Minister, that this Assembly has wasted 
about two weeks, but it hasn’t been through any fault or act of 
the opposition members. It has been because we still haven’t 
got the answer to the first question we asked. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Minister, the very first questions we asked were: what were 
staffing levels? We had, previously, the staffing levels of the 
city of Regina and none other. To my knowledge we still don’t 
have staffing levels of other communities. We do not have 
waiting lists. We have not heard a single intelligible comment 
from the minister opposite with respect to federal funding, a key 
issue in the fiscal health of this province. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Minister, that the credit rating of this 
province has been de-rated two times in as many years. I cannot 
think, Mr. Minister, of another province or another state which 
has fallen from grace so rapidly. 

To be fair, part of the problems that this government has 
suffered are bad luck; but to be fair, Mr. Minister, some of them 
are bad management. One of the ones, Mr. Minister, which I 
suspect rests with bad management is the loss of funds from the 
federal government. I suspect that provincial taxpayers have 
been ill-served by Conservative governments who have gone to 
Prime Minister Mulroney and who have had nothing more 
intelligent to say than: keep up the good work, Brian. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Minister, when I see those Health estimates, 
when I see what the federal government is doing to you, I think 
that anyone could think of something else to say than: keep up 
the good work Brian. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’d like to know a little more about Brian 
Mulroney’s good work. We’d like to know if you have been 
doing anything, anything Mr. Minister, to justify your salary. 
Mr. Minister, any single member of your caucus could come 
into this Assembly and could answer these questions better than 
you can. I could ask a question of any member of your caucus, 
and I would get better and more intelligent answers that would 
be of more use to the public than I have from you. I have never 
seen a display like this. 
 
If I sound a big angry, Mr. Minister, I am. I am. You are 
treating this Assembly with disdain. And I see the minister 
yawning, yawning when these comments are being addressed to 
him. I wonder if the minister is going to stick out his tongue 
today at us, as he did yesterday, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you if you have anything more intelligent to 
do in this Assembly than stick your tongue out at members of 
the opposition? 
 
The questions which we have raised involved an issue which is 
one of the most fundamental to people — their own good 
health. They are fundamental questions to this province’s 
financial good health, something that is an issue of concern as 
well throughout the length and breadth of Saskatchewan. And 
about all we have got from you is that you stick out your tongue 
at us. I must say that is a gesture that I haven’t seen before, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t recall having seen anyone do it, much less the 
minister whose Health estimates are being dealt with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I saw a tooth fall out one night, but not 
ever a tongue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I think that the teeth fell out 
accidentally. I don’t think the tongue fell out of his head 
accidentally. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are waiting for questions, issues, such as a 
fresh food subsidy in northern Saskatchewan. And a number of 
my colleagues, including the member from Shaunavon and the 
Leader of the Opposition, spent some time last spring in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? Tell me exactly where. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Where was it? La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

664 
 

An Hon. Member: — Who did you meet there? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who did we meet? I don’t recall the names 
at this point in time, but there were a goodly number of them. I 
can tell you that in La Ronge we met with the priest. I don’t 
remember the name. 
 
But I’ll tell you people, if you think there’s something funny 
about hunger, then all I can say is, you haven’t been where I 
have been. You haven’t been where I have been. One of the key 
health issues in this province are the food banks. I take off my 
hat to those dedicated individuals who are on the corner of 
South Railway and Albert Street trying to deal with an 
enormous problem. That’s hunger in this city. They are making 
a major effort. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I wish your government would address 
yourself to this issue. I wish you would address yourself to the 
issue of hunger in northern Saskatchewan, which I and my 
colleagues faced last year and we didn’t enjoy it. I can tell you, 
Mr. Minister, I wish you’d address yourself to the issue of 
hunger in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have asked you questions about alcoholism, 
about the rate of alcohol consumption. Mr. Minister, you didn’t 
give us the answers. You didn’t undertake to give us the 
answers. Once again you treated the issue with the utmost 
disdain. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask of you and I ask you to tell us . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well with every respect to my colleague from 
Quill Lakes, I disagree. We do need a House Leader. This 
House has run since March 17th without a House Leader. And 
that’s one of the problems. That is one of the reasons why we 
have wasted two weeks in this Assembly. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The debate before the House 
is not about the merits of whether or not we have a House 
Leader. Please stick to the topic being discussed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The point I was going to make, Mr. 
Chairman, had I had the opportunity to do it, is that if there 
were a House Leader in this Assembly, this would not have 
carried on for two weeks. The matter would have been resolved. 
 
We have one House Leader who’s absent, and one House 
Leader who is simply too arrogant and full of himself to deal 
with the job. And this Assembly lacks a House Leader, and 
that’s part of the problem. I cannot imagine anyone other than 
members opposite allowing this problem to continue for two 
weeks unresolved, with nothing other than a lot of banalities 
coming from the other side with respect to, what we do, and 
what we’ve seen, and who I visited. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, that who I visited in northern 
Saskatchewan is not terribly important. If the Acting House 
Leader were to address himself to the problem of these Health 
estimates, instead of who I and the member from Shaunavon 
and the member from Elphinstone met a year ago in La Ronge, 
we might not have reached this level of frustration. We might 
not be moving this motion. We might be making progress, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Chairman, doing the job that we are being paid to 
do. 

I do know, Mr. Chairman, what it costs to run this Assembly 
per day. I’ve never seen an accurate assessment of that. But I’ll 
tell you that in the last two weeks, the members of this 
Assembly have simply not earned their money in the afternoon 
or evenings, and I think that’s through no fault of ours. I think 
that is through the arrogance of the minister opposite and, 
perhaps, the government. 
 
There may be some grand plan which totally escapes me, Mr. 
Chairman, to stonewall these estimates until the middle of 1987, 
until April of ’87. I don’t know; that may well be the plan. I 
don’t understand the logic of that. I don’t think the public are 
going to understand the logic of that. I think the public expect 
us to come here, do our job, do it as efficiently and as cheaply 
as we can, and finish the business of this Legislative Assembly. 
They don’t expect us to come back day after day after day and 
ask the Minister of Health routine questions which we know he 
has the answer to but which he doesn’t chose to give us. 
 
If he chooses to rise in his place and say, I have that 
information but I do not think it’s in the public interest to give 
it, then that at least is responding. But this has been . . . This 
game of hide-and-go-seek has lasted two weeks. We ask the 
minister a question, he goes and hides, and we go seeking after 
him — and that is what has been going on for two weeks, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ned, tell us what a chicken sounds like. 
How’s that again? 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Well the member from Meadow Lake 
wants to know about cowardice. I have witnessed nothing but 
cowardice over the last two weeks. I can only assume, Mr. 
Minister, that you’re not giving us the answers because for 
some reason or other you’re afraid to. I know you have the 
answers to a goodly number of the questions that have been 
asked. I know you aren’t giving them. I can’t think you’re 
proud, Mr. Minister, of your behaviour over the last two weeks. 
 
I must assume, Mr. Minister, that you are afraid to give us that 
information. Some of it . . . I do not understand why some of it 
worries you as much as it appears to. I don’t understand why, 
for instance, you couldn’t give us the figures on the federal 
government funding. I think you have that information. I think 
you might well say to this Assembly — if I can suggest an 
approach to you, since someone needs to give you some 
assistance. Neither the former House Leader, who we have not 
seen in a week, nor the present House Leader, who we wished 
we hadn’t seen for the last two weeks — neither of them have 
given you any assistance, so let me try. 
 
You might approach the federal issue, the issue of federal 
funding, by saying to us: these are the figures; we are satisfied 
with this as an appropriate means of distributing the tax dollars 
in Canada, if that would be your position. Or you might say to 
us, Mr. Minister: I don’t believe this is an appropriate division 
of tax dollars in Saskatchewan, and I and my colleagues are 
going to attend federal-provincial conferences, raise the issue as 
vigorously and effectively as we can for the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan. You might have done either one of these. 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

665 
 

Instead, what we have got, whenever we’ve asked you that 
question, is you have stood up and you’ve praised something or 
somebody. Well I am very proud of the people of Wawota, or 
Wapella, or Indian Head, or wherever it is that your mind 
happens to be at the moment. Nobody questioned the 
worthwhileness of the people of Wapella or Wawota or Indian 
Head. They are, no doubt, all fine people. 
 
But I say, Mr. Minister, that that wasn’t the issue. I don’t think 
people in Wapella and Wawota and Indian Head ever thought 
that was the issue. I think, Mr. Minister, that they thought the 
issue was nursing homes. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have been asking you over the last two weeks 
about nursing homes. Each and every one of us is continually 
approached by constituents who have serious personal problems 
because of lack of nursing homes. I could name any number of 
people, Mr. Minister, who come to me and who say, I have a 
relative whom I love but whom I cannot look after, and it’s 
killing me to be unable to look after him in my house and to be 
unable to get him into a nursing home. I can’t think of many 
problems which can be as tragic for individuals. And I say, if 
the minister is laughing, then call an election and the public is 
soon going to wipe that smile off your face, because the 
electorate of Saskatchewan are not laughing. 
 
They are concerned about this problem. We come to this 
Assembly and we ask you questions about nursing homes and 
we get a speech on how grand the people of Wapella are. Well, 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, I know the people of Wapella, through 
a coincidence. They are fine people, but I don’t think the people 
in Wapella believe that the answer to all questions about 
nursing homes in Saskatchewan is a soliloquy on the glories of 
Wapella or Indian Head or the other communities you 
mentioned. 
 
The issue can be resolved by sensible and serious debate among 
the informed and responsible electors. If you people are 
informed, then you’ve cleverly disguised that fact, and you 
certainly are not being responsible. You certainly are not being 
responsible. I do not recall a time in this province for the last 
15, 16 years, Mr. Minister, when as many health issues have 
been raised simultaneously. 
 
Given the nature of your portfolio, there is always one or two 
health issues before the public. That’s the nature of that 
department; it’s not an easy department, Mr. Minister. But, Mr. 
Minister, you have more health issues which . . . You have 
more dragons standing before you than I can recall in some 
time. It may well be that the serious problems created by the 
former Thatcher government in 1969 to ’71 were worse, but 
you’ve got to go back to that period to think of an era when as 
many health issues were being raised by as many people in all 
walks of Saskatchewan. I’ll stop for the minister to yawn, if you 
must. Mr. Minister, I cannot recall a period of time . . . I’ll stop 
for you to stick out your tongue if you want to. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Minister, I cannot recall a time when there were as many 
health issues raised by as many people at all walks  

of life. It doesn’t matter whether it’s the member from 
Shaunavon and I in Buffalo Narrows, or Hafford. We listen to 
people raise health issues. The member from Regina North East 
and I were in a small community — it was Hafford, to be 
precise. We spoke for 10 minutes, answered questions for about 
an hour and a half, and health issues consumed 90 per cent of 
the time. 
 
And that’s not unusual. There’s nothing unusual about that 
community. That is absolutely typical. Apart from the 
agricultural crisis, Mr. Minister, this is the number one issue in 
Saskatchewan today — health care. These issues, Mr. Minister, 
apparently cannot be resolved by your government. 
 
The function of this Legislative Assembly is it gives electors an 
opportunity to reasoned and sensible debate to arrive at 
answers. You, Mr. Minister, have spent two weeks trying to 
thwart that process. You may think that serves some purpose. I 
frankly don’t see it, nor do the public of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Minister, we don’t lightly lower the salary of anyone in this 
Assembly to $1. Mr. Minister, we do not lightly make a 
personal issue out of what has heretofore been a public issue. 
We don’t lightly engage in personal attack but, Mr. Minister, I 
don’t know any other way to get your attention. I don’t know 
any other way to get you off these silly, superfluous speeches 
on a subject that is of little concern to anyone. 
 
I don’t know how else we get you to deal with the issues which 
have been before this Assembly with respect to nursing homes, 
with respect to staffing levels, with respect to patients in the 
hospitals who are worried, with respect to key issues of 
federal-provincial funding, with the equally key issue of food in 
northern Saskatchewan, and food in my riding, and alcohol and 
alcohol consumption. I don’t know how else we get you to deal 
with these issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you want to get up and start to deal with 
some of these issues, we’ll be happy and delighted to get on. I 
and my colleagues do not want to spend the entire summer in 
this Legislative Assembly but we are determined that we are 
going to do our job. We have been affected, both politically and 
emotionally, by enough hard-luck stories — and they’re not 
hard luck; by enough hard stories — over the summer from 
various people who have problems with health care that we 
came to this Assembly determined to deal with these issues. 
 
It was a note of some optimism that the House Leader called the 
Health estimates first. We assumed when you called the Health 
estimates first that you recognized the priority of the problem; 
you were putting this department on first so that we, as 
representatives of the public, might deal with these 
all-important issues and take whatever time was needed. 
 
But we haven’t. We have been stonewalled for two weeks. A 
level of anger and frustration has built up in the opposition. I 
don’t apologize for that, Mr. Minister, because we reflect the 
anger and frustration in the public, as we are being paid to do. 
You can aggravate and inflame that level of frustration in us 
and in the public by carrying on as you have. Or you can 
attempt, Mr. Minister, to defuse some of it by discussing these  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

666 
 

questions in a rational and responsible fashion. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: are you going to do your job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have sat here for 
three-quarters of an hour and heard the people talk on and on 
and on, and never ask one question in that period of time. There 
have been accusations and allegations, attempts to mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan about the activities of the Health 
department. I will indicate to you that over the period of time 
since 1981-82 when we became government, there has been an 
increase in the Health budget from $741.5 million to $1.212 
billion — a 63.5 per cent increase in health care services. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve explained in detail — I know they don’t 
like to hear this — but certainly about the 2,349 nursing beds 
that have been constructed and are in the plans of being 
constructed in this province — 2,300. I read every community 
that’s getting nursing home bed, where they’ve been. To show 
the intent and the respect towards estimates that the members 
have opposite, I heard the member from Regina Centre get up 
and talk and go on and on about Wapella, Saskatchewan. The 
town I talked about and invited him to was Wawota. So that 
shows the degree of sincerity, the interest that they have. 
 
They know very, very well that the people of Saskatchewan, if 
you go out on the street today, Mr. Chairman, and you walk 
down the street of any town in Saskatchewan, I will guarantee 
you, and you stop and talk to people at random, the vast 
majority of those will say that if there’s one thing the Devine 
government is going to be remembered for in its first time in 
office, its first period, is health care — safeguarding health care, 
building on health care. Never before — never before — has 
there been a $300 million capital fund. Think of that — $300 
million. Never before has there been a $100 million staff 
enrichment program. Those are very, very large figures. Never 
before has there been 1,600 nursing home beds in the period of 
time that there is today — 1,600 nursing home beds. 
 
So let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, that I will stand here any time 
— all summer, if they want — and defend activities of the 
Devine government in health care. In times when we see oil 
revenues and wheat prices declining, and we come with a 
budget of 11.6 per cent increase in health care, I think that 
indicates unequivocally the commitment of people in 
Saskatchewan towards health care in this province. 
 
They talk about support of the nurses. They make no . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You know, it’s very difficult in here. 
It’s very difficult in here, Mr. Chairman, for a sincere member 
to stand and make a point, because you’re always interrupted 
with people clucking like chickens. This goes on . . . 
 
I have been in here eight years. I have never seen such a low 
level of decorum from the other side — talking about jelly 
beans, clucking like chickens, acting like children that I taught 
in grade 3 or 4. And I see, day after day, young people from 
Saskatchewan coming into this legislature, coming in to see the 
people that they have elected, how the debate and the activities 
and the  

decisions of state are made in this province. 
 
I can tell you as a man that spent 15 years in the class-rooms in 
Saskatchewan, when I see the antics of my colleagues — I 
suppose they’re colleagues — but the people opposite clucking 
like chickens, talking about jelly beans, throwing socks in the 
air, I’m embarrassed. I’m embarrassed. I can tell you we’re 
getting letters and phone call after phone call from people 
around Saskatchewan saying, what is going on with that NDP 
opposition? 
 
I mean, this legislature and the activities of the opposition has 
sunk to the lowest ebb it has been in the history of the province. 
When I see men elected, people with law degrees, who can only 
stand up in this House and cluck like a chicken, I say what in 
heaven is wrong with democracy when a person like that can be 
elected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s the problem here. That’s the 
problem. You people are just degrading democracy. I mean, if 
you think somebody voted for you . . . My mother-in-law lives 
in your constituency, and I can tell you her and many of her 
friends have phoned me and they’re greatly embarrassed that 
their member, their member would sit in this legislature and 
cluck like a chicken when the Premier of the province is on his 
feet. That’s the total disrespect he has for this place. I’ll rest my 
case on that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number 
of points that I would like to make in response to the motion. 
Perhaps the first point that I would like to make, Mr. Chairman, 
is that the two members from the NDP opposition who have 
moved this motion just left the Assembly. It shows, Mr. 
Chairman, the lack of sincerity that we see on the part of the 
opposition when it comes to raising issues in this particular 
Assembly. I think that at least they would have the dignity for 
this Assembly to remain in their places and to hear members on 
all sides of the House respond to the motion that they brought 
forward. 
 
But I suppose we shouldn’t be surprised. I suppose we 
shouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Chairman, because when we see the 
following kinds of things, when we see the following kinds of 
things coming from the members opposite, we know, Mr. 
Chairman, that they are in the very desperate throes of a party 
that understands very clearly that they don’t have any positive 
points to advance. And so they have to resort to personal attacks 
on people in an attempt to get headlines in the newspapers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have been in this Assembly now for almost 
two weeks, almost two weeks, and the members opposite have 
yet to get a headline in the newspaper. They know full well that 
they are not going to get a headline in the newspaper, and so 
they have to resort to personal attacks on the integrity and on 
the dedication and on the professionalism of the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Chairman, that indicates to me that the party 
opposite, the members of the NDP party who sit in the 
opposition here today, are  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

667 
 

really in serious, serious political trouble — serious political 
trouble. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Health, my colleague, inherited a 
Department of Health that had been seriously ignored by the 
NDP opposition. And I want to tell you some of the things that 
they found when the Minister of Health took over. 
 
Under the NDP, cancer treatment services were allowed to 
deteriorate to the point of crisis proportions here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. The NDP cut hospital staff to the tune of 
some 400 positions. In the area of mental health services they 
deleted nursing positions and psychiatrist positions. Hospital 
construction — virtually no hospital construction under the 
NDP from 1977 to late 1981. They basically put a moratorium 
on the construction of special care nursing homes. 
 
That was their record in health care. And I would remind the 
members of this Assembly, when we consider voting on this 
motion, that last year the members opposite spent, I believe, the 
sum total of around two hours questioning the Minister of 
Health, because they knew that the record of this government in 
health care was a sound record, was a record that the people of 
this province could be proud of. 
 
Today they know that there’s an election just around the corner. 
They know that the people no longer believe the big lie that 
somehow the Tories will take away medicare. They know that 
that issue was put to rest a long time ago, and that in fact we 
have strengthened medicare here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And so they have only one option, Mr. 
Chairman: they have to resort to personal attacks, personal 
attacks on a very credible, a very professional, a very dedicated 
Minister of Health who is doing his best to advance the cause of 
first-class health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only, Mr. Chairman, do they resort to personal attacks on 
the Minister of Health, but they resort to personal attacks on the 
Premier. And we know that if the people of Saskatchewan could 
corporately sit together in this Assembly during question period 
and see the behaviour of the members opposite, see their 
childish antics, see the kind of accusations which they hurl 
across the floor that have absolutely nothing to do whatsoever 
with providing the kind of sound, forward-looking, progressive 
government that the people of Saskatchewan want — if they 
could sit here and see that personally, they would be deeply 
ashamed of the members of the 1986 version of the NDP party 
of Saskatchewan — deeply ashamed. 
 
(1530) 
 
We didn’t come to this Assembly to mount personal attacks, 
Mr. Chairman, on any member of this Assembly. We came here 
to do the best that we can for the citizens of this province. And 
when we see the members of the NDP opposition bringing 
forward today the kind of ludicrous — and there’s no other 
words to describe it — the kind of ludicrous motion that is on 
the floor today, then I think that we have no other option but to 
conclude that the members opposite indeed find themselves in a 
desperate  

political situation. They really aren’t all that concerned about 
health care. They’re more concerned about getting headlines in 
an attempt to somehow bolster up their political image in the 
province. 
 
The motion before us today, Mr. Chairman, is really a vacuous 
motion. It’s a motion that indicates that they are in serious 
trouble. It’s a motion that stands in stark contrast to the kinds of 
things that, in fact, professional people are saying about the 
Minister of Health. And I would only quote one item to you 
today from the Saskatchewan association of optometrists, 
directed to the Minister of Health: “I would also like to 
commend you on the excellent way in which you run your 
department.” 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Chairman, that that comment could be 
echoed numerous times around the province. In 1982, Mr. 
Chairman, we inherited a situation where the hospitals were 
crumbling here in this province. They should have been rebuilt; 
they should have been refurbished; new hospitals should have 
been constructed; but it hadn’t happened under the NDP. 
Instead they took our money and they spent it to buy uranium 
mines; and they spent it to buy land for the land bank; and they 
spent it to buy potash mines. And they abolished positions, Mr. 
Chairman, in the health care system so that they could find 
more money to put into their so-called family of Crown 
corporations. And as a consequence the health care system 
deteriorated and deteriorated and deteriorated. 
 
That is what we faced when the member who today is the 
Minister of Health took over. And in those four years, Mr. 
Chairman, we have begun to rebuild the hospital system here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We have put back the nursing 
positions that the members opposite abolished, and we recently 
announced an additional 1,500 new positions which are going 
to go into our health care system. We abolished extra-billing 
under the leadership of the Minister of Health. There are so 
many good things that have been done — new cancer facilities 
here in the province of Saskatchewan — that the NDP ignored. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we could go on and on and talk about the many 
good things — the many good things which have been 
accomplished in the last four years, and we know that there are 
many more good things that will be done in the next four years. 
We know that because of the record of the Minister of Health 
since he took over. 
 
Mr. Chairman, today under the leadership of the Minister of 
Health, the Government of Saskatchewan, the Progressive 
Conservative government, is spending $1.2 billion on health 
care. That is hundreds of millions of dollars more than was ever 
spent under the NDP party. And we can understand why, 
because instead of spending the money on health care where it 
should have been spent, they spent that money to expropriate 
potash mines, to expropriate uranium mines, to expropriate 
farm land for their land bank. It was an example of a perverted 
sense of priority. A perverted sense of priority, Mr. Chairman. 
And what we see today in this Assembly with this motion, that 
is a personal attack on the Minister of Health, is once again a 
perverted sense of priority. 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

668 
 

Unfortunately, I guess we shouldn’t be surprised. And that’s a 
sad commentary on what has taken place here from the 
members opposite when we see them performing as they do in 
question period, when we see them making the kinds of 
personal attacks. Really this is, I think, this motion itself is a 
travesty of what this Assembly is all about. 
 
The Assembly is here to further the cause of health care, and 
that is what the Minister of Health has done so dramatically and 
so effectively in the last four years. This Assembly is here to 
debate the serious issues which confront this province. This 
Assembly is here to do justice to the people of Saskatchewan. 
This Assembly is not here to debate this kind of a vacuous, 
personal attack on a Minister of Health that everyone in the 
province and certainly every member of this Assembly should 
be very, very proud of, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I don’t know what the headlines are going 
to read tomorrow, Mr. Chairman. We’re really not here to seek 
headlines. We’re here to provide good government. We’re here, 
Mr. Chairman, to do the kinds of things that the Minister of 
Health has been doing; for example, to get six new CAT 
scanners here into the province of Saskatchewan to provide 
better quality health care for people like my parents and my 
children. 
 
And that’s a good example of what a forward-looking, 
progressive, innovative government should be doing. And if 
people write headlines about that, that’s fine. And if they don’t 
that’s fine. We know that good health care is being delivered 
when that kind of thing happens. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, of what benefit is it to health care to bring 
forward this kind of a motion, this kind of a personal, vicious 
attack on a member of this Assembly. And the members 
opposite basically admitted that it was a personal attack. 
 
I can only wonder what is going through the minds of the NDP 
party these days when they sit in their caucus and they say: 
what shall we do today to question the Minister of Health; do 
we have any new ideas to advance that will further the cause of 
health care in this province; do we have any innovative 
suggestions as to how we can bring new equipment here into 
the province of Saskatchewan; do we have any means whereby 
we can ensure that the seniors who are now going to have more 
nursing home beds than they ever had; do we have any 
innovative ideas that are going to help the cancer patients here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and today they have better 
cancer facilities than they ever had; do we have any of those 
innovative ideas? 
 
And I suspect that the two members opposite who raised this 
motion, who don’t have the respect to be here to hear it debated, 
I suspect that in good conscience they would have to say no. 
They would have to say no. Because if they didn’t say no, then 
certainly they wouldn’t have to bring forward a motion like this 
today. 
 
Clearly they find themselves in a position today where they are 
so desperate, so void of any new ideas, so void of  

any constructive critical suggestions, that the only thing they 
can do is waste the time of this Assembly to bring forward this 
kind of personal attack upon the Minister of Health, and to call 
into question the very integrity of what this democratic process 
is all about. 
 
And where are the members opposite who even brought 
forward the motion? I tell the people of Saskatchewan that they 
have left the Assembly . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would like to remind the 
member who’s speaking that according to Beauchesne, 
paragraph 316, members who are speaking are not to refer to 
the presence or absence of members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I welcome the opportunity 
to have been able to participate in this motion. I’m only 
disappointed that the members of the Assembly had to be put 
through this particular exercise today, wasting the time of the 
public and wasting the dollars of the taxpayer, when it could 
have been spent more effectively dealing with the constructive 
and critical and important issues that face this particular 
province. Certainly the motion is worthy of nothing else except 
being defeated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I listened to the 
sanctimonious member from Rosemont carry on in this 
Assembly in a tirade that is despicable and hypocritical as I’ve 
ever heard in my life, he prompted me to take part in this debate 
today. He prompted me to take part. He can stand up in this 
Assembly and talk about two members that are out of the House 
when more than 35 of his colleagues aren’t sitting in their seats. 
Mr. Chairman, I was waiting for you. I challenged you and 
chided you to call him to order, and you didn’t bother. He 
covered every range and topic that wasn’t related to this motion. 
You let him go and you let him go and you let him go. 
 
Well I want to tell you, we’ve got a motion before this 
Assembly. We’re not here to debate headlines, Mr. Chairman. 
We’re not here to debate headlines. We’re here to get some 
answers. My colleagues have raised issues in this House and not 
one of them have been answered. For two weeks we’ve debated 
in this House and what did we get? What did we get? A bunch 
of garbage. Sanctimonious speeches by the member from 
Rosemont who puts on his halo and stands there and says who 
isn’t in the House. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that member maybe can 
look for headlines. We want some answers. We want some 
answers from the people that run this government. We see a 
government here that’s governing by desperation, a government 
that’s governing by desperation, that announces the last dying 
breath. In their dying breath, after they've governed four years, 
they start making some announcements of things they should 
have done for four years — announce six CAT scans, when 
they didn’t build any and buy any for four years. You call that a 
government by desperation. They govern by desperation 
because they are announcing things that they should have done 
while they should have been governing. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

669 
 

The Health minister here says he stand up and he’s 
embarrassed. Well he’s got reason to be embarrassed. He’s got 
reason to be embarrassed because he isn’t worth a buck. The 
answers you gave us over the last two years aren’t worth a 
dollar. He stands up and talks about kids in school that he 
taught when he was in grade 4. Was that where you learned to 
stick out your tongue? I’ve never, since 1971, witnessed 
anything quite that despicable — ever, ever. And he has the 
guts to stand in this House and say he’s embarrassed. 
 
Now all of a sudden he’s embarrassed. Well, he should be. He 
should be because I wish, along with the member from 
Rosemont, that the people of Saskatchewan could sit in this 
House. Well I’ve got news for you, Mr. Rosemont. I’ve got 
news for you because most of your constituents are in this 
House. Most of your constituents see your despicable actions. 
They see your big majority covering up and standing up and 
trying to say, we’re not here to get headlines. Oh, no. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, my colleagues don’t get headlines. They don’t 
get headlines. They haven’t been in court. My colleagues 
haven’t been in court. Name one since 1971 that’s been hauled 
before the courts of this land . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I do believe that the debate in 
this House is getting a little bit out of hand and is certainly 
away from the topic being discussed. And I must add at this 
point in time that members from both sides of the House are 
guilty. And I’m giving fair warning now to the speaker who is 
now speaking and any future speakers — any future speakers 
— that I will rule very, very strictly for members on both sides 
of the House. Let’s get back to the debate. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well that’s very nice, and I respect your ruling, 
very sarcastically, because I listened to the sanctimonious 
member from Rosemont not being called to order when I chided 
you. I chided you to call him to order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the member challenging the ruling of the 
chairman? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Then please carry on. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I said I will respect your ruling 
and I will talk about why that minister is worth a dollar. 
 
The member from Rosemont, a minister of this cabinet and a 
minister of the government, chided us and said we were seeking 
headlines. I’m responding to that chide and saying that this Bill, 
this motion before us, isn’t to spend a dollar to look for a 
headline. Because my colleagues, since 1971, have never gotten 
the front page headlines like your colleagues have — like your 
colleagues have. Show me one since 1971, and I can show you 
lots since 1982. 
 
You’re the one that raised it, Mr. Rosemont. You’re the 
sanctimonious one that raised it. And you said you want  

to talk about headline hunters. Well I want to tell you, we’re 
here to get some answers. And we’re saying that the Minister of 
Health better get down to business and start answering some 
questions. And I’d like to ask the member from Rosemont: 
where is the minister or former minister of Highways? I haven’t 
seen him in here for three weeks. I don’t know where he is. And 
I could list 35, if you want me to, right now, that aren’t in their 
seats. But I’m not going to. 
 
(1545) 
 
I’m going to tell the Minister of Health that I wanted an answer 
on integrated facilities in Lafleche, in Coronach, in Gravelbourg 
— didn’t get an answer. He’s not even on the five-year list, and 
they were on the list before you formed office, before you 
formed the government. They would have been built. They 
would have been built. The rural hospitals in Saskatchewan are 
in a position of financial ruin with this government, and this 
government isn’t doing anything about it. They haven’t done 
anything about it. 
 
We raised the issue of dental care in our rural schools. The 
Minister of Health said everything is fine, there’s no problem 
out there. Well I want to tell you there’s a big problem out 
there. There are cut-backs in local nurses in the health region. I 
got a letter from the Minister of Health explaining away a 
situation that your own candidate for nomination in my 
constituency raised with me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The next MLA. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I passed . . . He didn’t win the nomination, big 
dummy. He didn’t even win the nomination. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 
member to please not use that kind of language in this House. 
Now please carry on. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, the member for . . . that is Acting 
House Leader, makes it very difficult to use the kind of words 
that are parliamentary. He makes it very difficult for me. He 
makes it very, very difficult. I can’t be sanctimonious like the 
member for Rosemont was. I don’t have a green halo. I don’t 
have a halo. 
 
But I want to tell the Minister of Health that the last time we 
had a food bank in Assiniboia was when we had a Tory 
government in the ’30s. We now have a food bank. We are a 
great nation of health delivery in our country, and in Assiniboia 
we have now a . . . proud, proud to say that we have a food 
bank. Thanks to your health programs. Thanks to the programs 
that you are doing. I am saying to you that this is an issue. This 
is an issue, and the issue is important. Is this minister going to 
answer some questions, or is he worth the dollar that we say he 
should have? 
 
I think we’ve made our position very clear. We’ve made it loud 
and clear. The position our caucus raised here, that the Minister 
of Social Services, the sanctimonious member that stood up in 
this House from Rosemont and said that we were degrading the 
House and embarrassing them . . . But we raised the issue of 
liquor advertising. His minister didn’t talk about the health 
effects of our young  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

670 
 

people being enticed to use alcohol. He could sanctimoniously 
stand up in this House and defend the Minister of Health, that 
for two weeks never said one word against liquor advertising, 
wouldn’t respond to liquor advertising. But the sanctimonious 
member from Rosemont can say that his minister’s done a 
wonderful job. Well he maybe agrees with liquor advertising 
and the good it does our young people. 
 
I want to tell you that after the next election there won’t be 
liquor advertising. I can tell you there won’t be liquor 
advertising, and there won’t be pressures on our young people. 
You are governing as a desperate government. The desperation 
has let to announcements; the announcements are being 
accepted by the people of Saskatchewan as just so much 
hog-wash. They don’t believe you any more, and that’s why we 
moved that he only gets one buck. There’s another 20 of them 
that shouldn’t get as much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Mr. Chairman, the comments from the 
members opposite and the performance today in the House here 
prompt me to make a few comments on this motion. 
 
It’s a motion with respect to the Minister of Health, and I’m 
really sitting back here wondering what is the tactic of the 
opposition. Why would they pick the department that is the 
most successful department of this government? The 
department that . . . Why would they introduce this motion, this 
unhealthy motion, on Health? 
 
It seems quite apparent to me, Mr. Chairman, that while it’s 
quite widely known that they have nothing but contempt for our 
judicial system — they demonstrate that from time to time — 
they have nothing but contempt for our parliamentary process. 
That’s quite evident as well. 
 
What really concerns me, Mr. Chairman, as a member of the 
legislature, is that they’re demonstrating some contempt here 
for the taxpayers as well. We are here to do the business of the 
people of Saskatchewan. It costs a great deal of money to run 
this Assembly. 
 
I can recall, Mr. Chairman, when I was first elected to this 
Assembly in 1982, I was very impressed and very thrilled with 
the privilege of serving in this legislature for my constituents. In 
fact in my maiden speech, if you recall, I referred to this as a 
“cathedral of democracy.” 
 
Well, colleagues, if this is a cathedral of democracy, the 
performance of the opposition today . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. As I said earlier on, I will not 
tolerate any longer, debates by members relating to each other’s 
performance or behaviour or any such issue. 
 
Let’s get on with the motion which states, and let me read it 
again so all members are clear: 
 

That the salary of the Minister of Health be reduced to $1. 
 
That is the issue before the House. That is the topic being  

debated. Please stick to that. 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Thank you. Thank, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
delighted to stick to that motion. That motion, more than any 
other performance in the past several weeks, has demonstrated 
that the opposition are not only irresponsible, they’re absolutely 
contemptuous to the taxpayers of this province. They obviously 
haven’t done their homework. 
 
Their tactic appears to be, ask an unanswerable, stupid question, 
and when the minister is unable to respond, as is the case when 
the question is unanswerable, simply repeat it over and over 
again to delay and obstruct the business of this House. They’ve 
done that now for several days. 
 
They put forward questions that they know an intelligent 
answer cannot be given, and simply repeat it. When their tactic 
begins to not pay dividends for them — and I’m sure that they 
are convinced that the public are beginning to see that this thing 
is not looking very good for them — they then introduce this 
kind of a motion, to reduce the salary of the minister to $1. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, that as a member of the 
legislature who, when elected, considered it an honour and a 
privilege to serve, I can tell you that I am not impressed with 
this kind of a performance. This motion is designed not to deal 
with the issues of health, but to try to create the impression that 
the opposition is not being given the privileges that should be 
extended to them. They are not convincing the public; they’re 
not convincing other members of the legislature. 
 
The motion is, in my view, an obvious waste of our time here in 
this House, and it should be defeated. And that if the opposition 
in this legislature took their responsibilities seriously, they 
would get on with the business of dealing with estimates, ask 
intelligent questions, put forward the questions they feel they 
should, that their constituents are asking them to do, and let the 
taxpayers of this province have a break for a change — quit 
demonstrating the contempt that they have, not only for the 
parliament of this country, but for the taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank you for 
recognizing me, and I too feel it’s my privilege to stand in this 
House today and speak on this motion. 
 
I would like to first start off, Mr. Chairman, by saying that such 
a blatant attack on our Minister of Health is not only towards 
the Minister of Health but is towards the whole Health 
department, all the officials that the minister has working 
diligently, and especially over the last four years. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that in my riding I didn’t take 
health issues lightly, and neither did my minister. In my riding 
of Cut Knife-Lloydminster the Minister of Health has earned 
every bit of the buck that he gets as a member of this 
legislature. Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Health has put three 
hospitals in my riding — three hospitals that have been 
promised for years and years by the members of the opposition, 
but just political ploys. Mr. Chairman,  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

671 
 

in four years my Minister of Health has delivered to my 
constituents much-needed facilities. 
 
I want to indicate to you that my people have appreciated that. 
My people have appreciated the fact that they’re going to have 
fine facilities to go for their treatments. And I want to thank the 
minister’s officials for working with my local hospital boards 
out in my riding. I think it’s just fantastic how they got along 
and how they’ve agreed to the types of facilities that they’re 
now building and have built. 
 
I also want to thank the Minister of Health for a nursing home 
that was delivered to Lloydminster. Now a nursing home has 
been built, and this is under hard work from the minister — 
very hard work. And they say he’s only worth a buck. I cannot 
believe it. And they holler from across the floor when we speak 
of the fine things that our Health minister has done in this 
province. I also have another nursing home scheduled to be 
built by our Health minister. He’s just doing a fantastic job, and 
Cut Knife will eventually have a nursing home. And these are 
various projects that our Health minister has done. And I cannot 
stand in this . . . I cannot sit in this Assembly to let such blatant 
attacks take place. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the minister on his various 
programs for the safety of this province by bringing through to 
the schools and to the awareness of the public, through ad 
campaigns around Christmas and various heavily travelled 
festive times of the year, and bringing the awareness of the 
effects alcohol and driving can have. And by that it has proven 
— statistically it’s been proven — that it’s been working. And 
they talk about, he’s not worth more than a buck. I find it very, 
very hard to understand how they can stand in this House and 
speak and mislead the public of this province. 
 
The public know what’s going on. I mean, they drive by the 
hospitals; they use the hospitals; they use the nursing homes. 
We don’t have the moratorium on nursing homes. We don’t 
have moratoriums on hospital facilities any longer in this 
province; it’s been lifted. It’s been lifted, Mr. Chairman, by our 
Health minister. And for that I would like to congratulate him. I 
would like to congratulate the Minister of Health and his 
officials. 
 
And I would like the members opposite now, if they wouldn’t 
mind, is to leave this motion and to get on with the business of 
the House so that we can get to finish the work of the province, 
and get back to our ridings and do the work that we’ve been 
elected to do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Minister, I certainly will not be supporting 
such a blatant motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all, 
strange as this may appear, I like this motion. And I like this 
motion because it will greatly help me in Saskatoon Westmount 
when my constituents know that the NDP are so irresponsible, 
so unrepentant, so incapable of learning, that they would 
actually personally attack the Minister of Health who preserved 
the private St. Paul’s Hospital from being taken over by a 
government  

bureaucracy who would . . . The Minister of Health who 
expanded University Hospital, the Minister of Health who is 
helping to expand St. Paul’s Hospital, this is the Minister of 
Health that the NDP government wants to discredit personally. 
And I think this is actually — although it is a waste of our time 
— is actually extremely helpful. 
 
(1600) 
 
Of course, we will defeat it, but I want to thank them for 
showing their true colours, that they are not the least bit 
interested in health care. They are not interested in my 
constituent who phoned yesterday who, I could tell from his 
voice, was in extreme pain and was telling me that his doctor 
had ordered a bone scan for him in a week and that he will have 
to wait three months. Those kind of things don’t matter to them. 
They are not interested in the personal suffering of people who 
have to wait for three months for a serious scan, for something 
that may preserve his life a little longer, and it’s a race against 
time because necessary hospital expansion, necessary 
equipment, was not there. And they ridicule the idea of six CAT 
scans. Where were they when they needed them? 
 
North Dakota, which is not exactly a thriving metropolis, has 
two or three times more of this kind of equipment than we have 
— a tiny state. You were so busy . . . The NDP were so busy 
making people afraid that the PC government would take away 
health care, they weren’t interested in looking after health care 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I always have difficulty talking while someone else is talking, at 
least while I try to maintain a certain level of civility. But the 
member from Quill Lakes’ comment was so absolutely 
priceless . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. We are not talking 
about any member’s comments, particularly the one from Quill 
Lakes since he’s not in the debate at the time. Please keep your 
remarks to the motion. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — It’s always a temptation to get to their level 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I would. When I think about 
the number of people in my constituency who have phoned me 
and are so concerned about long waiting lists, and we know that 
the only way to keep down the long waiting list is to have 
nursing homes . . . That’s why we have Frank Eliason being 
built. That’s why we just spent our time opening Circle Drive 
Alliance Nursing Home which, I might add, the NDP candidate 
from Westmount voted against while an alderman — voted 
against Circle Drive high-rise senior residence. So they are not 
concerned about the nursing homes that are needed, so that the 
hospitals with senior patients being there who need a nursing 
home instead of a hospital bed . . . They’re not concerned about 
solutions. And this is what the people of Saskatchewan have to 
realize. If you want to vote . . . We have a Department of Health 
and a Minister of Health that is concerned about solutions. 
 
And so this is why, in one day, after opening a cancer research 
clinic at University Hospital, he rushes over to the other side of 
Saskatoon and opens the Circle Drive Alliance Nursing Home, 
where two NDP aldermen voted against that excellent, fine 
senior citizens’ high-rise  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

672 
 

where they will receive wonderful treatment. 
 
And then we go on several months before and we opened up 
Frank Eliason in Fairview, another nursing home. And just a 
few blocks from my house is a new Saskatoon Convalescent 
Home. When I campaigned in 1982 and the old Saskatoon 
convalescent home, the people were so crowded in that home 
that they lacked privacy, that it was difficult for them to look 
after themselves without people seeing . . . without having their 
privacy invaded. The halls were crowded; it was a fire trap. It 
had been there for many, many years. Certainly it had been built 
by love but it needed to be preserved by hard economics and 
bucks. And now we have a brand-new Saskatoon Convalescent 
Home, three floors, good quality care, plenty of room, all the 
high standards. It’s right there on Idylwyld, and if you ever dare 
have . . . You know, if you want to waste your time driving 
through Saskatoon, while you won’t be welcomed politically, 
you can see it right there on Idylwyld and 31st. 
 
And so there is concrete examples of what this Minister of 
Health and this government has done. And it’s that Minister of 
Health who’s been the Minister of Health since we got elected 
in 1982 who’s presided all over this. So we go from Saskatoon 
Convalescent Home to the west side of my riding, to the east 
side of my riding to St. Paul’s Hospital, just across from me, 
although the nuns live in my area, where there’s a big, huge 
sign and expansion going on, where they’re so happy to see that 
we gave them money, not for paper work, not for bureaucrat, 
but for health care staff — for nurses and nurse orderlies and 
nurse’s aids. And they were so happy to see that announcement, 
when the Minister of Health said that there will be more money, 
not for empire building in the Department of Health, but for 
staff. 
 
And he was not playing a political game but he decided what 
health means is to have nurses in the hospitals, to have adequate 
staff to give that kind of care, not to create empire building in 
Regina. 
 
And then we go on where many or my constituents, including 
my husband, work at University Hospital. And you go from 
University Hospital to the university buildings and there’s a 
huge hole there, and it wasn’t there two days ago or two weeks 
ago, and they keep on working and working to build the new 
cancer clinic. And you look up and there’s more building to the 
top of University Hospital. And that’s the kind of concrete 
examples of health care that the Minister of Health has provided 
in one city, in one area of Saskatoon. 
 
I’m not going to talk about what they’ve done in all other areas. 
But when I think about health care, I think of that man who 
phoned me yesterday and who needs a bone scan in a race with 
time, with a serious health problem. And he has to have a 
waiting list. And if we had been doing the kinds of things . . . If 
the government had been doing the kinds of things that we were 
trying to do in the last four years that man would not be in the 
situation it is today. 
 
I think of two couples, both of them dying of cancer, and they 
wouldn’t mind me saying so because they have reconciled to 
that, and I was telling them after I visited  

them that I was going to open . . . going to be there to attend the 
opening of the cancer clinic and how happy they were that 
although it would not help them that it would help someone 
else. 
 
So when we think of politics, we don’t think of headlines. We 
think of those people in our constituency who needed the help 
and it wasn’t there and we’re going to make sure it’s for the 
next person. And for this reason, I reject the asinine, wasteful, 
ridiculous, personal motion of the NDP motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Chairman, just a few very short points on 
this motion. I’m not going to repeat the things that were said by 
the member for Saskatoon Westmount, and I’m not going to get 
into the fact again that there was $100 million for staff just very 
shortly. I’ll stick to Saskatoon. There are other members from 
other constituencies who can speak as to what this Minister of 
Health has done in their areas and why this motion should be 
rejected by this Assembly. 
 
But I’d like to point out that our government is allocating $3.5 
million to reduce the waiting lists in the Saskatoon hospitals 
and that’s over and above the $100 million that was talked 
about earlier by the member from Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
I’d like to point out as well, Mr. Chairman, another good reason 
why this motion should be rejected in the Assembly this 
afternoon is the fact that, as pointed out, this is the Minister of 
Health we have had from day one from when we took over 
from the NDP. He, together with Walter Podiluk, his deputy, 
and the other good officials in our Department of Health, have 
taken us from an eighth-place standing in Canada on health care 
spending to where we sit today being the highest per capita 
spenders on health care in Canada. And certainly we, as 
legislators, can’t run the day-to-day operations of health care. 
We can provide the professionals with what they need to 
operate the system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and that is 
dollars. And we certainly have fulfilled that obligation and done 
all we could do, and I must commend the distribution of health 
care by the officials, the health care officials. It has certainly 
been the best that one could imagine. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that looking at Saskatoon 
specifically, and for the Saskatoon members here in this House, 
the reason that this motion should be rejected by the Assembly, 
Mr. Minister: if we look at University Hospital expansion, 
$30.4 million; 300 new permanent jobs will be created; eight 
new operating theatres; 105 new hospital beds; new CAT 
scanners as mentioned earlier. We have the City Hospital. It 
will become a brand-new hospital, 510 beds. New permanent 
jobs will result from that as well, Mr. Minister. The cancer 
clinic which I think that our government can — and this 
particular minister can — take considerable credit for it, $16.1 
million project; a new 80,000 square foot building to replace the 
existing 30,000 square foot building; new processing labs, 
treatment rooms; 20 treatment and examination rooms; new 
research and administration areas. And I think the credit must 
go to this government  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

673 
 

and the Minister of Health, and I will certainly not be 
supporting the ridiculous motion that’s now before this House, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not rise this 
afternoon, Mr. Chairman, to defend the record of the Minister 
of Health. The record will speak for itself; has spoken for itself. 
Neither will I stand to applaud the Minister of Health’s duties 
this past four years. Again, I state that the record has spoken for 
itself and the people of Saskatchewan recognize his laudable 
record for it. 
 
My fellow colleagues have made certain references to that 
record, and to say that it was an exaggeration would be totally 
incorrect. If anything, it's a minuscule applause for the minister 
for the terrific job he has been doing. And don’t for one 
moment believe that the people of Saskatchewan do not 
appreciate his efforts and the record that we have put forward 
this last four years. 
 
However, I do want to speak just on a couple of points, Mr. 
Chairman. I have found it disturbing, particularly so in these 
last two weeks and within my four years of serving as a 
member of the legislature, to have heard the schizophrenic — 
and I do say schizophrenic — logic of the members of the 
opposition. And I will change that terminology a little later on. 
 
On one hand, we have them saying in the House and in the 
public domain that the projects that the Minister of Health has 
put forward, and the record of this government for the last four 
years, are imaginary projects. They’ve used it constantly. I 
would invite those members to come with me to Saskatoon, as 
my fellow colleagues have indicated previously, and drive 
down 22nd Street to look at the imaginary project on 22nd 
Street and Fairlight, the level 3, level 4 care nursing home, 238 
beds, the first of its kind, the largest in the province — the 
uniqueness of that nursing home, because it is all-encompassing 
and comprehensive, a project that never was thought of, let 
alone acted upon before, in the history of this province. And I 
would invite those members to come with me to Saskatoon and 
drive down 22nd Street. 
 
(1615) 
 
I would invite the members to drive down College Drive and 
look at those imaginary cranes that the Leader of the Opposition 
said were lacking in the city of Saskatoon; to look at those 
imaginary cranes that the past minister of Health said were 
imaginary in the city of Saskatoon; to see the addition on top of 
the University Hospital. I would invite the members also to 
come with me to Saskatoon and drive down Avenue P and 20th 
to the St. Paul’s project. The NDP have been on record of 
striking fear into the hearts of the Grey Nuns with their attitude 
towards the hospital here in Regina and towards their attitude to 
the hospital in Saskatoon, that being St. Paul’s Hospital. I 
would ask the members to drive with me anywhere in 
Saskatoon, or follow with my colleagues through the city of 
Regina, or through any town, village, or hamlet in 
Saskatchewan, to look at the imaginary, proposed projects. 

Also they have been on record many, many times saying the 
complete opposite: that these projects are desperately needed; 
where are they? A complete contradiction, and yet they would 
have the public of Saskatchewan believe that they can speak out 
of both sides of their mouths at the same time. 
 
But the one that cuts at the heart of the public and patient care 
in this province is to suggest that it is just a political ploy, that it 
is just politically motivated. 
 
You see, what they’re suggesting to the public of this province 
is, up till 1982 health care in Saskatchewan came to a standstill; 
up till 1982, there was no need for additional health care. And 
we’ve heard of the moratorium in the level 3, level 4, care 
homes. It came to a standstill. They would have the people of 
the province believe that up till 1982 additions to hospitals were 
not needed, so they didn’t build any. They were suggesting that 
up until 1982 additional nursing staff was not needed. 
 
The truth of the matter is, and the public well recognizes this, 
that those things did not come to a halt in ’82. Those matters 
were pressing on April the 25th, ’82; April the 24th, ’82; 1981, 
1980, 1979, and back — but they did nothing about it. 
 
So therefore, when we took power from that inaction, when we 
took power from that group that said they cared about health 
care in this province, and we started building those projects 
because we recognized the need, because there was a 
tremendous amount of catch-up for the neglect from ’75, ’76, 
’77 on, they can’t find a counter-argument other than standing 
up in their seats and saying, one, those are imaginary projects; 
two, it’s a political ploy. 
 
You have to wonder where their hearts are in concern for the 
general well-being and health care of the public of this 
province. As I stated earlier, I called it schizophrenic logic. 
What the public are seeing today in every riding in this province 
is not schizophrenic logic but schizophrenic panic, because the 
people of Saskatchewan have finally recognized and understood 
that old saying of the wolf in lamb’s clothing. They’ve 
understood what really is underneath the hide of those members 
opposite. And what is underneath the hide and what is lacking 
underneath that hide is a heart. They don’t care about health 
care. They will try to use medi-scare as they did in ’82, as they 
did in ’78. 
 
But I believe that if anyone in my city, because obviously the 
members of the opposition won’t drive with me down those 
streets because to them those are imaginary projects — but if 
any citizen in the city of Saskatoon drives with me they will see 
that those are real projects and they will be thankful for it, that a 
government finally determined that health care was non-existent 
in this province and did something about it. 
 
Another point I wish to bring up. There are times in this 
legislature, and particularly when I have to talk to my 
constituents one on one, or with my students as today, who 
came to the legislature, and there are times when I'm visiting 
with those people, that I am embarrassed. And I  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

674 
 

am not embarrassed because of my colleagues on this side of 
the House. I am embarrassed that I, in all good nature, defend 
the actions of the members of the opposition. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We never asked you to. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — The member from North East says they never 
asked me to, which also shows me that the intellectual 
capability of that member, because you should be asking me to. 
Because my public who talks to me are saying, what are those 
people doing down there? 
 
I don’t have to go on at length. I do not have to go on at length 
at the types of things and shenanigans and antics that have gone 
on in this . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. We’re once again starting to stray 
from the topic. Please get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Weiman: — I apologize, Mr. Chairman. I thought that I 
was on topic but I take your ruling. I believe that I am 
defending the minister, which arose out of the estimates. And as 
we know, Health estimates are wide ranging when you come to 
topic number one, general administration. And therefore I am 
willing, Mr. Chairman — I do apologize to you. 
 
You’re doing a terrific job in a job that is very difficult at times 
to do. But I do apologize and I do wish to tie this into the 
Health estimates and the derogatory comments that were made 
in the motion towards the Minister of Health who has done a 
terrific job for this province. 
 
But what have I heard during the estimates, the estimates of 
Health, that impinge on the character of our Minister of Health? 
I have heard utterances in this House, Mr. Chairman, and the 
public has heard those utterances from the member from Regina 
Centre, that are both foul and dehumanizing. Now I will talk 
again about those estimates and the proceedings that have 
transpired during those estimates that impinge on the character 
of my minister. 
 
What I am really seeing, and the public of Saskatchewan is 
seeing, is the complete — the complete — unprofessionalism in 
this Legislative Assembly. And for that I am ashamed. And I 
am ashamed for member of the opposition for having put me in 
that position. 
 
I am convinced that the motion directed at the minister of 
Health, Mr. Chairman, has been brought about not because of a 
concern of health issues; definitely has not been brought about 
because of a lack of answers, for I have heard for the last two 
weeks the minister giving answers to the same questions 
numerous times. 
 
But I will suggest that it wasn’t motivated by that, Mr. 
Chairman. I will suggest that what we have seen, as I have 
indicated, an unprofessional attitude in that the members of the 
opposition were so convinced that there would be an early April 
election that they’d only completed their homework up until 
that early April election, and since that time have been 
floundering and using this time to scramble, to make 
themselves look like legitimate legislators — a fact that any 
effort will not fulfil — and that  

they do not have any legitimate opposition, parliamentary 
procedures, to bring forward to this House to enhance and flow 
through the business of this House so that business of this 
House can carry on 
 
It is an absolute waste, an absolute waste of the taxpayers’ 
money. It is a complete example of unprofessionalism on the 
part of Assembly persons here. And if anyone should apologize 
for their actions, it should definitely not be the Minister of 
Health, but the members opposite. 
 
Lastly, if in all fairness I can state that the members opposite do 
have a minimal concern for health, it is this: what we have 
witnessed in the last two weeks, what we have witnessed in the 
last two weeks in this legislature and borne out by the public 
response that I’ve received in my constituency over the last two 
weeks, is that members opposite, in terms of health, are 
dreadfully concerned regarding their malady. For they suffer — 
and it’s been witnessed and borne out in this House — for they 
suffer from a case of terminal stupidity. 
 
And what they would have the public of Saskatchewan is to 
suffer from the same disease, but the public of Saskatchewan is 
not buying their prescription. Mr. Chairman, I directly and 
completely oppose the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the remarks by the 
usually silent back-benches of the government side of the 
House have compelled me to rise and say a few words in 
response and in support of this motion. 
 
I have heard several members opposite, who don’t even know 
what their cabinet is doing from day to day, rise and address 
everything that they could except the issue in this resolution. 
Now isn’t that interesting, and doesn’t that tell you something? 
Having stood and made their speeches in this House, none of 
them have addressed the question here, that being of a minister 
— and it could be any other minister . . . 
 
It’s a question of the policy of this government and the attitude 
of this government towards this legislature, and through this, to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and that is not to provide 
information that the taxpayers of this province who pay their 
taxes ought to have and be able to get. That is the issue, Mr. 
Chairman. And I am interested in seeing that none of those 
members addressed it and it is clear that the reason that they 
have not addressed it is because they are just as embarrassed by 
it as I think some of their constituents are. 
 
We have here a situation for two weeks — for two whole weeks 
— where we have been considering the estimates of the 
biggest-spending department in the government — the 
biggest-spending department in the government. And the 
minister in charge has refused to answer substantial and direct 
questions regarding those expenditures. That is what we are 
talking about here. 
 
Now the member from Westmount stood and said something 
about irresponsibility. And I ask: what could be more 
irresponsible than the refusal by any government of any stripe 
to answer questions put in the House? It’s not  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

675 
 

just these estimates, Mr. Chairman; this is the history of this 
government for four years. 
 
It has been raised in this House on several occasions — the 
matter of orders in council, which not us individually have 
ordered over those four years, but which this Legislative 
Assembly has ordered this cabinet to provide. And two years 
later those answers have yet to be tabled in this House. So this 
is not an isolated case of refusing to provide information. It has 
finally culminated in the way that this minister has highlighted 
this strategy of the government — of stonewalling, and not 
letting the people know the things that they have every right in 
the world to know. 
 
The members from Saskatoon obviously are very easy to 
impress, those who have spoken. They are very easy to impress, 
if they can convince themselves that this government has done 
such a good job that they can be proud of an 8,000 waiting list 
to get into Saskatoon hospitals. I did not hear any one of them 
address that issue as they spoke on this resolution. And I’m 
asking, how come? Because they know that their constituents, 
as the people of Saskatchewan know, are disappointed in a 
performance which would cause as severe a situation as 88,000 
people on a waiting list . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 8,800. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is it 8,800 people? . . . 8,800 on a waiting 
list in the city of Saskatoon. That is the record of this 
government. That is why the minister refuses to answer 
questions, and the refusal to answer those questions, Mr. 
Chairman, are the issue here. 
 
(1630) 
 
You know, I understand that two years ago there was a motion 
just like this one put in this House, a motion directed at the 
minister in charge of the crop insurance, the member from Arm 
River. The same arguments were made by the government 
opposite. I’ve read the Hansard. Exactly the same arguments 
were made. They rejected the motion, and lo and behold, two 
years later the Premier remembers the motion and he says, yes 
it was right. The point that the opposition made was a good 
point. And he removed that minister from the cabinet. 
 
How chameleon-like can these people get? How chameleon-like 
can these people get? You know, Mr. Member from Weyburn, 
that’s an animal that changes its colours according to its 
political need. I mean, they’re usually . . . The other term, 
member from Weyburn, is called Tory. 
 
Now when they were in opposition, they moved similar kinds of 
motions. You won’t recall that, Mr. Chairman, because you 
weren’t here. But it seems to me how the attitude of some 
politicians change when they’re on the opposition side, and then 
when they’re on this government side. Somehow they can argue 
now that this motion is out of order. It’s a perfectly acceptable 
procedural move by any opposition, to make a point. And we’re 
making the point. We are hoping that with this motion we can 
jolt this minister and this government as a whole into some 
reality — the reality that they have to  

deal with the issues; the reality that they cannot go on 
indefinitely ignoring all of those issues that face the people of 
this province, which they have the right to expect this 
government to deal with. 
 
And if we can with this motion make this government and this 
minister face some of those realities and some of those issues, 
then we will have achieved a great deal. 
 
We have raised the issues of health in these estimates, Mr. 
Chairman. Day after day we have raised the issues in the field 
of health that people have raised with us over the past months. 
It’s the government and the minister who have refused to 
address them, by stonewalling. When we ask questions about 
the position of the government on established program funding, 
the minister refuses to answer. When we ask questions about 
the reduction of nurses in the dental care plan, the minister 
refuses to answer. When I asked the other day, questions about 
the minister’s advisory committee on alcohol, drug abuse, and 
youth, he refused to answer, even though he has had in his 
hands the report from that committee which was presented to 
him on February 28th. 
 
Now surely, Mr. Chairman, having gone for two weeks without 
once addressing the issues — and that is by the government — 
refusing to answer the question, the point has to be raised that 
it’s time this government changed its stance. Oh, the member 
from Rosemont stood in his usual way and he said that we have 
been here for a month and that we have been on these estimates 
for two weeks and nothing has been accomplished. Well I want 
to remind the member for Rosemont and the government that 
we have been here for a month, and the throne speech and the 
budget announced some very major legislation, and we have yet 
to see it tabled in this House. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. We are not discussing the throne 
speech or the budget, and I would ask the member to get back 
to the topic. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I want to talk about 
legislation as it affects Health, and some of the legislation that 
was referred to in the Speech from the Throne and is referred to 
in the budget, affects Health. 
 
Hospitals have been hard done by, by insurance companies who 
have increased liability insurance to such a level that it was 
previously unbelievable that it could happen. It was announced 
in the throne speech and I believe the budget — or was it the 
budget only? — that this government would have a proposal to 
deal with that question, even though for the last year and even 
now hospitals have got to pay those bills. Because the 
premiums are arriving on the administrator's desk and they've 
got to pay, with 300 and 400 per cent increases in liability 
insurance premiums. So the government does the political 
reaction. It announces that they’re going to do something, and 
to this day there is yet anything to be in this House tabled as a 
proposal, or anything to be tabled in this House as a Bill. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that the reason there is such 
silence on the issues by the government, and the refusal to 
answer any questions, is because this government got caught in 
their own trap. They got caught  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

676 
 

in their own trap. They presented a budget in this House, 
including estimates for the Department of Health which they 
never intended to pass. It was never intended to see the light of 
day. It was presented here with the theory and with the thought 
that they were going to call an election right after that budget, 
and for some strange reason they got cold feet and they didn’t 
call it. Maybe I say too strongly, strange reason, because I 
suppose, with the mentality of a Conservative government, 
when you know that you’re going to get defeated, you hang on 
as long as you can. 
 
Well they might hang on, Mr. Chairman, and the Minister of 
Health may sit here for as many days as he likes and refuse to 
answer questions, but as has been said before, they can run as 
hard and as long as they can, but they can’t hide. At some point 
in time there is a day of reckoning faced by any government 
anywhere, and that’s during an election. And that is going to 
come whether this government calls it or whether they wait and 
it automatically gets called because of the provisions of the 
constitution. They can run, but they can’t hide. 
 
And yes, maybe last year estimates in Health did not take as 
long as this year. The fact of the matter is, as I checked 
Hansard the other day, the minister would stand up and give 
answers last year. You will remember that, Mr. Chairman, 
because you were here. I ask: what has changed? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Election time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s right. As the member from 
Shaunavon says, we are now on the eve of an election, so the 
government now feels, boy, we better not provide any answers 
because surely in some way they may cause some 
embarrassment. 
 
The only thing that has changed is the fact that we’re nearing an 
election, Mr. Chairman, and I say to the minister and to any 
other minister whose estimates will be coming up, that is not a 
good enough reason to hide from the public information that it 
is theirs. That’s the issue in this debate, and that’s the issue in 
this resolution. 
 
Over the last year there have been situations in hospitals that 
some people have claimed were dangerous because of shortage 
of staff. We have had nurses who have felt the need to organize 
petitions and to demonstrate in front of the legislature. We have 
8,800 people on a waiting list waiting to get into a hospital bed 
in Saskatoon. That’s why the minister refuses to answer the 
questions, Mr. Chairman, because he does not have the kind of 
answers that he believes, or his Premier, believes, are going to 
get them any votes. 
 
You know, it is interesting that they called the Health estimates 
first. They call them first because they know that when they 
start announcing — and the minister should listen to this, 
because the hospitals are talking about it — when they start 
announcing the results of the negotiations that they have had 
with hospitals on the enrichment program, there are going to be 
no hospitals who are going to be satisfied. Because in that 
enrichment program, we are finding out positions are not being 
approved only for nursing care — bedside nursing care — 
they’re being  

approved for maintenance and housekeeping and dietary. And 
the minister does not want that to become public, and so he 
does not want to provide the answers. And they called his 
estimates, thinking that they were going to end in a day and 
somehow those questions would never be raised. But they’re 
being raised, and they will be raised again. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the issue is why the government refuses to 
answer questions. This motion is a way to highlight that, and, 
indeed, if it can be passed, it couldn’t be no more justice than to 
do it on a minister who has tried for so long and so hard not to 
answer those questions. 
 
And any of the back-benchers and private members of the 
government side, if they had their political head on correctly 
today and wanted to save their political hide, would support this 
motion. They would support this motion, because they can 
stand up and give the speeches that some research person in 
their caucus has written. But nobody will believe what they say 
because the people out there feel it and they know what the 
problems that are there. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 
comments that I want to make with regards to the motion that 
was introduced by the NDP in opposition wherein it at least 
attempts to reduce the minister’s salary to $1. I want to make it 
clear, Mr. Chairman, to you and to the members of the House, 
what in fact this motion is really all about. 
 
It’s not just about reducing the Minister of Health’s salary to 
$1. In fact, what I see in that motion, Mr. Chairman, is a 
question of credibility within the members of the opposition. 
It’s a credibility question, seriously, Mr. Chairman. When the 
members of the opposition are so short of material to work in 
this parliamentary system as to have to introduce such a motion, 
one clearly understands that there is a lack of credibility within 
the NDP opposition, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I want to make some comments that will prove that 
particular case which they themselves have laid out in their 
motion, reducing the Minister of Health’s salary to $1. They 
have made that out. One of our members, and I want to refer to 
the member for Regina North East, when he made reference to 
our members on this side of the House, that our so-called 
back-benchers . . . Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, let me clear 
one thing up. On the government side of the House, we have no 
back-benchers. They’re all front line; they’re all first-class. And 
it’s been proven here today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The member for Regina North East said, very clearly — it’s on 
the record — that this government’s back-benchers were not 
prepared to stand up and defend the Minister of Health, they 
were not prepared to get up and speak on his motion. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, again, that’s what this motion is all about — the 
credibility of the members in the NDP opposition, and now in 
particular, the credibility of the member for Regina North East. 
He said that, and it’s not true, Mr. Chairman. It’s not true. And I 
tell the people watching, it’s not true. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

677 
 

I’m going to give the member for Regina North East a little 
account. Maybe you weren’t in the House when our members 
were speaking. I looked back here and I took note of who was 
speaking. I saw the member for Saskatoon Eastview get up. He 
spoke. He spoke in the House. 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Chairman, the member for Regina North 
East made the comment that members on this side of the House 
did not get up to speak on this motion. And I’m not going to let 
an untruth like that go by. Do you understand that, Mr. 
Member? I’m not going to let it go by. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Eastview clearly stood in this House 
to defend the minister and to speak on that motion. The member 
for Regina Westmount got up and gave a very good speech 
defending the minister and opposing this motion. The member 
for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, he was up. He got up and spoke as 
well, and he gave a good speech. The member for Saskatoon 
Fairview and the member for P.A. — all of those members, Mr. 
Chairman, were on their feet. 
 
That’s what we’re dealing with. We’re dealing with the 
question of credibility in the NDP. The member for Shaunavon, 
I might add, Mr. Chairman, comes into that whole question of 
credibility as well. It wasn’t long ago, a month or so ago, that 
he was in the paper. Oh, the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said that they don’t get headlines. 
Well, the member for Shaunavon was getting a few because the 
Minister of Finance was putting him on the front page because 
he challenged him. He challenged him to resign his seat, and the 
member — the member that’s responsible for Finance — said 
he would put his seat on the line. But the member for 
Shaunavon wasn’t prepared to do so to back up statements he 
made. 
 
Well I won’t say what that is, but I’ll tell you what it sure isn’t 
— he was not telling the truth. Again a member of the NDP in 
opposition, the member for Shaunavon, the whole question of 
credibility brought into this legislature. The Minister of Finance 
did that to him. 
 
(1645) 
 
That member for Shaunavon, before I get off of him, he’s 
always shouting across the floor here about all of those nurses 
out there in front of the legislature demonstrating. I suppose I 
need to remind the members of the opposition that there were a 
great deal of ambulances out there that were demonstrating. 
You bet — the Saskatchewan Road Ambulance Association. 
They were out there, lights on and sirens. That’s when the NDP 
were in government, Mr. Chairman. That’s when they were in 
government. But those boys over here now in NDP opposition 
have the nerve to get up and make — these chicks across the 
floor — they make a lot of noises across the floor. Mr. 
Chairman, clearly they’re into animals and birds. I don’t 
understand it. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, what did the Minister of Health do when 
we became government, and the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley became the Minister of Health? What did he do, 
Mr. Chairman? He took the opportunity that he had to give me a 
responsibility as his Legislative Secretary at that time to solve 
that ambulance problem. 

He said, look, Mr. Member from Moosomin, I don’t want to see 
ambulances ever again demonstrating in front of the legislature 
— not ever again — and I’m charging you with the 
responsibility of going out there, talking to the people in the 
industry, and putting together a program. 
 
Well if the NDP want to get up and criticize the ambulance 
program in this province, that’s fine for them. But, Mr. 
Chairman, I tell you, because of the Minister of Health — 
whose salary they want to reduce to $1 — this province has one 
of the best ambulance programs anywhere in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I realize it’s difficult 
for you. I realize it’s difficult for the Chair in such a motion. It’s 
only one sentence — reducing the minister’s salary to $1 — and 
how do you confine the debate to such a simple and certainly 
unnecessary motion? It’s very difficult. It’s very difficult, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
We see the member for Regina Centre, who has been on the 
news clucking, he’s been in these Chambers doing that. He 
looks like he’s prepared to do it again right now, Mr. Chairman. 
And I don’t think that that’s suitable to this House. The member 
from Regina North East got up, and again I’m talking about the 
credibility, and he got into the chameleons and changing 
colours and things. Not long ago the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was getting into the crows and the 
cawing stuff. And I don’t understand it, Mr. Chairman 
 
And I’m going to tell you, Mr. Chairman, I believe that I’m a 
pretty good person to talk about this. I have been here since 
1975. I didn’t just get in the door. So I have watched. And I’m 
going to tell the members in NDP opposition, I had two terms in 
opposition. Now I had two terms in opposition, and I’m now in 
a term in the government, so I know what it’s like to be in the 
opposition. 
 
Now we have, of course, the member for Quill Lakes. He’s 
starting to make noises. They haven’t put a name to what kind 
of noise that will relate to. I don’t know which animal that 
relates to, but the member for Quill Lakes, Mr. Chairman, is 
doing that right now while I’m trying to speak to this motion 
that the NDP have put before this House. I’m just trying to 
address the motion, and the member for Quill Lakes is 
interrupting; he’s laughing, making noises, and I don’t believe 
it’s acceptable. That’s what’s happening. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the nuts and bolts of what’s happening in 
here, and they’re all out of nuts and bolts across in the NDP 
opposition — more nuts than bolts — but Mr. Chairman, what’s 
bothering them the most, the very most, is that 85 per cent of 
the people of this province approve of the programs delivered 
by this Minister of Health and by this government, under the 
leadership of the member for Estevan. That’s what’s bothering 
them. 
 
This used to be an NDP issue, so they thought. But they lost it, 
Mr. Chairman. They lost it when they lost government in 1982 
— April 26th — and it slipped further and further and further 
away from them. And the member  
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

678 
 

for Quill Lakes has maybe slipped the farthest away. He’s as far 
as he can get away from the issue. So they’ve lost a very crucial 
pillar, if you like, to the NDP party. They’ve lost it because that 
old scare tactic, trying to scare the seniors in our nursing homes, 
that if we got into power, we’d take away health care as it was 
known. 
 
What they have been able to see and witness in this province, 
Mr. Chairman, is that under the leadership of the Premier of this 
province, and under the good administration of our Minister of 
Health, whose salary they want to reduce to $1, we have put the 
budget of the Department of Health up to $1 billion, more than 
ever under an NDP administration in 11 years. More. So how 
do you condemn a Minister of Health and a government who’s 
put more money into health care for the people of this province 
than any other political party, certainly more than the NDP did 
in 11 years. 
 
It’s pretty interesting how they can sit there in opposition and 
tell us all of the things that we need to build for the people of 
Saskatchewan. When they had 11 years in office, Mr. 
Chairman, and never did one thing — moratoriums on nursing 
homes. What a shame, Mr. Chairman. When there were people 
wanting to be in a special care home, needing to be in a special 
care home, what did they do? They said, we’re not going to 
build any more, we’re going to buy potash mines, and we’re 
going to blow $600 million into uranium. That's what they're 
going to do. Sure, that was a wonderful idea. 
 
Well, I want to tell you, and I sure wish the member for 
Shaunavon was here, but it doesn’t matter; it’s going to go on 
record. Just before we took government — just before — the 
member for Shaunavon was the minister responsible for special 
care homes. And we had never had special care homes built in 
my riding, Mr. Chairman. And let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, 
what did that member do? Prior to an election he’s out in my 
riding and they’re looking for a candidate. Well, in fact, they 
even had a candidate search committee. They put one together, 
literally did. They put an ad in the paper and a list of the names 
— a candidate search committee. This has to do with the 
credibility of the NDP, Mr. Chairman. It has to do with what we 
did in health, what we’re doing in health right now, what they 
failed to do in 11 years. It has to do with that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would like to draw to the 
attention of the member from Moosomin that he is treading on a 
very thin line in trying to relate what he’s saying to the motion 
before the House. I’d just like to bring that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I need 
to be brought to attention from time to time, because I won’t 
deny that the members in the opposition get me fairly 
concerned sometimes when they start these kinds of ridiculous 
tactics. 
 
We’re talking about the motion that reduces the Minister of 
Health’s salary to $1. That was introduced by the NDP. Well 
I’m saying I support the Minister of Health and what he’s done 
in that department. And what I’m going to do is prove to you 
why. I can only prove to you why he’s good and they were bad 
when I tell you what the NDP were  

doing when they were in government, when they had the 
opportunity to be good for the people of this province. 
 
Well, what did they do? The member for Shaunavon went out 
there into my riding, Whitewood — that’s in my riding, yes, sir, 
right on the Trans-Canada — and because they couldn’t get the 
guy to run that they wanted to, they said, well then you’re not 
getting a nursing home; but if you would run for us, we’ll build 
one, we’ll make a promise. I think that’s shameful. They 
brought politics directly into the health field, politics directly 
into the health field. That motion today is bringing politics 
directly into the health field. We’re not trying to do that on this 
side of the House. We’ve been busy delivering health programs. 
We’ve been delivering, building, co-operating, consulting — all 
of the things a good administration should do. 
 
Go on back to my riding, what’s the difference? Why in the first 
budget, the first Conservative budget that we had, we got 
ourselves a nursing home and we got it in Whitewood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — You bet we did. If that wasn’t good enough, 
what happened in the next Conservative budget? We got 
another nursing home in Moosomin, right down to Wawota. 
And there, that’s something the NDP couldn’t deliver. 
 
Why my goodness sakes they wanted to reduce his salary to $1. 
Well if they’re going to reduce his salary to $1, they should 
make the former minister of Health, under the NDP 
administration, pay back to the people of Saskatchewan a 
couple of billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Well what else, Mr. Chairman, has this hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, our Minister of Health, 
done for the people? And I won’t be any less than candid about 
it. Certainly he’s done it with the people’s money, the 
taxpayers’ dollars, but it’s a question of priorities, of 
redistribution of the money that government takes in. 
 
Why, I think, Mr. Chairman, when you spend a third of this 
whole government’s budget, a whole third on health care, Mr. 
Chairman, isn’t that enough? Is it somewhere close, Mr. 
Chairman? That tells you that everything else, of course, has to 
be something less than the priority. If health care is a priority, 
taking a third of our budget, it makes some kind of sense that 
we’re not going to be able to do a lot of other things in a lot of 
other areas. 
 
The member for Pelly, of course, now he’s busy now, he’s busy 
chirping away. That’s interesting because, as I said, I spent two 
terms in opposition, and all the time I was over there, the 
member for Pelly was a back-bencher and he never said a thing. 
He was like those statues down in South Dakota there. That’s 
what he was like. All of a sudden now I’ve discovered at least 
his mouth can move, so I’ve got that much information from the 
member for Pelly. 
 
  



 
April 17, 1986 

 

679 
 

So anyway, Mr. Chairman, it’s clear: this government has a 
priority. It has a number of priorities, and certainly one of them 
is health care. And it’s proven by sticking a third of the budget 
into health care, and I’m proud of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there are other matters that need to be 
discussed that shore up the reason why we’ll defeat this motion 
today. We’ll defeat it and we’ll support our Minister of Health, 
you bet we will. And we’ll do it because he has taken a problem 
. . . 
 
Yes, the member for Shaunavon — and I wish he were here 
again, Mr. Chairman. I’m not saying he isn’t; I’m just saying 
that I wish he were here. I wish that he were here, because I’d 
want him to hear this. He cries away about those nurses out on 
the steps. And it’s a good thing, I guess, that he’s just crying 
away about them in here. I hope to goodness he never gets too 
close to them, Mr. Chairman. I’d be concerned then — I’d be 
concerned then. 
 
But there’s $100 million that this Minister of Health has 
allocated to staffing positions for special care homes and 
hospitals — $100 million, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I believe that’s a significant contribution. 
And that adds on, you know, adds on to that third of our 
funding that goes to health care. The NDP can’t beat that. They 
run out of questions here. They have no questions for the 
question period. They have nothing to discuss in this Assembly, 
so they introduce this slanderous, ridiculous motion to reduce 
our Minister of Health’s salary by $1. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that in my time in this legislature, I 
have never seen such a pitiful, disgusting performance by a 
group of individuals as I have from the NDP in opposition. 
Never, never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — And again I say that candidly, because I sat 
over there longer than I’ve sat over here. So I knew how we 
performed when we were over there. 
 
Now the member for Regina Centre, you know, he’s strutting 
his feathers, and I hope he doesn’t get into his clucking again. 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, the members in the NDP opposition 
will understand that we must have done something right when 
we were in opposition. And I know we did. We took our places 
when we were in opposition. 
 
Yes, we criticized the government from time to time, but I 
recall on numerous occasions when this Minister of Health, 
whom they’re trying to condemn today, and myself and others 
in opposition stood and we took our places on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan and we offered solutions and 
suggestions to the government of the day. We did that. And I 
guess, Mr. Chairman, that’s why we’re today government. We 
moved ourselves right from opposition; we walked ourselves 
right through the then Liberal opposition and moved right into 
this side of the House as government. 
 

Now, you know, I shouldn’t be giving away those kinds of 
secrets because the NDP opposition may discover that that 
might be a good tactic. If they’d get up in the House and offer 
some real good solutions to the problems, you know, that are 
before the people of Saskatchewan, as opposed to introducing 
such a single-minded motion, if I may say so, Mr. Chairman . . . 
What are they doing with that motion? I’ll tell you what they’re 
doing: the same thing they’ve been doing since this session 
began. They’re on a witch hunt. They’re muck-raking. They’re 
into that daily. You know, and that’s when they’re not into 
animals and birds. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe it’s parliamentary. I don’t 
believe it makes any sense. I know that the people out there 
watching me right now understand what I’m saying, that they 
don’t want their hard-earned dollars spent on a group of 
members, a small group of members in the NDP opposition, to 
be making these kinds of absolutely ridiculous, slanderous 
comments, day after day after day. It’s lowered the whole 
stature of this legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to move into one other topic. I want 
to move into one other topic, Mr. Chairman, and it’s a serious 
one. It’s back to that credibility question. And again I wish that 
the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was here. I really wish 
he was here because, you know, he goes ahead and he sends out 
. . . I have a copy of a letter that was written to him, and you 
know what it says: 
 

I am prompted (and I quote, Mr. Chairman) to write you 
regarding the letter you have sent out to churches in 
connection with the beer/wine ads which are now being 
shown on Saskatchewan T.V. stations. 

 
Mr. Chairman, can you understand . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, I do now recess 
the House until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


