













































April 2, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 2, 1986 

 

 

 

313 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, and under rule 11 sub(7), I hereby 

read and receive the following petition: — Of Orest Olekshy, 

Phillip Eriksson, and Dennis Pehach, of the city of Saskatoon, in 

the province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to incorporate 

Holy Resurrection Orthodox Church. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Closure of Bank of British Columbia Offices 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 

question to the Premier, and it has to do, Mr. Premier, with last 

evening’s news that the Bank of British Columbia is closing all 

six of its branch offices here in Saskatchewan — branch offices, 

by the way, that were purchased a little less than a year ago from 

the collapsed Pioneer Trust Company. And you’re familiar with 

Pioneer Trust, I think. 

 

Can the Premier tell the Assembly when he was first informed of 

this here decision, and what steps, if any, that he has taken to try 

to save the 45 jobs associated with the closure of these financial 

institutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the jobs, as 

I’m sure you’re aware and the members opposite are aware, we 

are creating many new projects and many new jobs, and we will 

be continuing to provide employment opportunities for people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to the announcement yesterday that the Bank of 

British Columbia was pulling out of Manitoba, and that the Bank 

of British Columbia was pulling out of Saskatchewan, and offices 

out of Alberta, I was informed yesterday about 5 o’clock in the 

afternoon. It’s a situation, Mr. Speaker, as we know, that the 

agricultural and oil situation in Manitoba, the agricultural and oil 

situation in Saskatchewan and in Alberta has resulted in the fact 

that the bank is consolidating its offices in one or two major 

centres in Victoria, Calgary, and Edmonton. They’re obviously 

responding to the economic conditions as they find them in 

western Canada associated with low wheat prices and low oil 

prices. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 

Premier then: have you, since you learned yesterday of the 

closure, have you taken the opportunity to try to meet with the 

officials of the Bank of British Columbia in order to determine 

whether or not you can, in fact, convince them to reconsider their 

decision to close out the facilities, the trust company locations in 

Saskatchewan, and to save the jobs for the people associated with 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of 

bailing out the Bank of British Columbia. Maybe that’s the 

position of the NDP that they want to bail out the Bank of B.C. 

Well if the NDP want to bail out the Bank of B.C. they can start 

in Manitoba. Okay. The NDP are in power  

in Manitoba, and they can bail out the Bank of B.C. I’m not going 

to bail out the Bank of B.C. And I don’t know of any provincial 

government across western Canada that plans on it. Now if it’s 

your position, fine, let it be clear that you want to bail them out. 

They are reacting to some economic conditions associated with 

low agriculture prices and low oil prices in Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan, and Alberta. And so be it. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 

Premier when he has changed his policy, or was there a special 

relationship between himself and his government and Pioneer 

Trust? Because obviously the people of Saskatchewan paid some 

$28 million for that little caper by your government. All I ask you 

here: have you met with them to ask them whether or not they 

would reconsider? In view of your economic forecast, surely they 

should have some confidence to stay around for the great, new 

tomorrow. Why aren’t they hanging around? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

against us having firms move into the province, and then they’re 

against us when the firms move out of the province. I mean, we 

ask Weyerhaeuser to come in and spend $500 million — they 

don’t like it. We ask Gainers to expand in the bacon plant — they 

don’t like it. We want to build a Rafferty project — they don’t 

like it. Announce a rural gas distribution program — they don’t 

like it. Then when a company decides they’re going to move out 

of the province, they don’t like that either. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously they don’t like business, period. 

They don’t like to see business move in. They don’t like to see 

economic activity. 

 

In this province, Mr. Speaker, we will defend depositors, and we 

have with Pioneer, and we defended hospitals and nursing 

homes, seniors, farmers who had retirement packages, and that 

was exactly the thing to do. 

 

The members opposite now, Mr. Speaker, want to bail out the 

Bank of B.C. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you that we are not 

going to bail out the Bank of B.C. The NDP are sitting there in 

their chairs, saying they want to bail out the Bank of B.C. The 

member for Shaunavon, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

are saying they want to bail out the Bank of B.C. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t believe that we’re going to bail out the Bank of 

B.C., and the members opposite are sitting there shaking their 

heads and saying, yes, they want to bail out the Bank of B.C. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not bailing out the Bank of B.C., now or 

in the future or at any time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take much to make this 

crowd clap, I’ll tell you that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker, final 

supplemental. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

314 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, for the 

last month and a half you have been going around this province 

trying to convince the people of Saskatchewan that there’s great 

economic activity on the horizon. What I’m asking you. None of 

the people of Saskatchewan believe you. Isn’t it a fact that the 

Bank of British Columbia, by closing up, don’t believe what 

you’re saying either? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are always 

doom and gloom. I mean they just love to see . . . They wring 

their hands when they see a little drought coming along, or when 

a company goes broke; they just wring their hands. They love it. 

When they see a grasshopper, they love it even more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bank of British Columbia is moving out of 

Manitoba; the Bank of British Columbia is moving out of 

Saskatchewan; the Bank of British Columbia is moving out of 

Alberta because of agriculture prices and oil prices. And the 

members opposite don’t like it when we say, yes, there’s going 

to be a new $500 million paper-mill in Prince Albert. They don’t 

like that. They would cancel that. When we are going to be 

building new programs here, new economic activity, we’re going 

to be building interprovincial pipelines, we’re going to be 

building upgraders, we’re building projects in southern, northern 

Saskatchewan, processing plants — they don’t like it. Mr. 

Speaker, they just don’t like being in opposition, and that’s their 

biggest problem. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would remind 

you, Mr. Premier, that the inconvenience to this province and the 

disaster in this province goes beyond the 45 jobs; there’s also an 

enormous inconvenience to people who have part of that $175 

million loan and mortgage portfolio who now have to deal with 

Victoria or Vancouver. 

 

My question, Mr. Premier, has to do with what I suggest to you 

is your personal responsibility for this closure, which goes 

beyond the responsibility of your office. It was your late night 

meeting with Edgar Kaiser, just hours after Pioneer Trust 

collapsed on February 7th, that gave the Bank of British 

Columbia the go ahead as it raced to beat others who were also 

interested in the take-over of Pioneer Trust’s Saskatchewan 

branches. Edgar Kaiser, himself, bragged about this meeting 

throughout the Saskatchewan media. 

 

Mr. Premier, in the light of your role in bringing the Bank of 

British Columbia to Saskatchewan in the first place, do you not 

feel a moral as well as a political obligation to find a solution to 

this latest fiasco. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are asking the 

government of Saskatchewan and taxpayers to bail out the Bank 

of B.C. Why do you want us to bail out the Bank of B.C.? You’re 

asking now to bail out the Bank of British Columbia, and I’m 

saying I’m not bailing them out. They moved out of Manitoba. 

Why don’t you get the NDP in Manitoba to bail them out? Why 

don’t you do that? You asked me from time to time, do you call 

your friend the  

Prime Minister? Why don’t you call your friend the Premier of 

Manitoba and say, look the NDP in Manitoba are going to bail 

out the Bank of B.C.? Why don’t you do that? Let’s put your 

money where your mouth is. If the NDP believes you should bail 

out the Bank of B.C., then phone your buddies in Manitoba and 

say, look boys, the NDP are going to bail out the bank — and 

find out what the response is. If they think it’s a good idea, well 

then you can say, yes, and our people believe that we should bail 

out the banks. 

 

Well I’ll tell you what — I don’t believe that and we’re not going 

to do it. We haven’t in the past, and we’re not in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

you obviously know something we don’t. You’re suggesting the 

Bank of British Columbia needs to be bailed out and is therefore 

in financial difficulty. Mr. Premier, I ask you: do you have that 

information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they have suggested that we 

bail out the bank because it’s closing offices in Manitoba, in 

Saskatchewan, and Alberta. Well I’m saying they’re moving out 

of Manitoba and they have an NDP administration there. If you 

think that they should be bailing them out, well then go phone 

the Premier of Manitoba, and he will bail them out if he agrees 

with you.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not bailing them out. If they decide to close 

their offices across the prairie provinces, as I said earlier, it’s 

because of agriculture prices and oil prices, and they’re 

consolidating their offices. And I believe that if you will talk to 

other people across the Prairies, you’ll find the same thing. The 

opposition here is taking the same old position that now when 

something moves in they don’t like; when something moves out 

they don’t like it. They’re just negative. They’re negative all the 

time. They’re against this; they’re against that. They haven’t 

changed at all, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

you apparently have some information we haven’t, and I’m 

asking you to share it with us. There was no suggestion to the 

media, or by the media, in anything that was printed, that the 

Bank of British Columbia is in any financial difficulty. The 

comments which were made by Mr. Kaiser, and which have been 

made by other sources, suggest this is a decision taken by a 

business to increase its profits, and not for any other reason. Do 

you have some information that this step is being forced on the 

Bank of British Columbia by their financial situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

asking the government to bail out the bank. I didn’t say I was 

going to bail them out. I never suggested it. You brought it up in 

question period. The NDP are saying that they want the 

Government of Saskatchewan to bail out this bank. That bank 

doesn’t need to be bailed out — doesn’t need to be bailed out by 

me or by the taxpayer or by anybody else. They decided to move 

out of the three prairie provinces, and the NDP says, no, they got 

to keep 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

315 

 

them here so that you got to bail them out. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not. I didn’t raise it; they raised it, and they can defend their 

position if they want to bail out the Bank of British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

you’ll recall that the take-over of Pioneer Trust branch offices by 

the Bank of British Columbia last February was unexpectedly 

quick. The take-over took many people, including some major 

financial institutions who also were trying to purchase these 

branches, completely by surprise. 

 

Considering that Pioneer Trust had just collapsed, did it ever 

cross the minds of any of the ministers of your cabinet to ask: 

what’s the financial health of the Bank of British Columbia? Will 

this take-over be in the best interests of Saskatchewan for the 

long term? Are there any other major banks or credit unions 

prepared to take over these branches? And, I suggest most 

important of all, will service be provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan by the Bank of British Columbia, as it clearly 

would be by one of the other financial institutions who were 

interested? 

 

Mr. Premier, did it occur to any of the members of Executive 

Council to ask any of those basic questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, may I point out that the Bank 

of British Columbia is pulling out of Manitoba, and there wasn’t 

a Pioneer deal in Manitoba at all. It had nothing to do with it. I 

mean, they’re pulling out of the prairie provinces because of 

agricultural prices and oil prices, and it has nothing to do with 

where they’ve got the offices. They have offices in Manitoba, 

and they’re pulling out of them. They had offices here that they 

paid 2 or $3 million for, and they’re pulling out of them. They’ve 

got offices in Alberta, and they’re pulling out of them.  

 

Mr. Speaker, they decided that they were going to move out of 

the prairie provinces because of agricultural prices and because 

of oil prices, and they are making that financial decision. I’m not 

going to bail them out, and you’re saying, well, I’m supposed to 

bail them out. No, I’m not going to bail them out. You can bail 

them out in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Shillington: —A short supplementary, Mr. Premier, which 

ought to admit of a fairly straightforward answer even from you. 

When Edgar Kaiser sought and received your encouragement to 

take over the branches of Pioneer Trust, did anyone ask how long 

they were going to continue to provide service to Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, what a question. 

What a question from the opposition. We’re going to say, a 

company is going to invest in Saskatchewan and we’d say, well 

for how long do you think that you’re going to stay in the 

province of Saskatchewan? And if I said, Mr. Speaker, if they’re 

going to stay, as Weyerhaeuser is, for 25 or 50 years, is that 

enough for the NDP? No. No, that isn’t enough. 

 

If you’re going to bring a bacon processing plant and they’re 

going to stay for 50 years, is that enough? No, that’s not enough. 

 

If you’re going to build a power project, you say, how long are 

you going to stay in Saskatchewan? Are you going to stay for 25 

years? We say yes. And they say no, that’s not good enough, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I mean, if they’re here for 13 minutes and they’re bringing money 

into the province, the NDP is against it. They don’t like it all. If 

they’re going to move out of the province and take the money, 

the NDP doesn’t like it at all. I mean, they’re negative, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re against everything that has to do with small 

business, big business, economics, profits, jobs. 

 

Do you know how many jobs are associated with economic 

development in Saskatchewan that would not be here if the NDP 

was in power? Thousands and thousands of jobs, because . . . 

(inaudible) . . . or close everything you can think of. You’re 

against uranium mines. Right? You’re against uranium mines. 

Burns Meats moves out of the province when the NDP moves in. 

You’re against the bacon processing. You’re against Melville. 

You’re against natural gas. You didn’t build any agricultural 

colleges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of the people opposite when they were 

in power is so pathetic that they lost every seat but eight. In the 

next election they might lose them all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Premier, this is an 

interesting revelation of your government’s policy that I think the 

public of Saskatchewan are going to be interested in. 

 

You apparently feel it inappropriate to ask any questions when 

you dole out Saskatchewan tax dollars. I remind the Premier that 

you gave $20 million to Peter Pocklington who is having his 

house foreclosed by the Royal Bank in Edmonton. Did you ask 

him how long he was going to continue to provide service? Did 

you ask Manalta Coal, who got 100 million, how long they were 

going to be here after they got our money? Did you ask 

Weyerhaeuser, after they got our 248 million, how long they’re 

going to be here? 

 

Is the Premier telling us that these are inappropriate questions 

when you are doling out enormous amounts of Saskatchewan tax 

dollars. Is that the policy you’ve just enunciated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when a company like 

Weyerhaeuser Canada comes into the province of Saskatchewan 

and has $500 million in its hand and decides to spend it in Prince 

Albert and build a $250 million brand-new paper-mill in the 

province of Saskatchewan — it’s sitting there, Mr. Speaker; the 

paper-mill will be right beside the pulp-mill in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And there it will be for all Saskatchewan to look 

at, to regulate, to tax. If they’re going to build facilities like that, 

don’t you think they’re going to be there for us to look at for 

generations to come? 

 

What did you do? I’ll tell you who got our money. You took $600 

million of all our money and you gave it to multinationals, and 

you sent them to New York. And the  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

316 

 

money’s sitting at Wall Street, and we got the bill. The people of 

Saskatchewan got the bill, Mr. Speaker, and we’re still paying 

Americans in American dollars for what the NDP did in mining. 

 

In potash mining in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker 

. . . (inaudible) . . . They don’t like to hear this. Right? They don’t 

like to hear it. Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to hear it, because 

on the campaign trail in the province of Saskatchewan it will be 

$600 million that you borrowed from Saskatchewan people to 

pay New Yorkers and leave it down there. We get 500 million 

back and put it in down-town Prince Albert. 

 

And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker — they like to see the money 

in Saskatchewan, not to go to New York. And we’re not going to 

change that policy. We’re encouraging them to be here a long 

time — years and years and years. And as long, Mr. Speaker, as 

the NDP don’t get back in, there will be many more people come 

into the province of Saskatchewan for years and years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Statement by Edgar Kaiser 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nobody believes the 

Premier so we’ll try a question with the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade. 

 

Do you agree with the appraisal of our economy put forward last 

evening by Edgar Kaiser as reported in The Globe and Mail this 

morning? He defined the decision to close the bank’s branch 

offices on the prairies by saying, and I quote: 

 

It doesn’t make sense for any business to be expanding into 

a market that is declining. There is a real depression in the 

West. 

 

Do you agree with that assessment that Edgar Kaiser put forward 

last night in deciding to close out their banks because there’s no 

business here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I never read or heard 

the comments of Edgar Kaiser, but I have in recent days been in 

touch with the people from Weyerhaeuser. Their view of the 

economy of Saskatchewan is very, very positive now and well 

into the future, Mr. Speaker. I have met with the people from 

Interprovincial Pipe Line who are committing, Mr. Speaker, 

295-odd million dollars to extend the interprovincial pipe line 

from Regina to Gretna, Manitoba. They have confidence in the 

oil industry, and they have confidence in Saskatchewan. I would 

tend to believe the views of those particular people that I’ve 

heard, and I support those particular views. 

 

Mr. Engel: — In the business section in The Globe and Mail it 

says: 

 

It doesn’t make sense for any business to be expanding into 

a market that is declining . . . There is a real depression in 

the West. 

 

The bank’s pulled out, Mr. Minister, because of the  

depression and the recession and no business here, not because 

of a financial bail-out necessarily. Do you agree with that 

assessment? 

 

When the Bank of British Columbia took over here in 

Saskatchewan’s office of Pioneer Trust less than a year ago, you 

said personally that you were pleased with the deal. You added 

that you liked Edgar Kaiser’s aggressive, forthright style. Did 

you and your officials in the Finance department not know the 

financial picture of the Bank of B.C. at that time, or is there a 

financial problem like the Premier suggested? Or did your people 

just have a natural weakness for high-flyers from other 

provinces? You’ll trust them before you give a break to a 

Saskatchewan business person. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get 

into questions. I’ll have the Minister of Finance deal with the 

particular questions that relate to Finance. 

 

But I can indicate to you of the economic activity of this 

province. Number one, Weyerhaeuser has shown confidence in 

the province of Saskatchewan. CCRL (Consumers’ Co-operative 

Refineries Limited) has shown confidence in the province of 

Saskatchewan by building a $600 million upgrader here in the 

city of Regina. They’ve shown confidence. Interprovincial Pipe 

Line has shown confidence. The credit unions have shown 

confidence. The banks, Royal Bank, other banks, have shown 

confidence in the province of Saskatchewan. We have 

confidence in the province of Saskatchewan, and they have 

confidence in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would have the Minister of Finance maybe make reference to 

the questions you directed to the Department of Finance. 

 

Open Government 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Premier, and it has to do with accountability because we have 

been dealing with accountability here this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have had no explanation as to why you ducked 

a public meeting in your own constituency several days ago 

where the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses wanted to debate the 

issue of health care. But some public comments that you have 

made, sir, after that meeting have a lot of people wondering about 

your attitude towards the public. 

 

Let me quote to you, Mr. Premier, so that you are reminded of 

your statement. In the latest edition of the Estevan Mercury 

you’re quoted as saying the following: 

 

Everyone at the meeting knew our policy already. I don’t 

see any reason why we have to go around defending it. I 

can’t go to every small town to defend our health policy and 

(Graham) Taylor can’t go to every small town just because 

somebody says we have to justify our health care policies. 

 

That is your statement, Mr. Premier, quoted in the Estevan 

Mercury. Can the Premier, sir, can you square that  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

317 

 

arrogant statement with your pledge to run an open government 

that listens to people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member probably 

knows, that same night I was at a nomination in Maple Creek 

with hundreds and hundreds of people, people from across 

south-western Saskatchewan that travelled to meet with me, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s been on my timetable for months, and so if 

somebody decides to call a meeting in another town and they 

expect the Premier to go to every meeting they all of a sudden 

decide to call, it’s impossible. 

 

I go to meetings and I meet with people in every corner of this 

province and, Mr. Speaker, I will be glad to defend — and I have 

— our health care policies, and the money we’ve spent, and the 

400 new positions, and the 1,500 new positions since we took 

office. 

 

I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker — people in Saskatchewan don’t 

believe the member from Shaunavon when he’s on the radio in 

Saskatoon saying, we didn’t have any freeze on nursing homes. 

That’s what he says. They don’t believe that. And he said, we 

didn’t decrease nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. And he’s 

on the radio saying things like that, Mr. Speaker, and he was the 

minister in charge of Social Services. They don’t believe it. 

 

When we talk about building health care — and our budget is 

over a billion dollars, and our record is 400 new positions, Mr. 

Speaker — I speak about that every single, solitary day all over 

the province of Saskatchewan. So I don’t have to change my 

schedule, when I’ve got hundreds and hundreds of people 

prepared to come and listen to me, just because an organization 

says, well, you’ve got to be there 10 minutes from now, or day 

after tomorrow. 

 

So the member knows; he knows full well our health care policy 

is in such excellent shape that the NDP don’t have anything else 

to talk about. So they’re trying to make a silk purse out of a sow’s 

ear, saying: but you’re short of positions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Health has created more health care 

positions, has done more for health and social services, built 

more nursing home capacity, more hospital capacity, has more 

CAT scans, more health care facilities than ever in the history of 

the province of Saskatchewan. And the member from Regina 

North East should give him a bouquet. he should give him a big 

hand, because when he was minister of finance he’d call, cut ’em 

off at the knees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we could refer 

items 318 through 391 inclusive to notices of motion for return 

debatable. 

Mr. Speaker: — Items 318 to 391 inclusive, motions for 

returns debatable. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder if I might have leave to move, 

seconded by the Minister of Economic Development and Trade: 

 

That the name of Mr. Klein be substituted for that of Mr. 

Morin on the list of members comprising the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 

the committee of finance. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

for me to continue from where I left off last night in this budget 

debate. As I said last night, the more the people of Saskatchewan 

see and understand about the budget, the better they like it. 

 

When we look around, Mr. Speaker, during the last week and a 

half at the editorials and paper articles, even the journalists like 

it. As one journalist said, Mr. Speaker, that the budget brought 

down by the rookie Finance minister promised to stimulate the 

economy, to reduce taxes, and to bring the deficit into line. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance in his budget 

address left no uncertainty as to where the direction of this 

government is going, or where the focus of our government is. 

Of course, that is on providing opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and while offering them opportunities, offering 

them protection also. I think he left no doubt that we are still 

committed to providing the opportunities for the people of 

Saskatchewan and the protection for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The minister spelled out in very simple terms, Mr. Speaker, when 

he said that our common-sense approach to economic 

development, together with our firm commitment to protect 

families, the family farm, and our social institutions, has guided 

this government’s actions during the last four years, and it has 

also formed the basis of our budget for 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget provides further stimulation for 

businesses to create new economic opportunities and jobs. It also 

provides additional protection for individuals, for families, and 

for our social institutions. I believe it is a budget which is part of 

an economic  



 

April 2, 1986 

318 

 

development plan for the province, a plan which is founded on 

the basic values of Saskatchewan people, a plan created by a 

government which is proud of our past and extremely optimistic 

about our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to examine the budget in some detail 

because it is imperative that the people of Saskatchewan 

understand fully the choice they will face in the days ahead. But 

first, Mr. Speaker, let’s be sure that we understand clearly just 

what this government has accomplished in its first four years in 

government. 

 

In April, 1982 we made a commitment to Saskatchewan to 

correct the serious problems that faced this province. Those 

problems included sky-rocketing interest rates and inflation that 

were threatening homes and jobs. Young farmers could not own 

their land; outside investment avoided Saskatchewan. Crown 

corporations were out of control and not accountable to the 

people of the province. SGI’s auto fund was practically bankrupt, 

even though the NDP government of the day had poured an extra 

$50 million into that fund since 1979. Hospitals were in disrepair; 

nursing home construction had been halted, halted because of a 

moratorium placed in 1976 by a former NDP government. 

University buildings in Regina and Saskatoon were grossly 

inadequate. 

 

Perhaps one of the most serious things that we found in 1982 was 

how the financial position of the province had been seriously 

misrepresented by the NDP to the people of the province. The 

Heritage Fund was empty, emptied because the NDP government 

bought up potash mines. They may have bought up the potash 

mines, Mr. Speaker, but they created not one new job with the 

hundreds of millions of dollars that they spent out of the Heritage 

Fund. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, it was a difficult position to find ourselves 

in, in 1982, taking over government. But I would like to say that 

I truly believe that the way our government responded to these 

challenges makes one of the greatest stories of our province’s 

history. 

 

Our Progressive Conservative government set a course of 

building opportunity and providing protection. We immediately 

removed the gasoline tax to save the families of Saskatchewan 

150 millions of dollars every year. That wasn’t a one-time tax 

reduction, Mr. Speaker; that $150 million annually stays in the 

people’s pockets and is regenerated and respent in our society. 

 

The Tory mortgage interest protection plan provided almost 

50,000 families an average saving of $3,400 a year annually on 

mortgage interest, but probably more importantly, it helped those 

50,000 families stay in their homes and live in their homes and 

keep their homes. 

 

The farm purchase program provided opportunities for young 

farmers to be able to purchase land, and it offered retiring farmers 

security because they had someone to buy that land. 

 

This government, this Tory government, created the Department 

of Tourism and Small Business to deal with the special needs of 

small business. We made Crown corporations more efficient and 

more accountable. 

Under the able leadership of the Minister of Health, health 

spending increased by almost $500 million, or 72 per cent, since 

1982. Under this government, increased elementary and 

secondary education budgets were increased by 52 per cent, or 

$156 million. 

 

Thanks to Progressive Conservative planning, Mr. Speaker, since 

1982 Saskatchewan has had the highest rate of increase in 

funding for post-secondary education in all of Canada — and 

that, Mr. Speaker, during some rather depressed economic times 

that we have gone through in the last few years. This government 

set up the $125 million university renewal and development fund. 

This alone, Mr. Speaker, has been touted across Canada as being 

very innovative and a long time in coming. And this program in 

itself is being envied by educational institutions across Canada. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the initiatives that I’ve just listed 

brought about a Saskatchewan that we see today, that has the 

lowest average unemployment rate, the lowest inflation rate in 

years, a province with a real growth rate of 4.3 per cent last year, 

and — more proudly and more importantly — a Saskatchewan 

that has real jobs for our people. I believe that it is a record which 

every person in Saskatchewan can be proud of and are proud of. 

 

But I would like, Mr. Speaker, to add a word of caution. A Greek 

philosopher once advised the people of Greece to get involved 

with your city-state or you will be ruled by your inferiors. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that advice from many thousands of 

years ago is extremely important today, when we see members 

opposite trying to fool the people of Saskatchewan into giving 

them one more chance — trying to fool the people by saying, 

well, we’ve learnt our lesson; give us one more chance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the people of Saskatchewan were treated 

to a strange spectacle. They were presented with one budget by 

the Minister of Finance, a budget that is a solid and responsible 

document. And they were presented with another budget; they 

were presented with a budget by the Leader of the Opposition in 

Saskatoon. And he presented a sort of make-believe budget, a 

grab-bag of goodies designed, I would suppose, to buy votes in 

the upcoming election. 

 

But I can tell you that the people of this province will be forever 

grateful that the make-believe budget will never see the light of 

day or will never be implemented. For in that make-believe 

budget, the make-believe budget of the little Leader of the 

Opposition, the people of Saskatchewan can see the glaring 

differences between the present Progressive Conservative 

government of Saskatchewan and the kind of alternative that is 

being offered to them by the NDP party opposite. 

 

The members over there talk about taxing the oil companies to 

get more revenue to fill their grab-bag of promises. They talk 

about give-aways and how they are going to sock it to the oil 

companies to pay these bills. But, Mr. Speaker, everyone in the 

province knows that those promises can never be delivered on, 

because they know that the oil industry left this province some 

years ago, probably 15 years ago now, and they know why they  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

319 

 

left the province. They didn’t leave the province willingly, but 

they were forced out by the NDP government of the day. And 

people know that should that ragtag band of goons and buffoons 

ever get back in, that they would force the oil companies out 

immediately. 

 

It’s funny, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have a very different 

philosophy. They believe that you can kill the goose that lays the 

golden egg and continue collecting those golden eggs. But 

they’re the only ones, Mr. Speaker, that believe that. 

 

I believe that this Devine government is providing the people of 

this province with benefits such as they have never seen before. 

We are providing the people with lower taxes, better health care, 

more nursing homes, more generous policies for seniors, good 

training programs for our unemployed youth. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I could go on and on, but the people of Saskatchewan know this 

success story very well. 

 

The public knows that the members on this side of the House 

realize something that members opposite don’t, and don’t seem 

to be able to want to learn. The members of this government 

realize that these benefits come from only one place, from having 

a political climate that encourages the people of Saskatchewan 

and people from outside of Saskatchewan to invest their money 

here, to work here, to work hard and to develop this province. 

This government realizes that it is risk and hard work on the part 

of the people that develop a province, and it’s this hard work that 

creates a high standard of living, and this hard work creates 

finances so that social programs that we want can be 

implemented. Members opposite don’t understand that and they 

haven’t learned in the four years that they have been sitting there. 

They don’t realize that if you don’t learn from history you are 

doomed to repeat it, and that is the box that they’re in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our present Progressive Conservative government 

realizes that it is not a giant government bureaucracy, and high 

taxes, and a tight network of regulations on the economy and on 

the people that creates wealth. No, we realize that it is the people 

of Saskatchewan who are making this province great. And this 

basic belief, Mr. Speaker, this basic belief in the industry of 

people and this basic belief of having faith in people, is the very 

foundation of our Progressive Conservative Party. 

 

(1445) 

 

Our government realizes that our job is to create the political 

climate in which the people themselves can build this province. 

Our government has faith in the people of Saskatchewan to do 

that, and this faith and this encouragement, Mr. Speaker, is 

working out. It’s the ordinary people of Saskatchewan that make 

this province work; it is the ordinary people of Saskatchewan that 

make this province great. But the members opposite still cling to 

that obsolete notion that it is government that has to do the job 

for the people. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite love to go out 

and talk about — we speak for the ordinary people. They don’t 

even know what an ordinary person is. I’m an  

ordinary person; my colleagues are ordinary people; my friends 

are ordinary people. We work, we try to get ahead, we try to 

provide homes for our families, jobs for others, do a good job if 

we’re employed by someone else, pay our taxes and contribute 

to society. That’s what an ordinary person does. Those people 

wouldn’t know an ordinary person if they came up and hit them 

in the nose. 

 

You know, in the recent days, in the last 10 days of this session, 

we’ve really witnessed an opposition party that has allowed its 

mask to fall. There is no mystery now, Mr. Speaker, as to what is 

happening in the NDP ranks. That opposition has come through 

the past four years without learning a thing. It has failed to 

develop a program that offers any alternative at all to our PC 

legislative program — I might add a legislation program that has 

finally got this province on the move. It has failed to use its time 

in opposition, during the past four years, to rethink its program 

and to listen to the people and to get on the side to offer some 

serious alternatives to the programs of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having wasted those four years it is now caught up 

in almost near hysteria. It is lacking a serious program to offer, 

so it is striking out blindly on a bidding rampage, a bidding 

rampage offering the public the sun and the moon and the stars 

and hoping that the voter might be silly enough to buy it. But I 

can assure them, Mr. Speaker, that the public will not be fooled 

again. 

 

As one respected Saskatchewan journalist said, referring, Mr. 

Speaker, to the tidal wave of election promises handed out 

already by the opposition leader, he said: “The NDP is letting a 

quest for power override any sense of what is responsible 

politics.” This same journalist went on to say, Mr. Speaker: “The 

NDP has become so consumed by the scent of power and 

determined not to see a repeat of 1982, that it is offering scores 

of promises.” Scores of promises, Mr. Speaker, that there is no 

way on earth that they would ever be able to fulfil it. But that is 

the mentality of the members opposite. They are so consumed 

with wanting power that they will do anything legitimate or 

misleading or otherwise — anything to do it. But I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of my riding will not be fooled. The 

people of Shaunavon riding will not be fooled again. The people 

of many of those ridings — I would even say the people of 

Elphinstone — will not be fooled again by the blatant 

mispromises of the NDP. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to refer to a few highlights of the 

recent budget. And let me say that it is a document that shows 

that this government is just hitting its stride. It is an imaginative 

blueprint for our future and it is fully responsible for the time. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a solid, solid document. 

 

The budget will exempt all clothing purchases under $300 from 

sales tax — another step, Mr. Speaker, in our long-term goal of 

total elimination of the sales tax implemented some time ago by 

the NDP. 

 

When you look at when we took over power in ’82, virtually 

everything, other than food, had education and health tax on it. 

And you look at, Mr. Speaker, the strides that we have made in 

that area alone, on gasoline, on children’s clothing, on electrical 

bills. Now clothing has 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

320 

 

been extended to all. Prototypes are exempt from E&H. We have 

made great strides in that area and after the election, Mr. Speaker, 

will continue on our goal of total elimination of the education and 

health tax in the province. 

 

The budget establishes the Saskatchewan pension plan for 

home-makers, small-business men, and the self-employed. And, 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of the woman, I think this is extremely 

important. This is an opportunity for those of us that perhaps do 

not work in an office or a business large enough to be able to fund 

a pension fund for their employees, this is a great opportunity for 

women to plan today and contribute today for their needs down 

the road. As we all know, some of the poorest people in society 

are the aged women. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that by being 

able to make that choice — because it is voluntary — to make 

that choice to put away some money in a pension plan today for 

the future is something that women all over the province have 

been asking for a long, long time. 

 

The budget also provides new home buyers with a grant of 

$3,000. This, Mr. Speaker, is a very responsible inclusion in the 

budget. And when I look back to my years in opposition and the 

things that we had asked the government of the day to do, and it 

was always no, no, no — you can’t do it, you can’t do it, you 

can’t do it. Well I can say, Mr. Speaker, with great pride, that my 

leader, the Premier of the province, Premier Grant Devine, and 

my colleagues, proved them wrong, because we said it could be 

done and we did it. And now the members opposite are saying, 

me too, me too, me too. But they sure didn’t say that when we 

were making very fundamental, good suggestions in opposition. 

 

The budget provides an 8 per cent interest rate program for small 

businesses. It will see health expenditures increased by $126 

million, bringing the Health budget to $1.2 billion. That is almost 

one-third of the budget. And in that increase, Mr. Speaker, we 

will be replacing and continuing to replace the nursing positions 

that were cut out — 400-and-some cut out in one year — nursing 

positions cut out in one of their budgets. I believe it was 1976 or 

1978. 

 

It calls for spending for elementary and secondary education to 

increase by $41 million, because we have a basic belief that our 

youth have to have educational opportunities to prepare them for 

the jobs of tomorrow. 

 

Agricultural funding will be more than doubled. The increase is 

$118 million. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in the last year of the 

New Democratic reign of terror, the NDP spent more on social 

services than they did on agriculture. We believe that agriculture 

is the basis of our economy. Agriculture must remain strong. And 

I think that the programs that we have instituted over the last four 

years state very clearly the importance that we place on 

agriculture. 

 

The budget includes income tax credit for construction or 

expansion of livestock facilities to help stimulate livestock 

production, because this government realizes that we must turn 

around our vitally important livestock industry. 

The budget also provides two-year corporate tax holiday for new 

small businesses. It provides more than $13 million for day care, 

an increase of 9 per cent, an increase I don’t think that you would 

find in any other province in the country. The budget also 

provides $125 million through the employment development 

fund for job creation and training programs this year, and 

combined with capital spending, Mr. Speaker, this will create 

over 20,000 jobs, a near record. 

 

And yes, there are tax increases. Yes, we did increase taxes on 

large corporations, because it is our philosophical belief that 

large corporations can afford to pay more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, I think I hardly have to say 

anything about agriculture this afternoon, because the people of 

Saskatchewan know that this is one government that realizes 

fully that the very base of our province’s economy is agriculture. 

Our government has provided support programs for agriculture 

in difficult times in a way that has left the members of the 

opposition wide-eyed. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we responded to the 

needs of farmers in a way that the opposition wouldn’t have 

dreamed of doing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the budget even goes further. It provides $25 

million for the agricultural development fund. It will build a new 

College of Agriculture building in Saskatoon — an agriculture 

building that will become a world renowned agriculture research 

centre. 

 

And I find it amusing, Mr. Speaker — at a U of S students’ forum, 

at which Mr. Blakeney, the Leader of the Opposition, was 

participating, one of the students asked him why they had never 

built an agriculture college. And he said, Mr. Speaker, he said to 

these students, that, the agriculture college was never a priority 

with my administration. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. Shame. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Shame is right. Here in the heart of the 

agricultural activity of Canada, this is where the research should 

be going on. The budget also allocates $42 million to 

Saskatchewan farmers in 1986 under the oil royalty refund 

program and, Mr. Speaker, this is another indication of the 

philosophy of this government. We believe in targeting certain 

sectors to help other sectors, and this is a good indication of how 

that can work. 

 

We’ve expanded the eligibility criteria for agricultural credit 

corporation loans, and fixes the interest rate at 8 per cent. It offers 

a 15 per cent provincial income tax credit for the construction or 

expansion of livestock facilities. The budget provides a 

three-year extension of the livestock investment tax credit 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province know very well which 

party is going to give them the support and the protection they 

need in difficult times, and this budget has simply underlined that 

fact one more time. When this government took office four years 

ago, the situation was deadly serious for the people of our 

province, but we  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

321 

 

responded to the serious situation we found. We responded to the 

challenges and we responded, I think, with vigour and 

imagination. We responded to the needs of families. We 

responded to the needs of farmers. We responded to the needs of 

seniors. 

 

But let us look at one particularly vital area for this province, and 

to the response by the Minister of Finance in his new budget, and 

that area, of course, is small business. It’s the source of most of 

the new jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. This Progressive 

Conservative government has focused on small business and we 

have provided a plan that is putting new enthusiasm into small 

businesses across the province. 

 

The program announced is a wide-ranging and comprehensive 

one, Mr. Speaker. It provides for a two-year corporate tax holiday 

on new small businesses. It provides an 8 per cent interest rate 

program for small businesses. It provides for the creation of a 

stock savings plan to encourage equity investment in public 

companies by Saskatchewan residents. It provides expansion of 

the venture capital program to include agricultural firms and to 

broaden investment criteria in centres with a population of under 

20,000. It creates the Saskatchewan agriculture and commercial 

equity corporation to provide individuals with further 

opportunities to invest in the province. It provides financial 

assistance to municipalities interested in establishing community 

development corporations. It also provides, Mr. Speaker, an 

entrepreneur training program. 

 

It is an imaginative program that will continue the revitalization 

of our province’s economy. And there is one thing you can be 

sure of: that program will play a central role as we continue to 

increase the number of people working in this province, and to 

maintain our record as having just about the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knows that Saskatchewan 

entrepreneurs, by their very spirit and tenacity, have created 

thousands of new businesses and thousands of new jobs; and they 

will do even more of that in the years ahead. Our government 

realizes that labour organizations have a vital role to play in this 

province’s economic development; that union members, with 

their knowledge of the work-place and their tradition for being 

industrious, can do much to help our economy grow. That fine 

spirit of co-operation between labour, management, and 

government, that has prevailed in the past four years, has meant 

an unequalled period of labour peace in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the new budget proposes the setting up of 

labour venture capital corporations. Their purpose is to 

encourage trade unions to create jobs and to build added security 

and prosperity for their members by channelling investments 

from organized labour to small- and medium-sized businesses in 

Saskatchewan. Individual union members will receive provincial 

tax credits equal to 20 per cent of the cost of their investment. 

This is just one more program, Mr. Speaker, that will help our 

province to grow and will undoubtedly be copied in other 

provinces when it is fully understood. 

Mr. Speaker, the basis of our strategy for this province and the 

strategy of our budget could not be more clear. It is to create an 

environment in which people of this province can take advantage 

of the resource riches of this province. The budget encourages 

them to invest their money, and their labour, and their 

management, and their entrepreneurial skills, to develop the 

province, and in doing so to bring benefits to themselves and all 

the people of the province. 

 

(1500) 

 

But there is one other side to our strategy that is just as important. 

Of course, it’s the people and the families of Saskatchewan, and 

it’s our emphasis on social benefits that are the right of every 

person in the province. 

 

Just look at some of the benefits this government has brought to 

families and to the people in bringing in this budget. We are 

committed, Mr. Speaker, to protecting families from economic 

hardship. This budget provides over $13 million for day care 

during 1986 — a 9 per cent increase. For the first time, Mr. 

Speaker, we are providing direct operating grants to day care 

centres. This has been a major complaint from day care centres, 

is not so much the funding for individual children, but the 

ongoing operational cost of the centre. And this will help them 

indeed. 

 

The senior citizens’ heritage program provides almost $40 

million to Saskatchewan senior citizens. Funding continues for 

the five-year, $25 million senior citizens’ home repair program. 

Seniors’ non-profit housing program has increased by $4.5 

million. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Speaker, we ended the NDP’s moratorium on 

nursing home construction, and since then have contributed 

towards the building of over 2,000 senior citizen housing units. 

For 1986 we will support the building of an additional 540 senior 

citizen housing units. As I already said, all clothing, footwear, 

and yard goods valued at less than $300 will be exempt from 

sales tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to tell the people of this province that 

our future rests with our youth. Yet that simple fact means that 

education is of crucial importance. If we are to secure the future 

of Saskatchewan and provide leadership, not only for all of 

Canada but to the world, our education programs must be of 

world standard. Mr. Speaker, under this government they are. In 

the past four years we have brought our educational system to a 

position of leadership. 

 

Now the budget goes further, Mr. Speaker, in the area of 

education, because it provides $41 million increase in funding for 

schools — funding for 45 school capital projects throughout the 

province. There is a $25 million increase in funding for the 

education development fund to further enhance the quality of 

education and to encourage our children to stay in school longer. 

And that is extremely important. 

 

There will be an $18 million contribution to the university 

renewal and development fund and a $9 million grant for the 

operation of the Northern Institute of Technology. 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

322 

 

And another important announcement, Mr. Speaker, was the 

enhanced student aid package, including new eligibility criteria, 

increased levels of assistance, and 6 per cent interest rates, right 

down through student loans. And let me say that the people of 

Saskatchewan support these initiatives all the way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the pronounced differences between our Tory government 

and what would happen under an NDP government is found in 

the management of the business of this government. We have 

demonstrated that we are committed to a much more efficient use 

of taxpayers’ money. 

 

From 1982 when our government took office, until now, we have 

reduced the size of the civil service dramatically, Mr. Speaker, 

by nearly 15,000 people, or brought it down from 15,000 to well 

under 14,000. Under this Progressive Conservative government 

the civil service is lean and efficient, dedicated to serving the 

public well but not to controlling the public with frivolous 

regulation and control. 

 

Now under this new budget we will move to more government 

efficiencies. We will create a property management corporation 

for the more efficient management of government land and 

government buildings. We will continue to restrict government 

expenditures, and we will further reduce the size of civil service 

by using more than 300 vacant positions., Mr. Speaker, to offset 

the increase in nursing positions. The people of Saskatchewan 

want an efficient government and we are committed to giving it 

to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on now to discuss the many other 

benefits under this budget, but I would like to conclude this way. 

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance, the member 

from Qu’Appelle, for his outstanding budget. 

 

I can only repeat, Mr. Speaker, that this budget is a budget for the 

times. It provides generous support in essential areas like health 

and education because this government insists that Saskatchewan 

be in the lead there. The budget has generous support programs 

for small businesses. It provides additional support for child care 

centres. It invests in agriculture, in research, and in our future. It 

is committed to building a much stronger livestock industry, and 

it lays out plans to support farmers who will move in that 

direction. 

 

All in all, it’s the kind of budget that the Saskatchewan people 

want today. It is a response to the needs of the people. It 

demonstrates again, Mr. Speaker, that this is government that 

listens, and that this is a government that has the imagination and 

the initiative and the courage to respond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege for me as a member from Maple 

Creek to endorse and support this budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take great pleasure in 

entering this budget debate. I want to address  

some economic issues and give some lessons to the people on my 

right here on economics. It’s hard to believe that they’re on my 

right . . . 

 

But I would like to start out by saying there’s two sides to our 

economy. There’s the social side, which looks after our hospitals 

and health care, the education system, senior citizens’ 

accommodations and programs, youth employment, day-care 

centre. That’s the side of our economy that has to be supported 

by government. And it’s certainly necessary, especially senior 

citizens’ accommodations where the former government had 

moratoriums on that from 1978 until ’82, until we took over. If 

they want to learn how to spell moratorium, it’s in last night’s 

Hansard. It was spelled out very plainly by the member from 

Turtleford. 

 

The other side of our economy is the industrial sector. People 

working in the industrial sector pay taxes to support the social 

side of our economy. And of course, the major things that look 

after the industrial side now are like the bacon plant in North 

Battleford, which certainly is going to create a lot of jobs. Those 

people will pay taxes into the provincial coffers, and certainly 

that helps to support the social side of our economy. 

 

And of course the new announcement of the paper-mill in Prince 

Albert which is just going to have a tremendous effect on the 

economy of Prince Albert. I want to stop there and go into that a 

little bit. I want these people over here to understand the impact 

of that paper-mill and pulp-mill in Prince Albert, the $50 million 

that will be spent refurbishing the pulp-mill so it can handle 

poplar which was never used in the pulp-mill before — just to a 

small extent just lately on test programs. 

 

This extends the life of the forest industry forever in northern 

Saskatchewan. The poplar that’s going to be used in the 

paper-mill, and the exchange of logs between the paper mill in 

Prince Albert and the sawmill in Big River is going to extend the 

life of the Big River sawmill and the pulp and paper industry in 

Prince Albert forever. 

 

I stood at a hockey game the other night in Shellbrook. There’s a 

lot of people from Prince Albert who support the hockey teams 

in the Shellbrook-Prince Albert area, and I know quite a few of 

them. These people work for PAPCO — that’s the P.A. Pulp 

Company. They came up to me at that hockey game and shook 

my hand and said, that is the most positive thing that has ever 

happened in the Prince Albert area. These are PAPCO workers 

that work right in the pulp-mill. They realize this has extended 

the life of that PAPCO mill forever, because the wild oat of 

northern Saskatchewan, which is poplar, will now be used in the 

manufacture of paper. 

 

The company, Weyerhaeuser, that is going to build this 

paper-mill beside the pulp-mill in Prince Albert, has the 

marketing system already in place to market this paper in the 

United States and all over North America. They’re not only going 

to be marketing paper. The paper-mill will only take 60 per cent 

of the production of that pulp-mill, so 40 per cent of it will be 

sold as pulp. But these people also have the marketing system to 

market that pulp. 

 

These people over here, the former government, don’t 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

323 

 

understand. They’re totally against it. They don’t realize that 

Weyerhaeuser has taken a smaller lease area in the parkland to 

support a larger industry, because it will be used more efficiently. 

This is very important. They are taking a smaller lease area than 

PAPCO had, because they’re using the poplar. 

 

The exchange of poplar logs from Big River to the pulp-mill and 

the saw logs going back to Big River, there will be no more saw 

logs going through the pulp-mill in Prince Albert. They will be 

sawed into lumber in the Big River mill, which increases the 

lifetime of the mill in Big River. So it’s good for everyone. 

 

Also, Weyerhaeuser is going to be paying the same stumpage as 

anyone else in the province when they take over that mill. They 

won’t be getting it at the price that PAPCO was getting it for, 

away reduced, below even private operators. 

 

The other thing that they’re going to do is they’re going to 

increase the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They’re going to 

increase their reforestation. I’m sure the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg doesn’t know anything about 

reforestation, but they’re going to increase their reforestation by 

126 per cent. And I’ve seen pictures of their tree farms in British 

Columbia where they grow their own trees for their reforestation 

programs, irrigated tree farms that they manage themselves. 

They’re going to do the reforestation, plus pay the larger 

stumpage fees, the same as the private operators. The private 

operators are going to be allowed a larger cut, a larger share of 

the cut in the Weyerhaeuser lease area, which is smaller than the 

PAPCO lease area. 

 

And they’re still saying they’re against it. The people that are 

running against me and some of my colleagues up there aren’t 

against it, but the people down here are certainly against it. And 

they’re not saying the same thing. They’re sending out two 

different messages. 

 

An Hon. Member: — North of the No. 1? 

 

Mr. Muller: — This is north of the No. 1. But I want to tell you, 

this is the most positive thing on Main Street, Prince Albert; Main 

Street, Shellbrook; Main Street, Meath Park, Candle Lake, 

Smeaton, Choiceland, Mont Nebo — wherever you go in that are 

— Big River, Debden, Canwood, that whole area; Meadow Lake, 

the whole area is excited about this paper-mill that’s going into 

Prince Albert. 

 

I’m sure the way these people are listening to me this afternoon 

they’re learning something about economics, how these jobs – 

800 jobs in Prince Albert and Big River area, and these are 

permanent jobs. These aren’t construction jobs. These are 

permanent jobs I’m talking about. Two hundred and fifteen in the 

pulp- and paper-mill and 600 support jobs in the service sector to 

support these people with the 250 new jobs. Those are all 

taxpayers that are going to be helping to pay for the social side 

of our economy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Make your last speech a good one. 

 

(1515) 

Mr. Muller: — I will let the member for Assiniboia know that 

this certainly won’t be my last speech in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to mention a little bit about some of the other more 

positive things, Mr. Speaker, in the province. I don’t want to 

dwell on just one little area like northern Saskatchewan. We’re 

also getting an upgrader in Regina, which will certainly support 

our economic base; the Rafferty dam in Estevan. All these things 

are important to support the social side of what our government 

pays for on the social side of the economy. 

 

The other thing in this budget that is so important is the 8 per cent 

loans to small business. Eight per cent loans for small business, 

of course, are supported by industry also. I can go through all of 

it again, how it’s done in Prince Albert through the paper-mill, if 

you didn’t quite catch it the first time, about the reforestation and 

the stumpage and all the positive things that the small operators 

are talking about, Mr. Speaker. It’s very, very interesting and 

very positive to walk down the streets of small town 

Saskatchewan now, in northern Saskatchewan, with this 

paper- and pulp-mill that’s being built in . . . the pulp-mill is 

there, the paper-mill being built in Prince Albert. 

 

An Hon. Member: — When? 

 

Mr. Muller: — It will be started this fall. The exchange of logs 

will start very soon, I’m sure. 

 

The one thing that is very, very important up there is the 

exchange of timber. The exchange of timber between Big River 

and Prince Albert is really very positive, one of the most positive 

things that has every happened in that area. I’m just so excited 

about it, and I’m sure that the member from Athabasca will be 

excited about it also when he sees the impact, Mr. Speaker, that 

that will have on the forest industry in all of northern 

Saskatchewan and all the private operators, the small, private 

operators now that are going to be able to get more timber. And 

we can support the pulp- and paper-mill out of a smaller lease 

area than we ever have before, because we’re using the poplar 

and not tramping it down and wasting it like we have done in the 

past. 

 

It has given me a great deal of pleasure to get up and speak in this 

budget debate. I know that there’s other members that will have 

something to say. I don’t want to take up all the time talking 

about the pulp-mill and paper-mill in Prince Albert, but it’s very, 

very important to those people. It affects all of northern 

Saskatchewan right from Manitoba to Alberta and right up to 

Athabasca and Lac La Ronge and all that northern area — far 

more than my seat. 

 

And I’m happy for all those people in that area because this is the 

most positive thing that has happened in over 20 years — in over 

20 years. And I will certainly be able to walk up, Mr. Speaker, 

and face my constituents, and constituents from all those other 

seats in that area, and be able to talk positively about northern 

Saskatchewan, which no one has been able to do for many, many 

years. 

 

I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for letting me enter this debate, 

and I certainly will be supporting the budget.  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

324 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce a guest. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I just some time ago noticed 

one of my constituents in the gallery, Mr. Rob Krismer, who is a 

teacher at the Convent of The Child Jesus in North Battleford. 

He’s down at the STF convention in the city this weekend, and 

I’d like to ask the members opposite and the members of this 

House to join me in welcoming him to Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(Continued) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

going to take a lot of time today debating this budget. I think that 

it’s a budget that we will be debating once again in approximately 

six weeks time, Mr. Speaker. The present government that has 

brought this budget in, and I consider this a dark, dark day in 

Saskatchewan when we have a budget . . . and I will go into the 

magnitude of what this budget really means to the province. But 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, in about six weeks time, after the election 

is all over and the dust is settled, that we will be having another 

throne speech, and we’ll be bringing in a budget, a budget that 

will be a sensible budget, one that will be putting people back to 

work and not depressing this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I just heard the member from Shellbrook, 

and I’m only going to make a few comments on what he has said 

about how excited he is about the Prince Albert pulp-mill and the 

Big River sawmill and that, going over to Weyerhaeuser, a large 

firm from Alabama who had profits last year, Mr. Speaker, of 

$5.5 billion. I will go into that later as to just what that means to 

the province. But he says he’s really excited. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m excited too. I’m excited and I’m 

concerned. I tell you, I’ve been on the phone since that 

announcement has been made to the folks in Big River and 

around Prince Albert, and there are a lot of people in there who 

are excited, but they’re concerned. They’re concerned for what 

has taken place; they’re concerned for the amount of money that 

was paid to a multinational corporation to come in and buy out 

the assets that they have taken, which I will go into later. But I’m 

concerned about that. 

The member from Shellbrook-Torch River also was praising 

Weyerhaeuser for the way they operate in other provinces. He 

was also talking about the large increase that we were going to 

see, 126 per cent in reforestation. He was telling us, and he made 

a point of telling us, just how great a nursery that they have in 

British Columbia. I suspect also, Mr. Speaker, that if they’ve got 

that big a nursery in British Columbia that you’re going to see 

the reforestation and the trees that are going to be involved in that 

reforestation also coming out of Weyerhaeuser’s nursery in 

British Columbia . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s fine, Mr. 

Speaker, the members over there say I’m wrong. Mr. Speaker, 

time will tell whether that’s right or not. 

 

I want to touch for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, on the 

constituency of Athabasca that I have had the pleasure of 

representing for the last 11 years. I look forward to the 

opportunity, if they will be so kind to re-elect me, to represent 

my constituents for another four years. I can assure you that I will 

represent them well. I sincerely hope that the next four years will 

be represented by myself on the government side where we can 

see some progress. 

 

Nowhere in the province since 1982 has any region been hit 

harder than the northern constituencies of Athabasca and 

Cumberland. And it’s continuing, Mr. Speaker, it’s just 

continuing on a daily basis. It has got worse and worse. We are 

facing unemployment up in northern Saskatchewan of up to 85 

and 90 per cent in some of our communities. Housing has come 

to a stop. Municipal funding; they’ve got a new formula out this 

year that the funding for our local communities has gone way 

down. And I tell you, some of the communities are up there 

telling me that if this isn’t changed and they don’t get more 

money to operate, they’re just going to give the government back 

the keys and let them operate the towns themselves. 

 

I take a look at what I consider should be one of the most 

important priorities of any government, and that is to create jobs, 

and they’re always talking about creating jobs. And then you take 

a look at the budget speech, and there’s a 20 per cent cut in 

funding for Employment Development Agency. Now they have 

a 20 per cent cut for the Employment Development Agency at a 

time when we have crisis in this province, an unemployment 

crisis. 

 

We hear them talking about transferring positions to other towns, 

and I see the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources is 

sitting in his seat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Does the 

member from Turtleford want the floor? . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I have the floor right now, and I 

just wanted to talk about the concerns that my constituents have, 

and I was going to relate to the department that the member from 

Turtleford is representing, and he seems to take . . . When the 

member from Turtleford wants to let . . . Mr. Speaker, the 

member for . . . 

 

I wanted to bring out a point, Mr. Speaker, on concerns of my 

constituents regarding the Department of Parks and Renewable 

Resources. I hadn’t even got the words out of my mouth and the 

member from Turtleford was up on his feet and hollering and 

screaming and interrupting me, so I can’t even represent my 

constituents properly in this  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

325 

 

House. Now if you would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not 

asking you a question, I’m debating the budget. I’m debating the 

budget, and when we get to your estimates, then I will have a 

question-and-answer period with yourself. So if you would just 

allow me the opportunity to relay my concerns, then I will do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what’s happening. They’re talking about 

transferring positions, and they transfer permanent positions 

without really checking into it. I have three secretaries up in my 

constituency who have a full-time job and have had that full-time 

job with Parks and Renewable Resources in their offices for a 

number of years, and they’re concerned. They have been told by 

the member for Turtleford’s department that their jobs no longer 

will be full-time; that they’re going to be part-time. 

 

I wrote him a letter and requested that he reconsider this, because 

the women that have them jobs are married women, they have 

families, their husbands live up in La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and Green Lake, where they’re concerned. And I asked him to 

reconsider that, not to make the jobs part-time but to make them 

full-time. And the answer that I got back was no, that it’s 

decentralization; we’re going to cut them back. If they want to 

they can quit their jobs and they can reapply for the part-time 

position, or they can be transferred down to Maple Creek or some 

place in the south. 

 

That’s the type of compassion that this Conservative government 

has for families in this province. Three families he wants to 

disrupt, and I have requested again, and I ask that member today 

to reconsider these three positions and leave them as permanent. 

They have their houses up there, their homes. Their husbands are 

working. They have their families to look after. They have 

commitments to make. And that has been their home all their 

lives and they want to remain there. They don’t want to transfer 

to Maple Creek. And I ask you, Mr. Member from Turtleford, to 

reconsider this once more. 

 

But this is the type of frustrations that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan. This is the type of frustrations that we have been 

facing since 1982. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s not easy when 

you live up in northern Saskatchewan. You’re a long way from 

services. And when you’re out of a job, you get up in the 

morning, you got to bed at night, and you haven’t got a job and 

you’re living on assistance — it’s pretty demoralizing. It much 

more demoralizing, Mr. Speaker, for individuals who do have 

jobs and they’re being disrupted. That is demoralizing. 

 

I sincerely hope that this government will come to its sense and 

start to realize that there is people north of Meadow Lake, and 

that they’re real people, and they need these positions. And they 

don’t want to be disrupted. If they did, they could go through the 

proper process and apply down South. But they don’t want that. 

 

I also want to now turn, Mr. Speaker — and everything that I’m 

going to say in here really relates to northern Saskatchewan — 

but I want to go back to what the member of Social Services said 

yesterday, the member for Rosemont. And he said that the NDP 

were out in the countryside promising the moon to the electors. 

He said we were promising them the moon. And that’s in 

Hansard. And 

he said that the NDP are promising the moon, and here is what 

the Conservative government have done for Saskatchewan. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the House today just what the 

member from Rosemont was talking about, some of the 

programs, and what has really taken place under the Conservative 

government that he was bragging about. Then I want to go into 

what we are going to do if we form the government. And I really 

have no doubts in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that that’s going to 

happen. I’ve criss-crossed this province and I’ve talked to people. 

And we’ve assessed it, and the polls are telling us the same thing, 

what is going to happen. 

 

But the member for Rosemont, he says that we’re gazing at the 

moon when we talk about this. Well, I just say — I say to the 

member for Rosemont, Mr. Speaker: do you think the citizens of 

Saskatchewan would prefer 4.5 per cent unemployment under the 

NDP when we left this government, turned it over to you, or the 

9 to 10 per cent unemployment that the Conservative 

governments have created and exists in this province today. 

 

We now have 44,000 people in this province who are looking for 

jobs, who are drawing unemployment insurance — UIC. And I’ll 

tell you there are many thousands who are not registered that are 

not on that 44,000 list, Mr. Speaker. And the member for Social 

Services, in telling us how good things are . . . Mr. Speaker, there 

are 60,000 citizens in this province who are on welfare — 66,000. 

And for the first time ever in this four-year history of this 

Conservative government, we not only have 66,000 people on 

welfare, we have food banks that are begging for food in all the 

cities. We have food banks. 

 

Never ever before in the history of this province have we sunk 

that low that we can’t even look after our social recipients. They 

have to beg for food. And there are radio stations and television 

stations and people all over this province who are going out 

manning food banks . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

The former minister of co-ops wants to talk about the deficit. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was my next item here. In four years . . . 

just imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, five budgets in four years. 

When the Conservative government took over they had $140 

million in the bank. Here we are five budgets later, and four 

years, and the province has $2 billion in debt, the operating debt 

— $2 billion. Just imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

have a government that can come in and in four short year take 

$140 million profit that was in the bank and turn it into a $2 

billion deficit. 

 

And let’s take a look at our equity position, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

When we left . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell you who 

wrote this. When we left government, the equity in this province 

was $1.091 billion. That was the provincial equity. Now four 

years later our equity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is minus $740 million 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

326 

 

Now the former minister of Tourism and Small Business wants 

to know where I’m getting these figures, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And for that member’s information, I am getting them figures on 

page 11 of the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial Position, 

dated July 1985, issued by one, the former Finance minister, the 

hon. member from Kindersley. That’s where I’m getting it – on 

page 11, for the member, if you would like to look at that. You 

read it; I can table it if you want it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members over there . . . it seems to be a 

touchy situation where they could take an equity position and 

totally destroy it — an equity position of 1.091 billion, and now 

it’s minus $740 million. 

 

I’ll tell you what it means, to the member from Tourism and 

Small Business. I realize now why you have been taken out of 

cabinet. I’ll ask you what it is. I’ll tell you what it means: it means 

that this province has borrowed more money than the province is 

worth. That’s what it means . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All 

right. You say that that’s wrong. You question that. I tell you, 

that’s exactly what it means. It means that the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Conservative government is broke. It has 

borrowed more money than the province is worth. And he 

doesn’t understand that. No wonder he’s not in cabinet. And I 

can see why he’s changed constituencies. But that’s exactly what 

it is. 

 

And you know, they sit over there when I talk about the figures I 

just gave you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they wonder where I get 

them. And they say they’re not true. Then they want me to 

explain what it means. I sincerely hope that they realize that when 

you start borrowing more than the province is worth, then the 

credit ratings start going down. And in the last year the credit 

rating of this province has gone down on two occasions, mainly 

because this province has borrowed more money than the 

province is worth. And it will continue to go that way under a 

Conservative government. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re on the finances of the 

province . . . and I think that the former member of Tourism and 

Small Business has finally grasped that. He knows what I was 

talking about when I was talking about an equity position. I think 

he realizes now what I was talking about. I want to touch on some 

figures . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You better believe it, it’s 

reality, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. I’m going to 

touch on reality. You better believe it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When the Conservative government took over this province, we 

had an accumulated debt of $3.3 billion We now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in 1986, in four years, now we have a total debt of $7.4 

billion of accumulated debt, and at the end of this fiscal year that 

will be $8.7 billion. And the member from Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake wants me to face reality. And I say to him that the people 

of this province also want your government to face reality. 

 

When you take a look at an accumulated debt of 3.3 billion when 

the NDP were in power, and now just four years short . . . four 

short years later it has jumped to $8.7 billion, just imagine what 

that means to your children and your grandchildren and all of us. 

I tell you, that is a serious  

situation. We’re in financial problems. And if this government 

keeps up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s just no way of getting out 

of it. 

 

A little later on in my speech, for the member for Moosomin, I’m 

going to explain where it was spent. I’m going to explain it. I 

intend to explain it. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just 

going to start right now by explaining why we’re in the big 

problem that we have right now. 

 

It’s some of these deals they’ve made. First of all, they were 

elected in 1982 and they got in in April — that’s when the 

construction season should start and should be going full bore — 

and what did they do? They said to themselves, well we’re not 

going to go ahead with these projects that the NDP have started, 

the hospitals and the schools, and you name it, and the highways. 

We’re going to study them and see if they really should go ahead. 

We’re going to study them. That’s right. 

 

The school in P.A. that the New Democratic Party had already 

started, and here four years later . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, do you deny 

that? That that college in Prince Albert wasn’t started under the 

NDP government? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well that’s fine. That shows what kind of a 

member you are. 

 

But that’s what happened. That’s what happened. They decided 

to study and to cancel. And as a result, the first summer of 

construction it just didn’t happen in this province. And once you 

started to go backwards, and then you seen the deals that started 

to unfold, and you just never catch up. And they’ve gone 

backwards and backwards, and now we some of the deals that are 

taking place. 

 

And here’s how they get into these problems. A $145 million 

loan guarantee for a group in Calgary. They started that off about 

two and a half years ago, three years ago — Manalta Coal. They 

started off . . . And this is how they started getting into debt. 

Saskatchewan owned the coal mine; we owned the drag-line. It 

was being used to generate power from Saskatchewan Power 

utilities. So what did they do? They signed a loan guarantee, and 

that loan guarantee is money that they borrowed on this province. 

It came from the taxpayers of this province. So that’s where they 

started. 

 

Then we see Pioneer Trust. And we see Pioneer Trust, and it’s 

starting to unfold more and more. They had to pay out $28 

million to the unsecured policy holders. Okay. They paid $28 

million to pay off the depositors, the unsecured depositors. 

 

And then it keeps going, and it keeps going. But I’m only going 

to highlight some of them, because I think it was highlighted in 

this House today about really what’s happening. 

 

Then they sign another loan guarantee to a supposed millionaire 

up in Edmonton, by the name of Peter  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

327 

 

Pocklington — a $21-million loan guarantee for him to come into 

our province to start manufacturing bacon, and processing bacon. 

Now I wonder why they would give a $21-million loan guarantee 

to Mr. Pocklington when Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon 

is running around 50 per cent capacity and are just waiting to 

expand when the markets are available. They’d like to expand in 

Saskatchewan. They’re a Saskatchewan company. They’ve been 

here for 40, 50 years, and they would like to expand. But did they 

give that offer to Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon? No. But 

they did to Peter Pocklington and Gainers up in Edmonton. 

 

And here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the real catch. They signed the 

loan guarantee for $21 million, and he gets a $10 million grant. 

He doesn’t have to pay back $10 million. Anybody could have 

. . . The member from Turtleford could have handled a situation 

like that. If he would have got the guarantees from the provincial 

government, he could have set it up, and he would have been a 

millionaire — a multi-millionaire, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

it’s $10 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let’s you and me get together and do it 

right. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — That’s right. And I could have also done that, 

if I would have been given that opportunity. And so could have 

Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon. They could have 

expanded if they were to give them the opportunity. But no, this 

government, in its wisdom and its direction of deficit budgeting 

and over-financing on this province decided that they would 

bring in another individual from Alberta. And I hear there’s a lot 

of problems up in Alberta, and they were highlighted today. 

 

Then we get, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to one of the later 

announcements, and here we go again. But this one’s a little 

bigger. This one here is worth about $200 (I believe) and 48 

million, to Weyerhaeusers in Alabama — $248 million, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all 

sincerity, and to the members opposite, that this indeed is a dark 

day for the forest industry in this province. 

 

And I see that the Minister of Finance is telling the member for 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake to take notes. Well, you can take all the 

notes you want because I’m going on record, and I have checked 

it out. I could have started that. I could have taken over the Prince 

Albert pulp-mill, the Big River sawmill, the chemical plant in 

Saskatoon, the forest industry that PAPCO had, plus they’ve 

added the Big River forestry leases to that. And what is the deal? 

What is the deal? 

 

Well let me tell you what the deal is. There has been a 

memorandum of understanding signed. There’s been a 

memorandum of understanding signed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And the financing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the financing for the 

purchase of the existing pulp plant and other assets will be 

handled by a $248 million government-held debenture, a 

promissory note on the province again. 

An Hon. Member: — Do you know what that means? 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Yes, I do know what that means. The 

province has put up all the money once again — $248 million 

that the Government of Saskatchewan has signed, a promissory 

note, or will sign if the deal goes ahead — if it goes ahead. And 

I’m quoting . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members would . . . I’ve touched a 

nerve over there. But I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’m 

quoting from is what the Premier has said. This is what your 

Premier has released: 

 

Financing for the purchase of the existing pulp plant and 

other assets will be handled by a $248 million 

government-held debenture . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not 1 cent of their money. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And not 1 cent . . . 

 

Weyerhaeuser had profits last year of $5.5 billion. 

 

Sales of $5.5 billion, and are you telling me that the Government 

of Saskatchewan has to put up all the funds for them to come into 

Saskatchewan, take our pulp-mill, take the Big River sawmill, 

the chemical plant in Saskatoon, and all the bush operations of 

PAPCO, and the bush operations from the Big River sawmill? 

Are you saying that the Government of Saskatchewan should put 

up that money? That’s why we are in debt to the tune of billions 

and billions of dollars. That’s why, because of this government’s 

business-like attitude. Do you call that good business? 

 

And here’s another release, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

. . . which Weyerhaeuser Canada will repay with interest 

(and let me just finish this) . . . which Weyerhaeuser Canada 

will repay with interest out of the combined profits of the 

pulp and paper-mills over an expected 20 years. 

 

So it’s pretty obvious, if they don’t make any profits over the 

next 20 years, that there’s another $248 million that 

Saskatchewan will not get back. 

 

Then we go to the back of the release and we find out here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we now have sold off the sawmill in Big River, 

the pulp-mill in Prince Albert, the chemical plant in Saskatoon, 

PAPCO’s bush operation, plus they have also thrown in the Big 

River mill’s bush operation, and that has gone in . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And not a dollar down. Not a dollar down. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Not one cent has Weyerhaeuser put in. Not 

one cent. Every cent is guaranteed. 

 

Also the individual who was negotiating for Weyerhaeuser, and 

here’s what he said. McInnes said: 

 

Modernization plans at the pulp-mill would begin 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

328 

 

immediately after formal approval by both parties. (So they 

really haven’t signed an agreement yet.) Construction of the 

new paper-mill would be expected to begin this fall and be 

completed in 1989. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you think the citizens of 

Saskatchewan are going to believe this for one minute? Do you 

think they’re going to believe that for one minute? 

 

And I can tell you another thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they 

don’t go ahead, well, they’ve got all our assets. If they do go 

ahead, any moneys that they put up will be from the assets that 

they have purchased with our money to buy the assets. And this 

really hurts. This hurts the members over there. They know that 

they made a bad deal. They know that. 

 

That’s fine if you want to sell off the assets of the Big River 

sawmill and the pulp-mill at Prince Albert, but let them do it with 

their own money. Why should the citizens of Saskatchewan, the 

taxpayers of this province, put up the funds? Let them put up their 

own money if they think the economic atmosphere in this 

province is good. Let them put their own money up. They don’t 

need our money. 

 

If the hog industry was that good in Saskatchewan, then why 

didn’t Peter Pocklington put up his own money? . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, I say that’s the way it should be. 

 

The Conservatives, they like to talk about the private infusion of 

private funds that are going in. “We welcome Weyerhaeuser’s 

desire to inject private capital into the Saskatchewan economy.” 

Not one cent. Not one cent did they inject. It’s all our money. 

 

I now want to turn . . . And that’s why we’re in this trouble. 

That’s why this province is in debt. I think that the voters in 

Saskatchewan will have an opportunity in a short while to make 

a decision as to whether they want to continue down that trail of 

. . . (inaudible) . . . and giveaways to the multinational 

corporations, or if they are going to go back to the Blakeney days, 

when we had 11 straight balanced budgets under Allan Blakeney. 

Eleven balanced budgets, and our unemployment rate was at four 

to four and one-half per cent. I think that that’s what the folks 

want. 

 

I think they want an NDP government and the re-instatement of 

the property improvement grant. And we will do that. I think that 

they want the 60,000 individuals who paid the unfair tax on used 

cars, that this government admitted in their own admission that it 

was unfair — I think the 60,000 people are going to welcome the 

return of the money that they paid, and we will do that. 

 

But I now want to turn to another plank that I hear the members 

across there thinking, ah, they’re looking at the moon again. But 

I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the housing program 

that the NDP have announced and will implement, the most 

energetic and popular housing program this province has ever 

seen . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member says it took 

15 years for us to figure that out. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when the NDP party was in this 

province, there was housing starts all over this province. Housing 

has come to a grinding halt under the Conservative government. 

We will implement a new policy. I think that the folks out there 

in voter land are going to have an opportunity, and I think I know 

how they’re going to vote. 

 

We have a program and we have brought it out, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a $7,000 down payment for the first-time home buyers. 

This assistance would be available for a minimum of three years 

— $7,000 for three years. Now that’s going to help a lot of people 

get started and build new homes. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you think they would sooner have 

$7,000 to start a new home, knowing full well it’s going to be 

there for three years? They can plan ahead and plan their home. 

Or do you think they want the Conservative government’s 

program which is $3,000 for nine months? I can tell you what 

they’re going to do. You take a look at the young couples who 

are going to take advantage of building this home, and now 

they’re going to, under the NDP program, have a protection plan 

that will guarantee home mortgage interest rates at 7 per cent for 

seven years on the first $70,000 of that mortgage. Now that’s 

pretty good. I think that that’s important. And I think that the 

voters out in voter land are going to accept that before they’re 

going to accept the thirteen and three-quarter per cent offered by 

the Conservative government. 

 

Also, under our program of housing we have a home rehab 

assistance plan which will provide up to $7,000 in assistance for 

those making major renovations or repairs to older homes. I think 

people have to think what that’s going to mean to Saskatchewan, 

especially after four years of a Conservative government where 

things were so uncertain in this province that a lot of people just 

couldn’t even keep up their homes. When you have 44,000 

unemployed and 66,000 on welfare, a program like this is going 

to be very, very important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — We have another plank to that housing 

program, and that’s a commitment to increased construction of 

social housing for low-income families and senior citizens. 

That’s under the section 40 housing. We are going to go ahead 

with that program. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, when they see our housing program compared to 

the Conservatives’ housing program, when they see ours with 

three years and theirs with nine months, ours with $7,000 and 

theirs with $3,000, I think it’s pretty clear — pretty clear — as to 

how they’re going to vote. 

 

And just imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this is going to 

mean to Saskatchewan once this starts. Just think of the 

carpenters and the plumbers, the electricians, the labourers, the 

young people who are going to be working. And they’re not 

going to be working for nine months: this program is going to be 

for three years. This is going to be well planned. And this is going 

to help solve the youth problem that we have. 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

329 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we start debating 

our housing program versus the housing program of the 

Conservative government in the next 28 days on the hustings, I 

can tell you what the folks are saying, because I listen to them. 

They are going to vote for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I want to conclude by . . . Well the members 

opposite seem to think that this is a big joke that we want to 

provide security for the citizens of this province in our housing 

program. But I don’t think it’s a joke. I think it’s serious. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I think that each and every one of them are going to have to 

answer for the budget that was just brought down by the new 

Finance minister — a Finance minister that has quite a history in 

this House. He’s quite a legend. It’s quite interesting that you 

have a member, a Finance minister, who is now being challenged 

for his own seat in his own constituency. And it’s a real 

challenge. Can you imagine that! The Finance minister. But that 

doesn’t end there. 

 

When we take a look at the track record of the Minister of 

Finance, we also know that the Minister of Finance was a very 

important part of Homecoming ’71. Of course he was a Liberal 

at that time. And he was in a very important part of that 

Homecoming ’71. And you could remember, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you can remember Homecoming ’71 that the Liberal 

government brought in, and the Minister of Finance, the present 

Minister of Finance, was a very important part of that Liberal 

government. 

 

Then things got kind of hot. He seen that the Liberal Party wasn’t 

going no place, so he jumps the fence and he goes over to the 

Conservative Party. He now sees that things are going bad in the 

Conservative Party, so he gets the Finance portfolio and he brings 

down a budget. And you talk about 1967 being a Black Friday. 

Well let me tell you, the budget he brought down here is also a 

Black Monday. And it’s going to be a disaster for the 

Conservative government and for all the members in this House, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think that the citizens of Saskatchewan are going to have an 

opportunity in the next 28, 35 days to decide whether the last four 

years of the Conservative government and their policies — 

whether they want that, or they want a return to the New 

Democratic government and to our polices, of only a few that I 

have brought out here today. 

 

And I think that the citizens of Saskatchewan will make that 

decision. I’m sure that they’re ready to make that decision. And 

we’re ready to go out there on the doorsteps, and we’re ready to 

debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their programs, the debt they got 

this province in. And we’re prepared to discuss the programs that 

we have, programs that we feel will bring this province out of the 

situation that it’s in right now, and once again provide security 

for every man, woman, and child in this province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the citizens of 

Saskatchewan will speak out loud and clear. And with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you know for sure I will not be supporting this 

budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

budget because what the budget does, Mr. Speaker, it sets a 

course for the future, a course of economic renewal, economic 

building in Saskatchewan. And clearly it’s very appropriate that 

I, as another northern member, would speak after the member 

who has just spoken, the NDP member. 

 

It’s unfortunate that the member didn’t dwell more extensively 

on the positive things happening in northern Saskatchewan, but 

it’s understandable. However, I must commend the member for 

being honest in terms of saying what his party’s position is in 

relation to free enterprise, growth, building; and clearly the 

position is negative. 

 

The opposition don’t like free enterprise. The opposition doesn’t 

like building. They enjoy the building of government, and clearly 

that’s what he wants to take us back to. He’s talking about the 

future, and clearly he wants to bring back the DNS to northern 

Saskatchewan, because that’s the only growth that the members 

opposite understand. 

 

Now I’m also pleased that the member opposite has again 

enunciated the position of his party in relation to the Prince 

Albert paper-mill, because in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, there 

has been some confusion on the part of certain NDP members. 

 

I have here an excerpt from the Prince Albert Daily Herald dated 

March 29, 1986. At that point I indicated to the media in Prince 

Albert that I felt that the NDP was against the mill. And I was 

questioned as to what I thought would happen if the NDP ever 

became government. I replied that I believed that they would stop 

the paper-mill deal. And clearly the evidence was here up to now, 

and clearly today the member opposite has confirmed the 

position of the NDP opposition. So, clearly, we know that they 

would take it away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However, I look at the comments with a bit of interest, the 

comments from the two NDP candidates in Prince Albert. And 

they say, I quote: “We welcome the announcement.” Now that 

seems to be a bit of a flip-flop, or else a calculated flip-flop. And 

I suggest the latter, Mr. Speaker, because I understand that in 

North Battleford the local NDP candidate says that he likes the 

Gainers plant idea, which is against the NDP party’s position, the 

position of the leader of the NDP, plus the members who are 

elected and who determine policy of the party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have indicated to the media in Prince Albert that 

I believe we are seeing political dishonesty in a party that comes 

into the legislature, states a clear position, and then directs its 

candidates to say something else while they’re campaigning for 

the votes of the good local people of Prince Albert and area. And, 

Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

330 

 

the public will not tolerate that type of activity. 

 

Now I notice some of the other things being said about the 

paper-mill. The member opposite said that nothing was being 

invested by the company Weyerhaeuser. This is simply untrue, 

Mr. Speaker. The Weyerhaeuser Company is immediately 

building a paper-mill which will employ over 250 people, new 

permanent jobs, not counting the 400 spin-off jobs that are 

created instantly because of the mill’s operations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government is not giving any money to 

Weyerhaeuser and the member knows that perfectly well because 

he was quoting from the same press release that I have before me. 

And the press release doesn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. The member 

is wrong. 

 

Now the member indicates that Weyerhaeuser will be tricking us; 

will be getting something for nothing and then making money 

and making a profit. Well I hope so, Mr. Speaker. I hope that 

Weyerhaeuser intends to make a profit. But they are paying for 

the construction of a paper-mill. They are paying for a pulp-mill. 

And they are paying roughly the same price that the NDP valued 

the pulp-mill at when they nationalized it. But, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the basic problem. The basic problem the NDP have is that 

they enjoy nationalizing and state-controlling industries. That is 

the real issue. But the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to 

talk about that. 

 

The real issue, Mr. Speaker, is that free enterprise is alive and 

doing well in Saskatchewan because we are open for business. 

That’s why Weyerhaeuser is coming into Saskatchewan; that’s 

why North Battleford is receiving a new industry employing 

hundreds of people. That’s why the NDP doesn’t like it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now we have to look at the other positions that the NDP have 

taken in relation to industry, because clearly our budget talks 

about a climate, a climate of good business. And what we’ve seen 

in Saskatchewan since 1982 is businesses, small and large, 

feeling comfortable about Saskatchewan, comfortable about 

risking capital, coming into Saskatchewan, setting up new 

businesses. People are setting up their own businesses, creating 

employment, because they feel comfortable about the business 

climate in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition members have talked about 

northern Saskatchewan, and in a way they’ve indicated the basic 

weakness in their philosophy. And the weakness is that the DNS 

and government structures cannot create an economic base that’s 

required. It wasn’t the government that created the economic 

base in the southern part of Saskatchewan, and it can’t work in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But let’s look at some of the solutions offered by the members 

opposite that do directly affect Prince Albert and the rest of 

northern Saskatchewan. Let’s look at what they would do. Well, 

they’d bring back the DNS and that would create a few 

government jobs, I suppose. They had a habit of not hiring any 

Northerners except those that they were buying off politically, 

but that would happen. So they would cancel the paper-mill 

which doesn’t benefit, Mr. Speaker, which doesn’t benefit the 

forestry 

industry in northern Saskatchewan. And those people in the 

industry are telling us that they welcome this announcement 

because Weyerhaeuser has a reputation for getting things done in 

the industry, creating jobs, good forestry management — things 

that make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the NDP said they’ll cancel that; they don’t like the deal 

because it involves free enterprise. So I guess the solution for 

Prince Albert is to continue operating PAPCO, lose millions of 

dollars every year, because the NDP don’t like free enterprise. 

Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t make sense to me and it doesn’t make 

sense to my constituents. 

 

But they’ve got a bigger plan for father north of Prince Albert. 

They want to solve the unemployment problem by closing the 

mines — close the uranium mines. Well, the people in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, can’t figure that one out either. Two 

hundred families in Prince Albert rely on the uranium industry 

for direct pay cheques — direct. Those people are going to have 

their jobs phased out if the NDP plan — their master plan — 

comes into effect. That doesn’t make sense to me. 

 

The NDP leader was on an open-line show the other day and 

someone asked him, someone phoned in and said, well what 

would happen to these hundreds of people that are employed in 

the uranium mines, an industry of the future, an industry which 

the Leader of the Opposition himself sunk $600 million into — 

what would happen to these people? Well his answer was: we’ll 

relocate them to other industries. Well that’s about as believable 

as the NDP believing in small business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it ironic that when we talk about relocating a small 

branch of government, namely the crop insurance people, to 

Melville, the Leader of the Opposition fights it — tooth and nail, 

he fights that move. And yet hundreds of people in northern 

Saskatchewan should be expected to be moved because the NDP 

philosophically want to close down uranium mines. That doesn’t 

make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, is the 

comments of the members opposite in relation to unemployment. 

The record shows that northern unemployment increased 

drastically over the 11-year term of the members opposite — 

drastically. Some communities experienced increases in 

unemployment from 15 per cent to 85 per cent under that 11-year 

term. Mr. Speaker, that isn’t performance. 

 

And yet the Leader of the Opposition says that he can take these 

people that reside in towns, which are unemployed to the extent 

of 90 per cent and 85 per cent, and he’s going to put them in other 

industries in northern Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, if his 

record of 11 years doesn’t speak for itself, I don’t know what 

will. 

 

(1615) 

 

Well let’s look at some of the other activity that’s happening 

that’s mentioned in the budget. We have an industrial incentives 

program; we have an attitude of being open to business and 

encouraging free enterprise.  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

331 

 

As a result, we’ve seen unprecedented activity in the gold fields. 

In fact, this Friday the Premier and I are visiting the first 

operating gold mine and mill in northern Saskatchewan — in the 

La Ronge gold belt. It’s presently under construction. 

 

That is there, Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s policy. 

That industry would not be there if the other people were in 

power — because we changed the rules, Mr. Speaker. We took 

away the rule that said that big government could come in and 

nationalize half of a mine when they see that it’s successful. That 

wasn’t fair; we didn’t think that was fair. If the gold industry . . . 

If investors want to risk capital — and gold is a high-risk type of 

venture — we don’t think that big government should take 

advantage of investors. 

 

We also changed some of the royalty tax structures and patterned 

them similar to our oil tax structures. As a result, Mr. Speaker, in 

the La Ronge gold belt now we’re seeing activity like never 

before. The member opposite must have forgotten to talk about 

that. But if the NDP master plan ever comes in to force, the gold 

mines are gone. Hundreds of jobs are gone. It’s a simple as that. 

 

The other project that’s been announced, which the member 

apparently forgot to mention, is the northern power line that was 

announced. This government is building a source of power for 

people in the North, part of the member’s constituency. That 

power is there, is being brought in to provide lower electrical 

costs to people in northern Saskatchewan. Now again the 

member doesn’t recognize that as something that makes sense. 

Instead he targeted in on talking about welfare. That’s his 

solution — DNS or welfare. And there’s not much of a difference 

if you look at the record of the DNS. 

 

Now welfare reform is something that took effect in Prince 

Albert and in northern Saskatchewan as well. We are changing 

our approach in terms of the welfare structure. One NDP 

spokesman, disguised as a union leader, the other day indicated 

that were attacking the welfare structure. That is the first time, 

Mr. Speaker, that I’ve agreed with that particular union leader in 

Prince Albert. Yes, we are attacking the welfare structure. It’s 

about time we attacked the welfare structure. The taxpayers 

cannot afford any more of what we’ve seen. 

 

The Social Services minister tried an experimental program in 

terms of welfare reform, asking welfare recipients to pick their 

cheques up rather than having their cheques mailed out, because 

the way the system was operating, we weren’t sure where they 

were getting to. The result was rather phenomenal. Between 5 to 

8 per cent of the recipients never came to get their cheques. So 

the cheques were going somewhere. 

 

Now what this means, Mr. Speaker, is a compassionate 

government realizing that there are people who need welfare. 

They should be getting welfare. Them getting welfare should not 

be interfered with by the people who are abusing the system, and 

that’s what’s important. There are two groups of people being 

abused. One is the people who should be getting welfare, and the 

other, of course, the taxpayers who have always been abused. So 

the members opposite criticize that. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s at stake here is political 

honesty. I think the public is tired of politicians not quite saying 

what they mean and perhaps politicians saying different things in 

different places. And that’s why the people of the Prince Albert 

area are going to react negatively against the NDP. Where here 

in the House they openly oppose the paper-mill, and then locally 

they get their candidates talking in favour of it. That doesn’t 

work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also doesn’t work in terms of other new developments. I took 

some time and got an old newspaper from 1978 where a former 

DNS minister by the name of Mr. Bowerman is quoted as talking 

very complimentary about the development in northern 

Saskatchewan pertaining to uranium mining. He says that this is 

the greatest thing that ever happened in northern Saskatchewan. 

The jobs, the economic development, everything is good about 

uranium mining. Now they’ve changed that position now, Mr. 

Speaker, but I trust that some of the northern members are going 

to be saying that they’re in favour of uranium mining to the local 

people, because they don’t want to disclose the real agenda of the 

NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s simply not honest. 

 

I want to close by dealing with another statement that the NDP 

frequently uses when they use the word “ordinary.” They always 

say they’re concerned about ordinary people, ordinary 

Saskatchewan residents. I, for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, cannot 

understand what they mean by ordinary. 

 

You know, I think Saskatchewan people are extraordinary, 

because they have built a fine province, and they deserve to be 

considered more than ordinary. But if they mean average people, 

I don’t know how their actions are connected to their concern for 

ordinary people. 

 

How do closing uranium mines help the ordinary worker in 

uranium mines? How does closing the oil industry help the 

ordinary worker in the oil industry? And how does putting a 

moratorium on nursing homes help the ordinary seniors who’ve 

waited for years for nursing home spaces and are now getting 

spaces under this government? How do we benefit by 

nationalizing ordinary industries? How does that create new 

jobs? 

 

We believe in building industries, Mr. Speaker. So I think what 

has to be done, Mr. Speaker, we have to recognize that the NDP 

are saying and doing virtually anything to get votes, and we have 

a duty to the people in our constituencies to provide the facts. 

And in the constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I’ll be 

providing the facts on the paper-mill to them regardless of what’s 

being said by local NDP candidates, because they are clearly 

misleading the people in my constituency. 

 

The member mentions that he would have built . . . or that the 

NDP started to build the technical school in P.A. Well I’ve seen 

the plans that the NDP had for three elections, and they’ve 

promised a technical school to Prince Albert. The plans were 

preliminary. It was a small school —  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

332 

 

capacity of 320 people. In my by-election campaign, we 

announced that we were building the technical school, 640 

students. The NDP reacted by saying that we weren’t going to do 

it. They said the Tories will never build a technical school. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been built; we delivered and the people of 

Prince Albert know that. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying that this budget 

stays the course of providing compassion, protection to 

Saskatchewan people, but also creating a climate of good 

business — the opportunity to build, not to close. And that’s why 

I support the budget, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 

 

Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to address the budget on several issues, particularly how it affects 

unions, how it deals with unions; how it deals with the 

small-business men; and particularly how it deals with the 

home-maker. 

 

I think the most interesting comment that was made on budget 

night, other than, of course, the most interesting lines of the 

Minister of Finance concerning reduction of taxes for ordinary 

citizens, was the Leader of the Opposition’s treatment of the 

reduction of the E&H sales tax on clothing. Remember when the 

Leader of the Opposition, the MLA for Regina Elphinstone, 

stood there and talked about . . . Of course, Mr. Speaker, I intend 

to continue with my speech. I just have difficulty when talking 

over the idiocies of the baboons in the corner. 

 

However, as the Leader of the Opposition stood there and 

ridiculed the idea that we should possibly be concerned about the 

taxes on sneakers and ties and clothing, that somehow that was a 

silly issue to deal with, that people don’t care in his riding — or 

apparently, all over Saskatchewan — what the price of children’s 

clothing are. It doesn’t matter to them. That was a silly issue. It 

was a most interesting comment for a man who claimed to be the 

head of the populist party, the grass roots party, the MLA for 

Regina Elphinstone. 

 

And I suspect in Regina Elphinstone it’s very similar than in 

Saskatoon Westmount. People care very much how much it costs 

to clothe a family. And I might say that the tax on clothing is a 

big issue, and it’s an important issue, and we understand things 

like that. And we understand that a family budget is more 

important to the people than the government’s budgets. We 

understand the institution of the family has a precedent over the 

state. And for this reason we think, if somebody is trying to buy 

pairs of shoes for five or six people in a family, that they 

shouldn’t charge education and health tax for the sneakers they 

have to wear at school. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one thing is very interesting while we’re 

nearing an election: that it’s so obvious that the NDP know that 

Westmount will not return their has-been NDP candidate. 

Because they used to treat me, oh, so well; and recently, as the 

election coming up, they so much like to treat me as the enemy. 

And I thank them very much for the vote of confidence, that they 

know they have a fight on their hands. 

I think when I deal with such issues of tax off clothing of 

everyone, it’s so obvious that there are people who understand 

the necessity of those, what seems to be in a government that 

spends millions, to understand how important it is on the price of 

clothing and the price, I might say, of sewing and knitting, and 

all those issues that are important to the family. Not to empire 

builders, not to people who are used to spending millions, as the 

Minister of Justice so very well said — the master plan for the 

NDP in the North, to waste millions for bureaucratic empires and 

then to go around talking about shutting down the few real jobs 

in the North. They don’t understand what it’s like for someone 

on a limited budget to be trying to find clothing to send children 

to school. But that issue isn’t important to them. 

 

What’s important to them is how large can we build this 

government; how large can we build a bureaucratic empire 

divorced from the people and to be the boss of the people. And 

for this reason the MLA for Regina Elphinstone stands up on 

budget night in front of a huge crowd in this room and in a huge 

TV audience and ridicules the idea of reducing taxes on clothing. 

 

(1630) 

 

Yet he goes on with his soothsaying, clairvoyant, imaginary 

budgets of 7-7-7’s that will cost millions and millions and 

millions of dollars, and he knows he never will have to produce, 

because he knows he will never get into government again. 

 

It was just maybe a small thing, that comment, but I think it was 

historical to show how out of touch the so-called grass roots party 

is. And someone jokingly said to me: well, Gay, it certainly is 

nice to have an MLA who understands that shoes of a 14-year-old 

just cost as much or more than the shoes of a 12-year-old. 

 

Maybe it’s good to have MLAs who have an understanding of 

grass roots, ordinary people rather than the master planners of 

our society who think they can create empires to run other 

people’s lives. Maybe it’s about time we had a grass roots party 

that’s based on grass roots politicians. 

 

And on and on the opposition has, to show their philosophy, 

although it’s not a provincial issue, they’ve consistently attacked 

the Nielsen report. And they said, why haven’t the PCs talked 

about the Nielsen report? And they complain about how awful it 

is. I just want to quote for the record from the Nielsen report to 

show a Tory philosophy of trying to reduce government for the 

benefit of the people who use that government, who must pay for 

it. And this is the service that . . . they’re so upset about the 

Nielsen report. And I quote from the Nielsen report, page 1: 

 

Canadians have a right to expect government that serves 

their needs at a reasonable cost. Government should be as 

efficient as possible while providing all essential programs 

and services. In this context outdated regulations, waste, 

duplication, and conflicting program objectives can add to 

federal spending without meeting national goals. In fact, by 

rendering the 



 

April 2, 1986 

333 

 

economy more rigid and unadaptive, they can and do hinder 

the achievement of both economic and social goals. 

 

Now can you imagine attacking the philosophy that we must stop 

huge government that causes waste, that stops businesses? That 

is the kind of people they are, that they object that people want 

to save the taxpayer money. They don’t like, apparently, the 

taxpayer having money to spend on themselves. They want to 

create a bureaucratic empire that controls people. 

 

It is very interesting as we see the philosophy behind the growth 

of government, and I said before, that when it comes in conflict, 

when the family’s budget comes in conflict with the 

government’s budget, we must first consider the family’s budget, 

and we must first consider, will this help or hinder what the 

family is trying to accomplish. And so when we look at issues 

such as tax on gas, tax on clothing, tax on fabric, and all those 

things, we have to say: will this help the family, or will it hurt it? 

And we go on to our other tax breaks. 

 

But for the last 10 years there has been an attempt for government 

to replace the family. They pretend that they would say that, we 

will provide the rules for culture and recreation, for health, for 

education, for social services, and to use this not as an aid to a 

family, not a service to the family, but as a way and means to 

replace the family, particularly when it came to the issue of 

women. First of all, the socialist mentality, the master plan, 

treated women as if we were somehow a minority ethnic group 

who voted in a bloc — as if, I might add, any minority ethnic 

group votes in a bloc — and that we all think the same and we all 

want the same things, and we care about the same things. They 

did not give us the opportunity even to be seen as individuals. 

 

And what the master planners of the socialists decided the 

women needed was to be removed from the home, and that the 

home was no longer an important institution when, after all, we 

could grow a government on the backs of the home. And so they 

decided then that the role of the home-maker was, at best, not to 

be mentioned; at worst, disreputable, and no intelligent woman 

with a choice would every choose it voluntarily. As many of my 

female friends said, for years we haven’t been considered as 

women, because we don’t qualify for those people who are upset 

at the idea that being a home-maker is an honourable profession. 

 

And so we saw then that continually their emphasis was on 

spending taxpayer money, money taken from families, to create 

an empire that would replace the family and control the family. 

And I must say, this is a rather historical budget in one way, is 

that the home-maker, for the first time in a long, long time, has 

been recognized as a valid political constituency, that the 

home-maker has been recognized as someone who has a role to 

play in society other than a vanishing breed whose job . . . Our 

job is to help that breed vanish. 

 

So instead of talking about how that we must raise taxes and raise 

tax, and forcing women to get jobs outside the home whether or 

not it’s good for their family — not choosing to take jobs but 

forcing them to go to work — 

that we provided a pension plan. This pension plan would not be 

based on the idea, if you don’t save, you get more; you’re 

slothful, you get more; if you don’t work — work meaning 

industriously — you get more. But it’s based on the idea if you’re 

a saver, if you’re concerned about the future, if you’re concerned 

about security, then you put money into our pension plan and 

we’ll match it. And it is based . . . This pension plan is voluntary, 

and this is very, very important. Many of the women I’ve talked 

to, they said, we like the pension plan but we don’t want it to be 

compulsory; we don’t want it that my husband has to give me a 

pension, but we want it to be voluntary. And that is so absolutely 

important, that the pension plan is voluntary. 

 

And so, this pension plan will be based on what you put in will 

increase what you get out when you need security in your older 

age, when you may be a widow or a widower. And this is so 

sensible because it’s not welfare, not degrading welfare, where 

you feel that you are owned by the state, that you are at the mercy 

of the state. But it’s saying, I’ve put it in; now I can get some 

back — matching. 

 

And it is so very important that it is voluntary. It is for the 

home-maker, the part-time worker, the person who enters a 

work-force, may leave it to raise a family, may come back — that 

they will not be penalized. This shows that we are not pushing 

some radical feminist social agenda devised by men who believe 

that the state’s job is to replace the family. It shows that we are 

talking about real people with real concern. 

 

We’re not pushing a life-style on anyone. We’re not attacking the 

woman who needs to go to work or wants to go to work — most 

certainly I am not, since I’m 163 miles away from my home right 

now. But we are saying that the home-maker has a valuable 

contribution to society and that they deserve security, and we will 

give them a voluntary pension plan. And I think that is so 

absolutely significant and so absolutely important. 

 

And perhaps the time has now arrived that women will be seen 

not as a mindless political bloc to pass the socialist goals of a few 

master-mind people who claim they know what’s best for a 

society, and claim what that is is for the state to take on the role 

from the individual and the family. 

 

And so, I think that this clearly shows in this budget that we’re 

speaking to real people. We don’t care what the people who want 

to run other people’s ideas — excuse me, run other people’s lives 

— think. We care about the ideas of the average citizens. We 

don’t care about how many more Crown corporations we can 

build on the backs of ruined businesses, businesses ruined often 

by incompetence, the selfishness, the over-regulation of 

government. What we care about is the small-business man, or I 

might add the small-business woman. 

 

We’ve reduced the tax burden. We’ve eliminated and simplified 

regulations. We’re promoting trade and I frankly am proud that 

our cabinet ministers are travelling all over the world on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And I’m proud that the world is 

looking at Saskatchewan as a place to develop and expand and I 

will  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

334 

 

face every door in Westmount and say, you bet that sometimes 

we travelled to give your folks a job. You bet our cabinet 

ministers travel to help you people have a job. As a result we 

have the Weyerhaeuser in P.A., as my colleagues from P.A. 

spoke of so well. 

 

In The Globe and Mail they talked about how this deal in P.A. 

shows such an incredible confidence in the economy in 

Saskatchewan where other pulp-mills are moving out of Canada. 

This is an incredible coup. This is marvellous, this saying that 

people believe in Saskatchewan. People believe that it is a place 

of freedom; people believe that it is no longer under the control 

of the regulators, the big government lovers, the bureaucrats. It’s 

under the control of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And let the people of Saskatchewan make no mistake, there is a 

big difference between the NDP who are now in opposition and 

the Tory government, and the difference is that the Tory 

government believes in the people of Saskatchewan, and they 

believe they have a right to the doors and windows of the rest of 

the world. They do not believe they have to put us in a lab and 

create a sociological experiment, to quote the past attorney 

general, so called Roy Romanow. 

 

And we have helped small business because we know that the 

small-business man is the one who will create jobs for other 

people. They are the backbone of our economy and they are the 

risk takers, the opportunity makers. They have contributed to the 

standard of living we have, to the freedom we have. We can talk 

about our schools and our hospitals and we’re proud of those 

institutions, but somebody has to pay and it’s the business man, 

the fellow who’s making a buck, who pays for the services we all 

enjoy. And when we start hurting the fellow who’s out there 

taking the risk, making the economy work, ridiculing that fellow, 

competing with him with government bureaucracy, making him 

pay for his competition, then we’re saying we don’t even want 

the services because we refuse to treat the person right who’s 

paying for them. 

 

And so you can’t say that the NDP are for health and they’re for 

education and they’re for social services and they’re for 

government programs, if the NDP are opposed to the people who 

are paying for them. You can’t get blood out of a stone and you 

can’t build a social structure on a bankrupt province where the 

young and the aggressive, the risk takers, are leaving. But you 

can build when businesses such as the Weyerhaeusers are coming 

in to Saskatchewan. 

 

And you say: what has that got to do with Saskatoon Westmount? 

It’s got a lot to do with Saskatoon Westmount, just as everything 

that happens in Saskatchewan has a lot to do with Saskatoon 

Westmount. We need jobs for our children. We need jobs in the 

oil patch and in the pulp-mill and we need the money that that 

generates. And so every time there is an economic opportunity 

anywhere in this province, including in uranium mines in 

northern Saskatchewan, it directly affects the children and the 

grandchildren of the people of Westmount. So there is no 

constituency that is ever hurt by economic expansion, including, 

I might add, that  

Intercon has benefited from the competition in the pig marketing 

industry. And I am very pleased to see that Freddie Mitchell is 

expanding his Intercon business that has provided jobs for my 

constituents. He has treated my constituents with fairness and 

decency, and he respects the workers in my constituency. 

 

(1645) 

 

I would like to mention our treatment of unions and labour, and 

the NDP’s treatment. The NDPs have one particular goal for the 

unions, and that is a political machine for their re-election. The 

unfortunate thing about political machines, they work best when 

they are voluntary, meaning to say that you can tell the union 

leaders that they should back the NDP, and some will go along 

with it and some won’t. But as long as we have secret ballot, you 

can’t control the union membership and the union leaders. You 

can’t control people because they happen to have a union card in 

their pocket. 

 

So they used the union and have continually attempted to use the 

union as a machine for their re-election, for their spreading of 

their lies about our anti-union policy, or lies about our treatment 

of workers. What workers want is security; they want 

opportunity; they want jobs; they want jobs for their children; 

and they want education. We’re providing that and the workers 

are smart enough to figure it out. 

 

But this budget has said to the unions, we will give you an 

opportunity to invest your funds in venture capital, that you can 

be part of the entrepreneurial, the making job business, as well as 

having jobs of your own. The budget didn’t say, you have to do 

it; this is what you must do. They said, this is an opportunity. And 

so it’s an opportunity budget; it’s not a compulsion budget. It’s 

not saying, here’s a tax there, here’s a tax there; compulsory this, 

compulsory that. He says, here’s an opportunity for pensions, if 

you want it; here’s an opportunity for venture capital, if you want 

it; and here’s an opportunity, when you go into a store, to put 

your money on clothing and not on taxes. 

 

And for this reason, because it’s an opportunity budget, I am 

supporting this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to rise 

in the Assembly this afternoon to offer my congratulations to the 

Minister of Finance and his excellent budget for the 1986-87 

fiscal year. 

 

As a member of this legislature for the Redberry constituency I 

could speak extensively on many thrusts in the forest 

management and renewable resource development that this 

document contains. I could speak at considerable length on new 

incentives for local government or perhaps a comprehensive 

package for job creation. I could expand on a need for welfare 

reform or on selected tax cuts that will stimulate small business 

and small business’s growth across the province. I could spend 

my allotted time talking on the new and exciting investment 

opportunities that will encourage Saskatchewan people to invest 

in their own province. 

  



 

April 2, 1986 

335 

 

I could probably spend my entire time, Mr. Speaker, talking 

about the creation of the property management corporation, a 

corporation which will free our senior civil servants to do the jobs 

that they can do best and will leave the management of property 

to those trained in that function. I could talk about the substantial 

savings that this new corporation will bring the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I could explain how this government has eliminated waste and 

duplication and has saved over $300 million while reducing the 

civil service by more than 1,000 positions since 1982. I could talk 

about this government’s commitment to health care, and how the 

PC government has increased health expenditures by almost 70 

per cent since 1982, and how we will spend another average of 

$1,200 for every man, woman, and child in this province in health 

care expenditures in 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is, I could spend the entire 

afternoon and probably the evening of the Assembly’s time 

speaking about the positive things that this government has done 

and has accomplished in its four-year term. I could probably 

spend another afternoon on all the positive measures that have 

been introduced in the budget. 

 

I think it is important for us to have a positive attitude in this 

House. We are constantly bombarded by members opposite with 

their negative attitudes, half-truths, and innuendoes. And, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly, I think the people of Saskatchewan are 

fed up with this attitude. So I’m going to spend my time 

constructively outlining what I think are two of the highlights in 

this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and indeed the people 

of all Canada recognize that this Conservative government of 

Saskatchewan has been and will continue to be in leadership and 

in the leadership role when it comes to protecting the 

Saskatchewan family. 

 

Over the past four years this province has demonstrated its 

commitment to Saskatchewan people, to Saskatchewan families, 

by protecting their homes against high interest rates and by 

removing an exorbitant NDP gas tax which crippled the economy 

prior to 1982. 

 

These positive measures that our government has taken help the 

average Saskatchewan family. Our government has recognized 

that there will still be a void and it has to be filled. Many 

Saskatchewan people have not had the opportunity to set aside 

money for a worry-free retirement period. This is especially 

applicable to low- and middle-income earners who work for 

small businesses, and perhaps are self-employed, and are not 

under the umbrella of a pension plan. 

 

These individuals, Mr. Speaker, are the backbone of the 

Saskatchewan work-force. They are the mother and dad 

enterprises in small business that makes Saskatchewan strong. 

They are the employees in towns and villages across this 

province who work in small business and help Saskatchewan 

grow and prosper. And until this time, and until this government 

responded to their needs, there was not a pension plan that they 

could contribute for their  

retirement days. 

 

I know the members opposite cringe at the thought of voluntary 

plans. They don’t like the word “voluntary.” It doesn’t fit in their 

vocabulary at all. But this plan is voluntary, and it is not designed 

to compete with private pension plans, but will benefit and help 

all the small businesses, farmers, in this province to establish a 

pension plan for both their full-time and part-time employees. 

And perhaps most of all it will help the mom and dad enterprises 

to establish a saving plan for their retirement years. 

 

I think that this pension plan in itself is a great stride forward for 

Saskatchewan families and for the protection of families in the 

future years, and I commend the Minister of Finance for 

introducing this in his budget. Mr. Speaker, there are potentially 

thousands of small-business people, home-makers, and farmers 

across this province who I know will participate in the plan. And 

I encourage all members of this government to urge the federal 

government and other provinces to follow the Saskatchewan lead 

so that a national home-makers’ pension plan can be established 

which would be undoubtedly based on our model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second item I wish to talk about is our 

government’s commitment to the protection of the family farm. 

As the Minister of Finance stated in his budget speech, we are 

“determined to create opportunities that will ensure the future 

prosperity of our agricultural industry.” 

 

I could spend a fair bit of time outlining what we’ve already done 

for agriculture, and it is quite substantial, Mr. Speaker. No other 

government in Canada, and perhaps no other government in the 

world, has done more to protect its agricultural industry than this 

government, and I’m proud that we’re doing this. 

 

No other government in Canada has a Premier who is a farmer 

that has a permit book. And we have, and we’re proud of it. I 

might add, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition doesn’t like to hear 

that the Premier is a farmer, because when they stack their eastern 

lawyer against our farm boy, I’m afraid they come up well short 

in the eyes of the public. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity and a privilege to 

be involved in the cabinet committee on farm input costs, which 

toured this province. We heard from farmers and business men 

and agribusiness people from virtually every corner of the 

province. The message they provided to us was a constant one, 

Mr. Speaker. At every meeting, people told us that: we appreciate 

The Farm Security Act that your government has brought into 

effect so that farmers facing foreclosure action will have some 

relief. We like the livestock assistance program which gave 

16,000 farmers $29 million in 1984, and 13,000 farmers $30,000 

million in 1985. We appreciate the 1985 crop assistance program 

which made $68 million in assistance available to 13,000 farmers 

in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

They were particularly thankful for the oil royalty refund 

program which will turn over $42 million to the farmers  

  



 

April 2, 1986 

336 

 

in this calendar year. 

 

And perhaps the most popular program, Mr. Speaker, was the 

production loan program which provided $920 million at 6 per 

cent interest to approximately 46,000 farmers. But did they tell 

us that there was more that needed to be done, Mr. Speaker? And 

this budget answers some of their concerns. They said, we 

appreciate your natural gas distribution program and it needs to 

go on because natural gas is a viable alternative at a lower cost 

for our farmers. 

 

They also told us that, we can’t function in today’s highly 

competitive world with old-fashioned communications systems 

and technology. We need individual rural line service and this 

budget provides that opportunity. They told us that the marketing 

and production of agricultural commodities require substantial 

investment in research and development. This budget continues 

with a $200 million agricultural development fund which was 

introduced last year. 

 

Particularly important to note, Mr. Speaker, that although the 

former government promised year after year to build a new 

College of Agriculture in Saskatoon, the project never did get off 

the ground in the time of the NDP government. They had 

hundreds of millions of dollars to invest in potash mines, 

hundreds of millions of dollars to invest in uranium mines, and 

all kinds of money to build Cornwall Centres in down-town 

Regina, and the Sturdy Stone Centre in Saskatoon. But never 

once did they have enough money to build a College of 

Agriculture building in Saskatoon university. Their priority was 

not with agriculture, Mr. Speaker, as with this government. And 

this building will ensure that our College of Agriculture can 

maintain its rightful place as a world leader in the agricultural 

research and education field. 

 

The rural folks that we talked to on our farm input tour told us 

how important it was that the College of Agriculture go ahead. 

And we listened and we responded. 

 

And there was another message, Mr. Speaker. The people we 

talked to in rural Saskatchewan said, you know things aren’t so 

rosy in this province. Input costs are higher than they should be; 

commodity costs are lower than they should be, and we’re caught 

in a bit of a price squeeze. There’s one thing for certain: things 

are better in Saskatchewan than they are in Montana; things are 

better in Saskatchewan than they are in North Dakota; and things 

are a lot better in Saskatchewan than they are in Manitoba. And 

we’ve had a Progressive Conservative government that takes and 

places priority in agriculture. 

 

There is one final comment I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s about the deficit. No one in this province likes deficit 

financing, least of all the people on this side of the House. But 

this government had two choices. We either forget about securing 

the future of our families and our agricultural industry, as 

suggested by the members opposite, or we can increase the size 

of the deficit. The opposition say we should have raised taxes 

substantially by bringing back such negative measures as the gas 

tax so that the deficit would be reduced by squeezing the purse 

of every family and every wage earner in this province. 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that those members opposite want 

taxes and budgets that provide for increased spending for big 

governments and big Crown corporations. They have been, and 

continue to be, totally negative towards any measure which helps 

the people and the real families in this province. And I must say, 

Mr. Speaker, that I could not and would not support any 

amendments that come from the negative nine opposite, but I will 

support the positive and progressive measures that are put 

forward in this budget. And I’m pleased to add my support to the 

motion. 

 

Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The House Leader, why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say how 

delighted I am to get into this debate. I want to express my 

annoyance with the fashion in which this House is handled. The 

conduct of the business of this Assembly simply cannot be done 

efficiently or effectively if we cannot take government members 

at their word. 

 

I want to publicly complain about the fact that the Government 

Whip gave us his word, and then apparently it meant nothing. I 

want to publicly complain about that and tell you that the 

business of this government simply cannot be effectively done if 

we cannot believe what you say. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased to enter into this 

debate. I want to mention one other thing while I’m on my feet, 

and that has to do with the security system in this building. The 

security system may or may not make sense. However, it’s been 

combined with a policy which I vehemently object to, and that is 

the exclusion of peaceful protest groups from this building. These 

two things have been done at one and the same time. 

 

I want to publicly complain that this building is no longer 

apparently open to the people of the province. This government 

is not just afraid of farmers and nurses; it also seems to be afraid 

of legitimate groups. This is the seat of government and I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that peaceful demonstrations ought to be allowed 

and ought to come into this building. 

 

Mr. Speaker wants to call it 5 o’clock. I’d be prepared to agree to 

that. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


