


















































April 10, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 10, 1986 
 
 

509 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, among all the spurious 
comments, the only one of which was probably accurate was 
my promotion of television sets and ski-doos in northern 
Saskatchewan. All the rest was stretching it a bit. But that was 
the absolute truth. In the midst of all that nonsense you did give 
us, you did read out some of the figures for the waiting list for 
nursing homes in Saskatoon. So if you could just give us that 
one again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I should point out to you that — and you 
will see this because of the different manner they’re reporting in 
— we, after our meeting on Monday, requested the DCCs to 
give us this accurate and up-to-date information. 
 
As I said before supper, Regina had three categories: priority, 
urgent, and other, and I gave you the figures on that — and I 
did just before five. And I can understand that maybe you 
missed them. It was the Saskatoon ones. And they have a little 
different classification, but that’s up to them. I mean they run 
their own ship up there. 
 
I will give those to you now. And that is for level 3, on the 
priority list, two people; for level 4, on the priority list, 12 
people; total of 14. On the preference, they would call . . . What 
Regina call the urgent, they would call the preference, I 
suppose. At level 3, 130; and at level 4, 211; for a total of 341. 
And then they have a category, as I explained to you before 
supper, that they called bypass, and that is for people who are 
categorized by the DCC in level 3 and level 4, but when 
contacted by telephone indicate that, we’re glad we’re classified 
but at this point in time we do not wish to enter a nursing home. 
And there are 35 of those on the bypass category in level 3 and 
93 of them in level 4 for a total of 128. 
 
Saskatoon’s footnote is — they informed us since Monday — is 
that for their priority list they say physical health, and/or social 
support system breakdown, needs, can or should be met in a 
special care home. So they go priority, preference, and then 
they have bypass. 
 
So as you can see, the DCCs are completely autonomous. They 
don’t all follow the same categories, but I can assure you that 
all the individuals who apply to the DCCs are assessed by that 
DCC under the same criteria. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What about levels 1 and 2, then, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Level 1 and 2 for Saskatoon are not 
reported. I probably can get you that figure, though. They’re not 
reported in what I’m quoting from here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, will you have the 
information here by 10:30 tomorrow morning? This is  

nonsense. Every time we ask you a question: well, I’ll go get 
the information — notwithstanding that the information is on 
the end of a telephone. Indeed it’s possible your officials have 
that information. I’ll give you a moment, Mr. Minister, to be 
briefed and give us that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Here are the level 1 and 2’s for 
Saskatoon. And on the preference list there are 55 level 1’s and 
on the level 2 for preference, 115; zero on the priority for either 
level 1 or 2; and on the bypass, 73 level 1’s and 58 level 2’s. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number 
of questions, Mr. Minister, that I want to ask you tonight, and to 
express a number of concerns that I have and that my 
constituents have with the health services in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I know that during the course of the year 
since we last went through estimates, you have had a number of 
letters from my constituents up in northern Saskatchewan, 
expressing some grave concerns about situations that has taken 
place in the last year. As I indicated when we first went through 
this exercise four years ago, there was going to be many horror 
stories that were taking place in northern Saskatchewan as 
Health was being administered . . . the way it was being 
administered. And that has happened ever year, and we’ve had 
cases every year where there has been serious situations that has 
been brought to the attention of your department and yourself 
and your officials. I will be going into some of them and I will 
be wanting to discuss a petition that you have received in the 
last couple of months from the community of Beauval. And I 
just give you that advanced warning that I will be discussing 
that. 
 
I want to first of all, Mr. Minister, talk about transportation 
subsidy that was paid . . . that the government had for fresh 
food and meat and vegetables into the Stony Rapids and 
Fond-du-Lac in the Black Lake area, which your department 
discontinued two years ago, and we have been trying on this 
side to get you to reinstate that program. 
 
At this time, Mr. Minister, I’ll start off by asking you if you 
would immediately reinstate that food transportation subsidy, 
and if you would also add Uranium City and Camsell Portage to 
that list. As you know, there are no roads up into that area. 
Norcanair now is not running their scheduled flights into 
Uranium City like they did before. And I think that you can see 
that with the lack of fresh food and vegetables that they had 
access to before, that you’re going to see health costs rising. 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would consider 
reinstating that program immediately and adding Camsell 
Portage and Uranium City to that list, on the food transportation 
subsidy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have discussed this previously and 
the member of the opposition has raised it, and I have indicated 
to him our rationale for it. I think if he recalls our discussions of 
last year, there was a priority of needs, of medical services up 
the west side, and I indicated to him that we have worked in 
conjunction with the federal government and the University of 
Saskatchewan, and I  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

510 
 

think to some extent have alleviated that problem. 
 
I indicated then that when we removed the food subsidy, that 
from the indications that have been brought to my attention 
some of that food was not going to residents in the North, but 
some of it was going to fly-in fish camps and things of this 
nature. I have been in discussions with my colleague, the 
Minister of Social Services, and he has indicated to me that if 
there are people on social assistance in that area that you’re 
referring to, he is willing at taking a look at seeing for those 
individuals who would be on social assistance, that his 
department may be willing to do something to assist them. 
 
But certainly, I think you would agree with me, my concern is 
for the residents in that area. I don’t see the government’s 
obligation to be subsidizing food into fly-in fish camps. I don’t 
think that’s the role of the government to be subsidizing this. 
And there was some of that going on, as you well know. 
 
But I would indicate to you that the position of the government 
is that my colleague — and when you come to his estimates 
you’re quite welcome to question him on it — at this time is 
studying the possibility if there are people on social assistance 
that he would certainly be thinking of doing something to assist 
them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, we’re not dealing with Social 
Services estimates tonight, we’re dealing with Health. And the 
program is underneath the Department of Health. 
 
I want to first of all get this straight. Your department and your 
department officials claim that it’s the tourist operators who 
were benefiting from the program I want to say to you, and I 
want to make this public, Mr. Chairman, that that is absolutely 
not true. We all know the tourist operators are open for maybe 
two to three months out of the year, and that the majority of 
them that are up there, and there’s not a lot of them, they have 
their own aircrafts and they fly their own fresh vegetables and 
food in. 
 
What has taken place since you have removed that 
transportation subsidy is that a lot of the citizens up there who 
were on a regular basis getting fresh food and fresh vegetables 
and meat and produce, no longer can afford that. The prices 
have just gone too high. They just cannot afford that. And by 
your own admission, Mr. Minister, you’re trying to say that 
maybe if they’re on social assistance, that your Minister of 
Social Services is going to help these people. 
 
Well, I say that’s not fair, because here I have an ad where you 
are paying your civil servants up there a food subsidy. Also I 
just wonder what is the difference between somebody that’s 
working for your department up in northern Saskatchewan in 
that area that we’re discussing and you’re saying, maybe if 
they’re on social assistance. You say that, you don’t need that 
food subsidy. So I’m wondering why, if it’s such a bad 
program, that somebody else other than the citizens up there 
were taking advantage of it, why you are advertising for 
departmental people to work in our department up there and 
you are going to provide them with a food allowance  

— a food subsidy as you say right here. You’re providing a 
food subsidy. 
 
I think the citizens who are living up in northern Saskatchewan 
— they were born and raised up there and they live there by 
their own choice — but they are a part of Saskatchewan. 
They’re no different than anybody else. I don’t think that they 
should be allowed to suffer any different than anyone down 
here. But yet you want to pay a subsidy, a food subsidy, over 
and above the housing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 
Minister, you’re shaking our head. I have here . . . This here is 
on February 18,1986, and it’s an ad put out by your department. 
It says, “Agreement benefits include northern allowance and 
food subsidy plus housing allowance.” So you are prepared to 
pay that to your people but you’re not prepared to pay it. 
 
We’re dealing with $250,000 a year. That’s all, Mr. Minister, 
that we’re asking the Department of Health to pay out, 
$250,000 a year to provide fresh food and vegetables and meat 
to the folks up in that area. You deny that — $250,000. 
 
I want to take a look at Public Accounts, just to show you 
what’s really taking place. This government and where its 
priorities are, are most certainly not with the citizens in northern 
Saskatchewan, or as far as that goes, with anybody else in this 
province. I want to take a look at your Public Accounts at page 
334. I see where you paid out last year $5,261.20 in travel to a 
part-time employee of the government — $5,261. That’s for 
travel. But that part-time employee also received $95,000 in 
wages. And it’s in your Public Accounts. And all I’m asking 
you for is $250,000 to reinstate a food transportation subsidy 
that means so much to the people up there and provides them 
with the fresh food and vegetables that they need — fresh foods 
and vegetables that you’re prepared to pay your department 
officials extra money for to go up in that area and serve them. 
 
(1915) 
 
So I ask you once again, if you’ve got that kind of money to pay 
for a part-time employee — $95,000 — that would almost pay 
50 per cent of that food transportation subsidy. 
 
When they don’t get that food transportation subsidy a lot of 
them turn to the junk food types. They can’t afford the fresh 
vegetables and fruits that they ordinarily had under that subsidy. 
I ask you once again, Mr. Minister: will you reconsider 
reinstating the food transportation subsidy for northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I would be interested and 
I’d ask the member if that advertisement was a government 
advertisement or not, or university, or who the ad was from. As 
you know there has been a northern allowance by the Public 
Service Commission for some time. It’s standard to attract 
people into northern Saskatchewan. So I would ask the member 
opposite to indicate the competition and who it was sponsored 
by. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t quite get what you 
were saying. But it seems to me that you are saying  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

511 
 

that this here is a normal procedure when the department is 
hiring staff in northern Saskatchewan. Is that what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What I asked you was, I would be 
interested in your reading the complete advertisement as to 
what we were looking for and who the advertisement was from. 
I said it’s been standard procedure in the past, for some time, 
for a northern allowance for people working in the various 
departments, be it Health, Education, or where it is, so that we 
get competent people to go into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m not debating whether it was Health or not. I’m just asking 
the member if he would have the courtesy to read the complete 
advertisement to us so that we know just what you’re referring 
to — if you would have that courtesy. And also you quote from 
Public Accounts. We can track this down, but if you would 
indicate the position that you referred to, certainly that will 
equip us to respond to you more promptly. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Yes, it’s for nurses in 
Uranium City, and yes, I’ll read that if you want. I read it before 
when we were debating the budget, and I will also do that. “One 
full-time and two part-time positions, three shift rotations, 
salary and benefits as per SUN collective agreement." And that 
agreement always has included northern allowance and northern 
housing, but never before did it include a food subsidy. And I 
just want to say that this is something new. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Start at the top and go right to the 
bottom. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I was going from the top to the bottom, for 
the member from Moosomin. And I can also send over a copy 
so that maybe you can understand it. Things might be good 
down in Moosomin, but let me tell you, the folks in Uranium 
City, it’s pretty tough to go out and buy fresh food and 
vegetables up there, and that transportation subsidy meant a lot 
to them. And I want to say to you, Mr. Member from 
Moosomin, that you take $250,000 away and you deny a food 
subsidy for the folks up in northern Saskatchewan, but you’re 
prepared to give $21 million to Peter Pocklington — no 
problem with that. 
 
“Agreement benefits should include northern allowance and 
food subsidy.” And, Mr. Minister, I can pass this over if you 
want that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I appreciate your co-operating in that 
extent, and I think I can explain the situation to you — that 
basically that is an ad placed by the Uranium City Hospital. 
Uranium City Hospital is operated under a contract by Bob 
Shaw Consulting Services under the City Hospital in Saskatoon. 
So that is not a standard government policy. That is a special 
situation by a consultant. 
 
And I imagine you, being from that area, know who is operating 
and running Uranium City Hospital. I saw to that end, and I’m 
sure you’re aware of it. I saw a clipping just a while ago and a 
picture in the paper of two young children in Uranium City 
Hospital, one was on a jolly jumper, as I recall, young native 
children, and there was a  

glowing account of Mr. Shaw’s consultative service running 
that hospital. I think there’s been a major improvement to the 
operation of Uranium City Hospital since Mr. Shaw’s taking 
this over. 
 
But to get back to that. That is not a government ad. That is an 
ad by a consulting firm that is running the Uranium City 
Hospital as sublet by the City Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
To get to your next question and to ease or to help the flow 
move along, I would like you to mention to me the page again 
or what you quoted from Public Accounts, if you would please. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. I’m quoting from page 334 of the 
1984-85 Public Accounts, and the $95,000 wages are for one 
Dennis Ball. And really what I was trying to . . . My point was, 
Mr. Minister, that if the government can pay $95,000 in wages 
for a part-time position for the government and can pay that 
individual $5,261.20 extra in travelling, surely they can pay 
$250,000 a year to provide fresh food and vegetables and 
produce for all that northern Saskatchewan. That’s the point I 
was trying to make, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand there is a comparison. I just 
indicate, and I think you’re aware of this, that that employee is 
an employee of the Department of Labour. It’s certainly not a 
Health expenditure. 
 
And all I can say to you is that we looked at the northern food 
subsidy. I’ve given you the reasons. You may not agree with 
them, of why we withdrew it. I give you the assurance, and my 
colleague will certainly answer your questions pertaining to 
how he sees some portion of that being reinstated under his 
estimates. 
 
But our reasons were that we thought that, as I was Minister of 
Health and I saw that there was some of this being milked off to 
fishing camps, I saw the necessity. And you brought this to my 
attention too, and if I remember back about three years ago in 
estimates, that there was a necessity for adequate medical 
service up the west side. I remember you raising a question 
about a lady, I believe it was in La Loche, during her pregnancy 
and the number of different doctors she’s had. 
 
I think some of the initiatives that we have taken on the west 
side, up the west side as we call it, and you now what I’m 
talking about, from Meadow Lake to Uranium City, in the 
provision of medical services, has improved quite dramatically 
in the last two years, I would say. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I still have not got a 
commitment from you that you will reinstate that program. I 
want to once again state my argument that the facts that you 
received, from whoever you received them from, that the tourist 
operators were milking off the subsidy that was going in for that 
food transportation, I say that that’s not true. You have letters 
on your files from tourist operators who say that that’s not true. 
They’re only there for two to three months out of the year, and 
there’s just a small proportion of tourist operators there. 
 
I give you an example of Fond-du-Lac. There is absolutely no 
tourist operation in there, and we got a population  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

512 
 

there of approximately 800 people. There are no tourist 
operators that work in or out of Fond-du-Lac at all. And the 
same would apply to Camsell Portage, which I’m trying to get 
you to add on, because they now have found themselves in a 
tough position because of the closure of Eldorado Nuclear, and 
the Hudson Bay is also closed down. So it’s getting tougher up 
there all the time. And as you know, it’s getting tougher to run a 
hospital up in that area because of the shift in population. 
 
But I ask you once again, Mr. Minister, for a commitment from 
yourself to reinstate that food transportation subsidy in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In consultation with my officials in the 
North, who tell me that probably the reinstatement of the old 
food subsidy program is not the best answer, that there are other 
initiatives that can be taken in co-operation with Social Services 
that will get the food to those that need it. I think that’s what 
you are wanting and that’s what I am wanting. I want to see if 
we’re subsidizing food for people who need it and not for 
commercial operators, things of this nature. So I can give you 
the assurance that Social Services are looking at this. 
 
My officials who are in the North on the scene indicate to me 
that to reinstate the old food subsidy program is not the best 
way to address the issue. I can give you this assurance, that the 
issue is being addressed, and I hope what can come out of this 
will be something that is beneficial to the people and 
satisfactory to you and other people in the North. I give you that 
assurance that it’s being addressed. 
 
I will not give you the assurance that the old policy that allowed 
the fishing camps to milk off a good portion of that food will be 
reinstated. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 
give me a commitment and a commitment to the citizens up in 
that area. And if you would add Uranium City and Camsell 
Portage to that list, could you give me a commitment as to when 
you plan to implement another program. And I think that it’s 
not unrealistic to say that if you feel that the tourist operator is 
milking off of that program, they’re only in there for that short 
time and that seems to be such a small portion of it. 
 
You also indicated that you were going to take the $250,000 
and provide better health care, and I look at the northern health 
budget this year, and I see that there’s a reduction of $158,480. 
To me, the money should have went up and we should have had 
more services up North, but we’re getting less unless you’re 
getting them cheaper, because you have a reduction in the cost. 
 
And to indicate, or any official . . . And I would like to talk to 
your officials who indicate that the tourist operator was the 
beneficiary of that food transportation subsidy. That’s not true. 
The beneficiary were the citizens who were living up in that 
area. They were the ones who were getting the fresh food and 
vegetables and meat and produce. 
 
I want to turn now to the administration. You say that you have 
one Mr. Shaw who had now taken over the  

administration of the Uranium City Hospital. And I didn’t think 
that things were operated that bad up there in that hospital, but 
you indicate that conditions have improved since Mr. Shaw has 
taken over that Uranium City Hospital. Is Mr. Shaw an 
employee of the Department of Health, or is he a consultant that 
works out of Saskatoon and paid for by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Shaw in not an employee of the 
Department of Health. He was previously an employee of the 
department, but he works on a separate contract. He has no 
association with the Department of Health at all at this time, 
hasn’t for approximately six months or more. 
 
On the budget — and I know sometimes it’s hard to follow this, 
and I’m not criticizing you at all for this — but actually the 
increase for northern health services went up 8.9 per cent or 
$418,000. Where you are missing the point a bit in reading the 
estimates book is that we took the northern home care out of 
that subvote and put it into the general home care subvote. So 
that’s what makes it appear to you that there isn’t that great an 
increase for northern Saskatchewan. In actual fact, there is. 
 
I want to say, on northern health services, to you, that certainly, 
and I think you must admit this . . . And you know, let’s give 
credit where credit is due, as I’ve done to you and your 
government, for things that you have done correct in health 
care. I think, and you must believe also, that the supplying of 
medical services up that west side has certainly improved. I 
think also, and I think you’ve been present at some of the 
meetings and my officials have been up there — as high up in 
my department as my deputy minister — personally has been 
up that northwest side looking at the whole aspect of home care 
and of long-term care, and that had never taken place before. 
Those meetings, and I think you either attended them or you 
had perhaps some of your assistants attend them, and I think 
you must know, hon. member, that certainly there are some 
startling initiatives and discussions going on in the provision of 
health care services to the north-west side of Saskatchewan that 
previously didn’t exist before. 
 
(1930) 
 
So the amount of money has actually gone up. What appears to 
be a reduction in your eyes is over into the home care vote. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Now, Mr. Chairman, you still didn’t 
answer the question that I originally asked you about Mr. Shaw. 
He is looking after the Uranium City Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Shaw . . . You asked was he an 
employee of the Department of Health. No, he’s not an 
employee of the Department of Health. He, at one time, worked 
for me in the Saskatchewan hospital services branch. He’s 
under contract with City Hospital and has the contract for 
administering and running Uranium City Hospital. 
 
Just from newspaper reports that I have seen, I think he’s doing 
a very credible job, and you maybe saw the same picture. I 
remember the two little children, one in a jolly jumper, another 
one beside them, and a caption about  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

513 
 

Uranium City Hospital and the good service that the residents 
there were receiving. And that warms my heart to see that sort 
of thing, and I’m sure it does to you also. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Shaw — does he live in 
Uranium City? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, he lives in Regina. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — So I understand that he is administering the 
Uranium City Hospital from the city of Regina. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials tell me that the acting 
administrator is the director of nursing, and she is reporting to 
Mr. Shaw on a day-to-day basis. The director of nursing is 
actually running the hospital. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I would assume that the moneys that are 
being paid out for the consultant that is administering the 
hospital would not be under your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s under City Hospital, but of course the 
total funding would come originally from my department, yes. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate to me who is 
administering the hospital then at La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse? 
Is that Mr. Shaw also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — John Boskill is the administrator. It’s a 
contract with the Catholic health council. I believe it is Mr. 
Shaw’s company though that is also in charge of the 
administration of those two hospitals. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It’s the same consulting firm that’s 
administering Ile-a-la-Crosse Hospital plus the La Loche 
Hospital. Is that right? The same consulting group that Mr. 
Shaw works for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. All three are being administered by 
Mr. Shaw’s company. The selection of the two, Ile-a-la-Crosse 
and La Loche was by the Catholic health council. It was that 
group that selected Mr. Shaw’s company. And for Uranium 
City, it is administered through City Hospital. So City Hospital 
would be the ones that selected Mr. Shaw’s company to 
administer Uranium City. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The administrator that is administering the 
hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse and La Loche — would he be getting 
his funds from the Catholic health council or would he be 
getting that directly from the Department of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — He’s an employee of the Catholic health 
council and gets his funds from them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I assume, Mr. Minister, that you feel 
that the La Loche Hospital and the Ile-a-la-Cross Hospital are 
being administered better now under this arrangement than they 
were before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The deputy minister has been in contact 
with Mr. Donlevy, who is the head of the Catholic health 
council, and all reports from Mr. Donlevy to my  

deputy indicate that perhaps the hospitals are being run the best 
they have for some time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I find that quite interesting 
because last night in one of your tirades in here, you were 
indicating that the NDP government were trying to take the 
powers away from the sisters and that; and I just want to say 
that, and I quote you here, that, you didn’t believe that the 
sisters of this province could run health care. I’m quoting you. 
That’s what you said. 
 
But I’m just saying that I have had the opportunity since I’ve 
been a member to work with the Catholic health council, and 
the sisters, and Father Matthieu, who was the administrator at 
La Loche before . . . well, Sister Dobmeier, I believe was her 
name, was the administrator; and I thought that they had done a 
good job. And I suspect that you feel that the consultants can do 
a better job than the sisters. And when I see you making a 
statement last night, here in Hansard, that we were trying to 
take responsibility away, I suggest, Mr. Minister, that it’s your 
department who is taking the administration away from the 
sisters. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what the plans are in that far 
northern area with the hospital at Uranium City, and the shift in 
the population down to the Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Black 
Lake area. Do you have any plans now to move that hospital 
from Uranium City or does it fall under your five-year plan to 
build a hospital in some other area, or move the hospital and its 
facilities from Uranium City to another area to the east? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I don’t mean to get in an argument 
with you over the sisters operating the hospitals. I’m on record 
for saying they do a very, very good job. I just would remind 
the legislature that it was the NDP government that took Pasqua 
Hospital away from the sisters I rest my case. 
 
However, the concern of the Athabasca region — of course we 
are concerned about supplying health care in there. We’ve 
discussed this before. I’m pleased to see the good accounts 
about Uranium City Hospital; I think this was a bone of 
contention. In fact, as I remember back in estimates a few years 
ago, it was the question of, will you maintain and operate 
Uranium City Hospital? As Eldorado pulled out, and it looked 
like Uranium City was going to be actually closed down, I 
remember giving you the assurance in this House that the 
hospital would remain there and that adequate health care 
services in the way of hospital services would be provided to 
the people of the Athabasca Basin. You know as well as I do 
that because of differing conditions in the North — and I don’t 
pretend to know the area as well as you do; you represent it — 
but it may necessitate that at some time in the future the 
hospital at Uranium City be closed down and another hospital 
be put in at Stony Rapids, or Black Lake, or somewhere in that 
area. 
 
I think one of the things that we have to look at . . . It’s just not 
as simple as instituting a hospital — say, we’re going to build 
one. You have to look at the infrastructure. You have to look at 
the population trends and where they’re settling. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

514 
 

I think one of the things that goes a long way towards this, 
though, is that, as my colleague a while expressed, a power line 
that’s going to be built in that area, that’s going to bring some 
of the necessary services that an area would need for the 
operation of hospitals and facilities, will be there after this type 
of construction. 
 
So I think it would be not fitting for me to indicate at this point 
in time that we would be shifting the hospital base in the 
Athabasca region. But I am also saying at the same time, I am 
not ruling out that possibility. Because both you and I, I’m sure, 
and the people in this Assembly, would wish, if we did relocate, 
that we look with some vision for the next 20 or 25 years to 
serve those people the best we can. 
 
And it may well be that some time in the future Uranium will 
not be the base and one of these other ones will have to be. I 
have to give that careful study, and it is going on now. And 
secondly, we would have to make sure that the necessary 
infrastructure is there to run a hospital of the magnitude that is 
needed. And thirdly, and the most important, is that we decide 
for the location of that hospital that it be in the optimum place 
to supply the best hospital services to the people of the area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chairman. Yes, I fully agree that there is a problem up there. I 
know last year you indicated that Uranium City Hospital would 
stay open. But you also indicated at that time, for the 
foreseeable future. And when one is talking about the 
foreseeable future, that could come to an end very fast. 
 
Really what I was asking you: are your officials at this time 
now looking at the possibility, because of the shift in the 
population, are you negotiating and looking at the possibility of 
relocating that health facility somewhere to the east — 
Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Black Lake, in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can give you assurance that we’re 
studying it. We’re not in negotiations at this point in time, but 
we’re looking at it. As I said, we have to make sure when we do 
make that decision that it is the correct decision, and that it will 
serve the residents of that area for the next 25, 30 years, to the 
best way possible. 
 
So I give you the assurance that it is being looked at. I will not 
give you the assurance that we are under any type of 
negotiations, because that would be to mislead you. I have no 
intention to do that. But certainly I give you this assurance: that 
hospital services will be provided to the people of the 
Athabasca Basin, and that may some day necessitate the 
movement of the hospital; and as I said previously, if that is 
necessitated, then we’re going to do it so it’s in the best 
location, for the best service for the people for the longest 
period of time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
wonder if you could indicate over the last year what the stability 
of the doctor situation has been up in that area. How many 
doctors do we have that are serving that area, and how long 
have they been serving the area, and what kind of a contract do 
you have with those doctors? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My indication is that at the present time 
there are four doctors now in Ile-a-la-Crosse and three doctors 
in Uranium City. Is that what you were wanting? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I want Uranium City. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You want Uranium City. Three doctors in 
Uranium City is the indication that I have at this time. You 
wanted to know something about contract? Restate your 
question, and we’ll get you the most . . . 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you 
indicate how long the three doctors have been up there and if 
they are up there on a permanent basis? Can you get me that 
answer? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will go down now to the southern portion of 
northern Saskatchewan, and I want to specifically talk about the 
area of La Loche and the Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse 
regions. You have, I believe, a new advisory body that you have 
put into that area. I wonder if you could just indicate how many 
people sit on that board and the names of the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’re getting you the answer to your last 
question. The answer to the first one is that there have been 
three doctors. There’s been continuity of doctors in Uranium 
City. There have been three of them on contract for the past six 
to 12 months, is what my indication is. 
 
Now the other question was: who is on that advisory group for 
Beauval, Buffalo, Ile-a-la-Crosse area, and La Loche. You want 
the names of them and who sits on there and how many people. 
My officials are digging that out at this time. I’ll supply it to 
you just as soon as I have it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The three doctors that you indicate that are 
serving Uranium City — are you indicating that none of them 
are there on a permanent basis, but rather that they are working 
on an in and out situation where they’re in for two weeks or 
three weeks, whatever the case may be, and then out? Or how 
long has the three doctors been living in Uranium City? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They all have different contracts. They all 
have been there for at least six months. Some of them, their 
contracts will be for one year and some of them for two years. 
So there is a greater continuity. It isn’t three weeks in and three 
weeks out, or something like that. They have been there for six 
months, they tell me, and the contracts are for one year at the 
minimum and some of them are for up to two years. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You haven’t got the list of that new 
advisory board yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Not yet. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. In your five-year plan, Mr. Minister, 
do you have any plans for any new hospitals in any part of 
northern Saskatchewan? When I talk about northern 
Saskatchewan now, I’m not going to limit myself to the 
Athabasca constituency, but rather the northern  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

515 
 

administration district which would cover Creighton and 
Cumberland House, La Ronge and that area. Do you have any 
plans in the next five years for any new hospitals in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, the consultation committee — 
and I should say it’s a consultation committee that you asked 
the members of, that I’m getting for you. That’s one of the 
things that they’re looking at on what we call the south end of 
the west side, in our terminology, between you and I. But you 
asked me specifically about the five-year plan. La Ronge is the 
hospital that is designated in the five-year $300 million capital 
construction plan. La Ronge Hospital. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate when your 
plans are to construct that new hospital in La Ronge, or when it 
is to start? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The Premier was in La Ronge last 
Thursday, I believe, Thursday or Friday. He made an 
announcement there that they’re to begin the planning of the 
hospital immediately. There’s money in this budget for the 
planning. I think you realize to plan a facility takes some time 
to get this all put together and to build the best facility that one 
can build to service that area. The construction, in my five-year 
plan, is designated for ’89-90. But they have the go-ahead to 
start the planning. As you know, there’s BCRs (band council 
resolutions) that have to be signed; there’s work with the 
federal government; there’s the local share — all of these 
things. But anyways they were given the green light last week 
to start on the planning. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, once again you indicate that your 
priorities are not in a constituency, especially in my 
constituency. I’m sure you would have no trouble getting BCRs 
in my constituency to put health facilities in there and band 
council resolutions. There would be no problem with that. I 
most certainly would assist you, especially with the La Loche 
band or the Dillon band or the Patuanak band, or any of those 
bands, you would have no problem. 
 
I’m disappointed that you would not have any plans for the west 
side in your five-year plan. You talk about a lot of dollars. You 
talk in the 300 million and yet you say that the only plans that 
you have to go ahead are for a new hospital in La Ronge. This 
most certainly disappoints me. Do you have the names now of 
the . . . Are you having trouble with that board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we have no trouble there. They’re 
putting it together. Actually the consultation committee — 
they’re putting the names together for me — has been 
established for that very purpose of looking at that area of the 
province and advising us. I appreciate your offer of 
co-operation and assistance of trying to decide where the 
location of a facility would best serve the area. That’s going on. 
The very fact, I think, that I sent my deputy minister up there 
last year to meet face to face with the people there is an 
indication of the desire that we have to get on with some 
planning on that west side. I can see that you’re perhaps a bit 
disappointed it isn’t in the  

five-year plan. However, I think our track record would 
indicate, as this five-year plan is developed, there will be other 
facilities and I think the record will stand very strongly to show 
that will happen. I think one in your area that you’re talking 
about would certainly be a priority for some of the capital 
construction in the next phase of the development of the 
five-year plan. 
 
I have the names now, the names of the people. My assistant 
deputy minister, Don Philippon, chairs the committee. The head 
of the SHSP, Ted Wright — that’s Saskatchewan health 
services plan — is on the committee. My director of northern 
health services, Ken Smallwood, is on the committee. Max 
Morin, the deputy mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, I believe it is, is on 
the committee. Ray Cheechum, mayor of La Loche, is on the 
committee. Leonard Larson, the mayor of Buffalo Narrows . . . 
Am I going too quickly? I’ll slow down. Okay. Dr. James 
Irvine, director of northern medical unit, is on the committee. 
Dr. Jake Letkeman, Meadow Lake clinic, is on the committee. 
Mr. Urban Donlevy, from the Catholic Health council, is on the 
committee. Phil Gaudet, from the Catholic health council, is on 
the committee. Claudia Ajecoutay, ML of the district chiefs, is 
on the committee. And Joanne Meyers, of the northern Health 
and Welfare — I guess, the federal person; I think she’s 
stationed in Battleford — is on the committee. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And I 
wonder if you could indicate just what that body of individuals 
are going to be doing. Are they going to look at what is needed 
on that west side, or just what mandate do they have to 
perform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well their mandate is to meet with 
various groups in that area, to look at two aspects: the 
provincial of long-term care services and also the provision of 
acute care services. I think it is the most comprehensive . . . I’m 
informed that some of this consultation has taken place already; 
there’ll be more of it — and perhaps the greatest consultation 
that has taken place in that part of the province on that topic of 
the proper location, the requirements of facilities for both 
proper long-term care and acute care. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, thank you. Thank you very much. 
And I want to wish that group well. And I sincerely hope that 
they will come out with some recommendations, and that if 
you’re still the government, which I have my doubts — as soon 
as an election is called, there’ll be a change — but that the 
requests will be honoured. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would be prepared to 
table the study that you had up there started about two years 
ago. And I wonder if at this time you would be prepared to table 
that study so I could have a look at it and just see what 
recommendations were in there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Would you name the study that you are 
referring to, please? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It was a study announced in Buffalo 
Narrows two years ago by your deputy minister. He had the 
individual there that was going to carry out the study, and I 
would assume that it’s been done for over a year  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

516 
 

now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That was the start of this consultation 
committee. What I’ve just named to you is the outgrowth of 
what he mentioned would happen. You may have taken it that 
we were going to sit down and study it. We put together, as you 
can see, some of the mayors of the area, the people involved in 
health care, and their recommendations to us will be the study. 
At this point in time, there isn’t a study to this extent. There’s a 
committee put together who are out receiving briefs, talking to 
people, and they will be coming to my deputy minister with 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
could you give me the name of the individual that was heading 
up that study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The gentleman sitting to my left here, 
assistant deputy minister of Health, Don Philippon. Don 
Philippon, assistant deputy minister of Health, this gentleman 
right here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — He was the one heading up that study. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s heading up that consultation 
committee. Of the list I gave you, I named him as the chairman 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not making myself 
clear. Two years ago your deputy minister, who is sitting beside 
you, was in Buffalo Narrows and had made an announcement 
that the study was going to be carried. He had the individual 
with him who spoke to the group there. Could I get the name of 
that individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My deputy indicates to me that the 
meeting you are referring to was on February 1, ’85 in Buffalo 
Narrows, that he was there, that there was no individual named 
as carrying out a study. He indicated that he felt the way to 
address the situation was to put together a consultation 
committee, which I have just named for you, of which Dr. 
Philippon is the chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, are you sure, Mr. Minister, 
that when your deputy minister made that announcement up 
there that the individual, and I believe he was out of Saskatoon, 
was not there and did not address that group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think maybe who you are referring to is 
Dr. Mike Spooner from the University of Regina, school of 
medicine, was there with my deputy minister. Dr. Spooner was 
instrumental in helping us establish that good pattern of medical 
services up the west side. But if there was some indication that 
he was going to do a study for us, I think someone must have 
been misinformed because that wasn’t the intention. But my 
officials tell me it must be Dr. Spooner to whom you are 
referring. 
 
And I again I say Dr. Mike Spooner was very helpful and I 
would thank him and congratulate him for helping us put 
together this arrangement with the school of medicine and the 
federal government to supply the continuity of medical services 
in that part of the province. I’m sure it’s  

Dr. Spooner you are relating to. But if you think it’s someone 
else, please rise and question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, Mr. 
Minister, it was Mr. Spooner, and at that time your deputy 
indicated that he was going to do a study. He addressed the 
group that was there from all around and indicated that he was 
going to carry out a study. And one thing that he said was that 
he was going to carry out a study to see how the people of 
northern Saskatchewan died. And that’s exactly what he said at 
that meeting. And I got up at that time, and I indicated that I 
was very concerned that you would carry out another study, and 
that the individual, who was going to carry out the study, would 
get up and make a statement like that. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how much money was paid to Mr. 
Spooner as a consultant for the Department of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think it’s coming — it’s crystalizing 
now. I think again we’re still on the wrong individual. The 
gentleman that is now the director of the provincial lab has been 
the provincial epidemiologist, Dr. Roy West. And I will explain 
what an epidemiologist does — I don’t know if everyone knows 
in the Assembly what they do — but they are medical people 
who study what causes various patterns of death and so on. So 
that would be Dr. West. And he doesn’t do that particularly for 
the northern part of the province, he does that for the whole 
area. 
 
Just to illustrate, you have read some press clippings this year 
about an outbreak of influenza in Assiniboia. And to see if 
those were deaths from influenza or other factors, Dr. Roy West 
was the man who investigated that. He does that all over the 
province. So that would be Dr. West. 
 
If there was a study mentioned, it would be Dr. West talking 
about that type of study for that part of the province, which is 
no different than what he does for Regina or for the area I live 
in, or anywhere else. 
 
Oftentimes I get questions and suggestions from parts of 
Saskatchewan where residents feel that there’s a predominance 
of cancer there more than any other place. There are areas of 
Saskatchewan where some of the residents figure that there is 
more MS than in other places in the province. 
 
It’s men like Dr. Roy West — that’s their training, that’s their 
expertise. An epidemiologist looks at this to see if there’s any 
scientific data that would prove those types of allegations. So 
I’m sure that’s what you must be referring to as the study that a 
gentleman talked about on that day. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if 
you have that study, or if there is any study of anything down 
on paper which you have from Mr. Spooner regarding that 
situation up there, I would be pleased if you would send that 
over to me, not tonight, but at your convenience. 
 
I indicated at the start, Mr. Minister, that I was going to  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

517 
 

bring out a petition that your department has received, signed 
by 28 senior citizens at Beauval, and a letter that was sent back 
to, I believe the chairman, Mrs. Flora Bishop, from your 
director of Health, Mr. Smallwood. Could you indicate at this 
time . . . First of all, I’d like to know: could you tell me where 
this is carried out. Could you tell me if they have an office of 
their own in Beauval, or just where they operate from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — On the other topic — while my officials 
are discussing this question — I would indicate to you that I 
would be more than pleased to share any of Dr. Roy West’s 
studies that may impact upon the area of the province you 
represent. Certainly we would provide any of them to you at 
any time. 
 
My director of northern health services tells me there seems to 
be a little bit of a problem or misunderstanding in the role of 
home care. There are some in the community that feel that 
home care should only administer to the elderly. Actually the 
mandate, and I’m sure you understand, of home care is to 
provide services for any individual who is in need of that 
service. There are many younger disabled people who need 
home care services as well as the elderly. 
 
There seems to be some friction between some in the 
community and the board over this topic. They have indicated 
to my director that they would like to have the home care board 
fired. Well actually, that isn’t the way to go about it. We don’t 
fire them. If people want to change the home care board, they 
buy memberships in that home care district, and they go and 
present themselves at the meeting, and they nominate other 
representatives on to the board. That’s the way it has been since 
home care was first instituted. There’s been no change in that. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could 
you indicate where that office is at in Beauval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The best advice I have is that it’s in the 
town hall. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, the best advice you have is 
that the office is in the village hall. That’s a fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I haven’t visited the office myself, 
but my advice is that it’s in the town hall in Beauval. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I guess I’ll just leave this here with 
you, Mr. Minister. This petition that you have received, could 
you indicate if you are prepared to act on this petition signed by 
the 28 senior citizens in Beauval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The director indicates to me that the 
petition did not reach me. It came to him. He wrote to the 
people involved. They wanted the board fired. He indicated to 
them how, as I’ve answered to you just a minute ago, you go 
about changing a board And he said he also sent the home care 
consultant down into that area. 
 
He indicates that he feels the situation is at rest at this time in 
the area, and that therefore there would be need to act upon the 
petition, that it has been explained to  

the residents, if they want a change, how they go about doing it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I find that kind of odd. First 
of all, I want to make that very clear, the office is in the village 
hall. I want to also say that if the folks up in Beauval, the 28 
senior citizens who signed this petition, have changed their 
mind. They’ve changed their mine in the last two days, because 
I picked this petition up this weekend. When I was home, it was 
delivered to me. So I find that quite interesting that this 
situation has been solved and that there need be no further 
action taken on this petition. But if that’s the case, then fine. 
That’s good. I just wanted to make it clear that the folks that 
gave me this petition delivered it to me on Sunday on my way 
down. There was still a problem at that time. But as you 
indicate, there is no problem in Beauval and that this whole 
situation that the 28 senior citizens are concerned with has been 
resolved — then that’s fine. I accept that. 
 
I want to now turn to the health centres that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you indicate 
to me if there has been any renovations or any improvements or 
any additions to the health care centres that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan. As you are aware in Stony Rapids we have a 
health centre and number of places where we have health 
centres — Pinehouse is another place. Could you indicate if 
there has been any additions to the health centres of any 
improvements, and has there been any public health nurses 
added to north-western Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No major additions. Some ongoing minor 
renovations, but what one could class as a major addition or 
anything of that nature, no. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, has there been any additions 
to the staff in northern Saskatchewan? Have you added any 
more public health nurses up in northern Saskatchewan? And 
also I guess, Mr. Minister, the dental nurses and the dentists that 
you have up in the north, they fall under your department also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The staff complement has remained the 
same, no deletions. And I’m happy to say that the vacancy rate 
has been lower than it has been in the past. So the amount of 
people, the same; one addition of a dentist in the area; and 
fewer vacant positions than there were previously. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell 
me if there was any renovations done to the health centre at 
Buffalo Narrows in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Only very minor renovations. We’ve 
moved the dental therapist over to the school, so therefore the 
public health nurses would have more space in the centre. But 
nothing major — some walls changed and so on, and the 
movement of the dental therapist out of the clinic. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Right. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if you 
could indicate who carried out that work for the department in 
Buffalo Narrows? 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

518 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The Department of Supply and Services. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I’m assuming I’m not going to get the 
answer to my question, then, from you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I wouldn’t . . . You’re wanting to 
know who they’d let the contract to, or something of that 
nature? No, you’d have to ask the minister in charge. I don’t 
now whom they let it to. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The last time I asked the Minister of 
Supply and Services a question in this House was regarding the 
fence at the hospital. And the hon. member from Meadow Lake 
still hasn’t answer that question. So I just don’t know . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? I just don’t know how I’m 
going to get the answer because it was the health centre in 
Buffalo Narrows that you renovated; it was renovated by the 
Department of Health. Now I’m not too sure whether it was 
government services or if it was handled right out of northern 
health services. 
 
And I would like to know, Mr. Minister, who carried out that 
renovation in the hospital at Buffalo Narrows at the health 
centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we have no staff to do that. We don’t 
do any renovations. If there’s a need for renovation, we request 
the Department of Supply and Services to do the renovation. 
We have nothing to do with this other than saying, look, we 
want this renovation done, you fellows get at it and do it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, Mr. Chairman. Could you indicate, 
then, Mr. Minister, if the tenders for the renovations of that 
hospital were tendered by your department or were they 
tendered by government services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. As I answered previously, if there’s 
something that needs to be changed, we indicated what we want 
changed, the specifications. Supply and Services do the work. I 
wouldn’t know who got the tenders at all. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could check 
with your director of northern health services to find out if it 
was tendered through government services or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. My director indicates that once he 
requested the work done, he was informed that Supply and 
Services would be handling it from there on. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, then. So you indicate then, through 
your director, that the tenders for the renovations of the Buffalo 
Narrows health centre were done, were handled, by government 
services. That’s right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know if they tendered it or how 
they handled it. I know that they were in charge of it; we were 
not. We said we wanted this done, and then they looked after 
doing it. So . . . 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you’re not 
suggesting that there was work done at the Buffalo  

Narrows health centre without going through tender, are you? 
You’re not suggesting that there was renovations carried on at 
the Buffalo Narrows health centre without going through the 
proper tendering channels, are you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m tell you very plainly how it 
happened, is that we said we wanted some changes in the 
Buffalo Harrows health centre — a couple of walls moved, and 
move the dental therapist out to the school. That would require 
some physical work to be done. Supply and Services handled it 
from there in. I don’t know what they did, how they went about 
it. You would ask that question to Supply and Services, but 
certainly that was where our commitment would end, at that 
point. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. Well I’m not going to belabour this, 
Mr. Chairman. But I do want to make this clear, that you’re 
indicating that the work that was carried out was tendered out 
properly by government services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well you’re not interpreting what I’m 
saying correctly. I don’t know how it was tendered. I don’t 
know if it was tendered. I don’t know who did the work, or 
anything of that nature. All I know is that we asked for some 
work to be done, the work was done, and Supply and Services 
did the work. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I know 
the work has been done. You know the work has been done. 
You’ve indicated here tonight. All I’m asking you is: was it 
tendered out through the proper process? And that proper 
process is tendering. And I just ask you to ask your director: 
was it tendered out or what it not tendered out? He was in 
charge of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, hon. member, as I’ve said, I have 
no idea. You’re asking the wrong minister as to what the 
tenders or if there were tenders. I have no idea. I know that 
there was work requested to be done to change some aspects of 
the Buffalo Narrows clinic. That was done. Now if you want to 
know if it was tendered, who the tender was, so on, you must 
ask the Minister of Supply and Services, because that was under 
his mandate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you 
indicate how much money was spent on the renovations of the 
health centre in Buffalo Narrows? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t know the amount of money. 
That’s in the Supply and Services budget. My officials tell me 
there was about two or three days of work that was done. But to 
find out the amount of money, to find out who did it, if it were 
tendered, what materials were used, you must ask the minister 
whose responsibility is for that, and that’s the Minister of 
Supply and Services. 
 
This is a government building; therefore, it is up to that 
department to make those decisions. We say what we want 
done. They are the department that are charged with the 
responsibility of getting it done. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, all I . . . I know I’m not 
going to get the answers as to how it was tendered or   



 
April 10, 1986 

519 
 

how it was carried out, but surely your department must carry 
out an inspection. You are the only one who pay the money out 
for the renovations, and I’m sure that your department officials 
must carry out an inspection to see that the moneys that you 
have put into any renovations is carried out properly. And that’s 
really all I’m going to ask you now, because I’m not going to 
get any other answers. But could you indicate just how much 
money was spent on the renovations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You know, you’re in the wrong estimates. 
That amount of money is under Supply and Services. The cost 
of that is all absorbed in it. To put it simply: we say we want 
these changes; they go ahead and do them. I don’t know how 
much it costs them to do them. That’s in their budget. I don’t 
know who did it. I don’t know what materials. We walk in the 
day that it’s finished, and we occupy it. 
 
Let me give you an example. You know the Douglas building 
down here where the Health department is housed. Now if, for 
example, there was a request to change an office in there, that’s 
in the Health department, but that building is operated and 
owned by government services. So if there was a change in an 
office in there, government services would do it entirely. And 
that’s the same thing with the health clinic in Buffalo Narrows 
— exactly the same. 
 
So I mean, you’re at . . . I’d request you to ask the minister in 
his estimates, and I’m sure the answers will be supplied to you 
of these questions you’re asking about. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to go 
any further on this. It seems like I’ve run into a stumbling 
block. I’m quite surprised that the Department of Health would 
carry out renovations and not know how much the renovations 
cost. It just seems like somebody is not looking after the funds 
of this province very well. Because if the Department of 
Education is going to build a school or put an addition on, they 
most certainly want to know how much that addition cost or 
how much that new school costs, because it comes out of their 
budget. 
 
And I would think, Mr. Minister, that in all fairness you should 
be able to tell us in this House how much money was spent on 
the Buffalo Narrows renovations. You don’t want to give us 
some numbers; you don’t want to give us some numbers; 
you’ve thrown them away. And that’s fine. You go ahead and 
do that. But I tell you, I would like to know and the taxpayers of 
this province would like to know how much money you spent 
on renovations on any hospital and who did it. And we’re not 
going to find out. 
 
But that’s fine. You can operate like this. And let me tell you, 
it’s not going to be too long before your Premier is going to 
have to call an election in this province, and then we will see 
there will be a change in this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I’ll tell you if you’re lucky enough to 
get re-elected and sitting on this side and asking the same type 
of questions of our minister of Health, I’m sure that they will 
provide you with the proper answers. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Chairman, let me just indicate 
to the member, in all fairness, your analogy is not correct. A 
school is not a government building. A school is owned by a 
school board. And a school board will know the amount of the 
cost of the addition or renovation of that school. 
 
The Buffalo Narrows clinic, the T.C. Douglas building, are 
owned by the Government of Saskatchewan, and they are 
administered by the Department of Supply and Services. Any 
renovation, any improvement to those buildings is done under 
that department. And hon. member, this is no different than 
when you were on the government side. Exactly the same. 
 
But you should ask the appropriate question to the appropriate 
minister. If I were responsible and owning that building, I 
would tell you the exact dollar, I would tell you the tender, I 
would tell you the materials, I would tell you how many hours it 
took to do it. That is not my responsibility. And I ask you to ask 
my colleague and I can assure you, he will give you those 
answers. But you must ask the answers under the right set of 
estimates. I don’t own that building, so your analogy to a school 
is not correct. 
 
And you know me well enough that I would not be withholding 
the information from you if it was my jurisdiction to tell it to 
you. You know that. We’ve dealt in this House for four years, 
and you are one of the members over there that has some degree 
of sincerity. And I tell you, sincerely, that that is where you 
should ask your question. And I assure you that my colleague, 
the member from Meadow Lake, will supply you the answers 
when his estimates come up. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to change to a different subject. With 
waiting lists growing, hospitals and nursing home beds in short 
supply, long waiting lists, those that exist understaffed, doctors 
in Prince Albert withdrawing services, questions about health 
care are very much in the taxpayers’ minds. Mr. Minister, 
several days ago you took notice of a question with respect to 
$37,500 paid by your department to Tanka Research, the PC 
party’s polling firm. Can you, Mr. Minister, now tell the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers what work the PC party’s polling firm 
was doing for your department to the tune of $37,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. Tanka Research did some work for 
the department. One of the things that they did was . . . We run 
the Christmas alcohol advertising campaign; I’m sure you’re 
aware of that. It was four years old, and we wanted to know if it 
was sill effective or if we should be budgeting for a new type of 
campaign. We asked Tanka to do some tracking on this. 
 
And as a result of the research that they did, we learned that 
support for the advertising was very, very high, and that 89 per 
cent of those surveyed could recall seeing the ads. So I think 
that indicates that certainly the money expended on the 
Christmas alcohol advertising was most  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

520 
 

certainly reaching the target audiences. I think 89 per cent 
recognition factor is very commendable. Ninety per cent of 
those who saw the ads felt that they should be used again. 
 
So I think that is a cost-saving measure, because if we hadn’t 
have done this type of tracking, we may have thought it 
necessary to develop a whole new series of ads. I think the ads 
must really be what the people of Saskatchewan are wanting to 
hear, because they are reaching the people. 
 
The majority of those surveyed said that they had been paying 
more attention to their personal drinking patterns and their 
drinking and driving habits because of the Christmas ads. And 
because the research was so overwhelmingly popular and so 
positive, we ran the ads again in 1985-86. 
 
And we also developed the award-winning, non-smoking 
advertisement directed at youth. Now I think this kind of careful 
planning for health prevention by this government is something 
that we’re all committed to. There was actually 600 people 
surveyed. 
 
The other aspect of the work done by Tanka was to research 
methods of mailing and communication to indicate how we 
could best develop a consultation process for long-term care. 
And I would like to just elaborate on that for a moment, because 
I think the advice given to us of how to touch the various 
sectors of the population was very, very good advice. 
 
We have had four of these consultation workshops spread 
throughout the province, in North Battleford, and in Yorkton, 
and in Humboldt, Prince Albert, and Swift Current. I guess 
that’s five. And there’s been approximately 2,500 people turn 
out to these workshops I think the part of these that makes them 
so unique, and I’ve had . . . And I’d be glad to share some of the 
positive comments with you, the letters that have come in. The 
people are indicating that never before have they seen such a 
well-organized type of workshop. The cross-section at the 
tables, for example: there’ll be reeve of a municipality, there’ll 
be a mayor of a town, there’ll be somebody from the health care 
sector there’ll be a doctor, there’ll be a nurse — about 10 or 15 
people at a table. 
 
Many of my colleagues here have attended them and certainly 
speak very highly of them. So that was the expenditure . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I would ask you to question 
your colleague, the member from Shaunavon. There was one 
down in Swift Current, and he had the courtesy the day after to 
indicate to me that many of his friends in that area indicated to 
him first hand that it was very, very valuable consultation, that 
they appreciated being invited. And it was the kind of thing that 
they were not used to and they certainly appreciated it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, since the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer has paid for this, will you table these polling results so 
that the taxpayer may judge for themselves whether or not this 
expenditure was worthwhile? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the proof is in the pudding. I 
mean, I would certainly share with you the letters of 
commendation. And it would take you a long time to read them 
all, from the workshops I would be glad to provide that to you, 
because you will see that the people were very, very receptive 
to this. 
 
I would ask you to phone a fellow you may know. His name is 
Gordon MacMurchy. He attended the one in Humboldt. And I 
think he will give you a true evaluation, that he thought it was a 
very worthwhile exercise also. 
 
So I mean, if you want to question the whole aspect of 
consulting with people in Saskatchewan about long-term care 
when we know the demographics of our province are that the 
elderly population is growing very, very rapidly . . . It is a 
number one priority of people in this province, that adequate 
health care services are supplied to their residents. 
 
I hear the member from Morse saying, right on. The member 
from Morse was kind enough to fill in one for me at the one in 
Swift Current. And he can tell you first hand the praise and the 
congratulations given to him that day by the people he knows 
only so well in that area surrounding Swift Current, of the 
opportunity to sit down and to plan with the government the 
type of delivery services for long-term care in this province. 
 
I think that type of expenditure on long-term care and on 
Christmas alcohol, where we can save lives, Mr. Chairman, 
where people openly admit, 90 per cent in favour of them, 
saying that they are changing their drinking and driving patterns 
because of those type of advertisements — the amount of 
money spent for Tanka Research to find that out for the 
province of Saskatchewan, I maintain, is money well-spent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I did not ask you for your fan 
mail, Mr. Minister. I can give you some of mine. I’m not sure 
that will be of great assistance to you, nor will your fan mail be 
of assistance to me. 
 
I asked you to table the results of this polling firm, so that the 
public may judge for themselves and they will not have to 
depend upon your somewhat biased interpretation of whether or 
not it was worth while. I ask you again, Mr. Minister, why 
won’t you table the results themselves? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have just given the 
results of the polling. The results of the polling on the mailing 
idea was to touch mayors and reeves, and all these community 
leaders, health care professionals — and it has been enormously 
successful. People from all walks of life have come to these — 
elderly people, young  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

521 
 

people, from all walks of life, turning out, Mr. Chairman, in 
excess of 500. In many places we had to set up extra tables. 
Registration took much longer than we thought to get them all 
in. 
 
People want an opportunity to talk to their government. The 
members opposite didn’t realize that, but I can tell you people 
appreciate that kind of consultation. 
 
The other results I just read out to you: 90 per cent of the people 
said put those Christmas ads on again; 85 per cent of the people 
said they recognized them; a good number of the people 
changed their habits. Those are the results of the research. 
They’re right here, right in the House. I’ve explained them to 
you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I asked you for the polling 
. . . for the report itself. Mr. Minister, I don’t believe for a 
moment that that’s all the report said. I don’t believe for a 
moment that that’s all that was in it. I do not believe that you 
could spend $54,000 saying that. Mr. Minister, I asked you for 
the report itself. If you’re prepared to give it to us, all well and 
good. If you are not, I would like to know why you refuse to 
give this to us, and through us to the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, I’ve 
given them the results of what they asked, what they found out. 
That’s what I’m willing to supply, and I have done it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask for the report itself. I do 
not ask for your interpretation of what the report said. I don’t 
trust that. Frankly, the health professionals in the field don’t 
trust it, and the public don’t trust it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you for the report itself. I’d also ask you to 
stop avoiding the question with these inane comments and these 
inane speeches about what a grand and glorious time you had in 
Shaunavon, or Duval, or wherever it was that you may have 
been. I ask you for the report. Save the blether for someone else 
at another time, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, that was just advice that I looked for 
in what we should do with the Christmas ads. I’ve given you 
what the report was, what they said we should do with it. He 
says that we’re not trusted. I think, when there’s 500 people 
turn out to consultation meetings, I think that indicates that they 
trust this government, they believe that this is a government that 
listens, they believe this is a government that will share ideas 
and information with them. That was the outcome of the 
research, and I have given it to you. And I’m proud of the 
response of the people to those Christmas advertising ads. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, quite frankly, the fact that 
200 or 300 people turned out to a meeting called means 
nothing. On Tuesday of this week there were 400 or 500 nurses 
turned out to a meeting that was never called, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, again I would ask you for the report itself and not for 
your interpretation of it. I don’t trust your interpretation. My 
colleagues do not. The health professionals in the field patently 
do not trust it. And I think the public deserves to see it for 
themselves. Again, Mr. Minister, I ask you to either give us a 
report or  

tell us why you won’t give it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, you know he says 200 or 
300. There was 500 at pretty well every one of those meetings 
— 500 people. Probably more could have been there. Certainly 
the results of the report are that they say, continue the 
Christmas advertising ads. They’re good. 
 
I’ll go through it again for you just in case you missed it. The 
support for the advertising was extremely high. Eighty-nine per 
cent of those surveyed recall seeing the ads. Eighty-nine per 
cent recall the ads. Ninety per cent who saw the ads felt they 
should be used again. The majority of those surveyed said they 
have been paying more attention to their personal drinking and 
their drinking and driving habits since seeing the ads. That’s the 
results of the research. It tells us that we should continue with 
those, and that’s what we will be doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is that single page of 
information all you got for $54,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, when 2,500 people from 
all walks of life turn out to discuss long-term care, that’s what 
we got from that research, and we will have more of these 
workshops. There are more planned for in the future. We have 
people coming from all political parties, from all walks of life 
to these meetings to discuss the future of home care. 
 
What did we get from those kind of meetings? I’ll tell you what 
we got from those kind of meetings. We got initiative and 
suggestions of how to better home care delivery services in this 
province. We got the suggestions for the $100 million patient 
care program that has been announced. Those come out of that 
consultation. We have got the support of the people of 
Saskatchewan to continue spending taxpayers’ money on 
Christmas alcohol advertising that would save the lives of 
people in this province. That’s what we got out of there. 
 
So for that member to have the audacity to say, did you get one 
piece of paper, I’ll tell you what I got from that kind of 
research. I got the support of a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
that said, thank you; continue on with Christmas advertising of 
the alcohol: continue on with those things that say, do you want 
to spend Christmas in jail. Those types of messages sink in, and 
we got the message that, continue on with workshops and ask a 
cross-section of people to come, people who have never, ever 
had that opportunity before in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your estimates have been one 
long, frustrating, and unsuccessful attempt to get information. 
We spent Monday trying to find out what the waiting lists were 
for nursing homes, and we got nothing except Regina, 
information you had already, I suppose, in error given us. We 
spent this afternoon, and all we got out of it was a lot of blether 
and a restructured series of figures for Regina. We got nothing 
from Saskatoon and nothing for the rest of the province, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

522 
 

Mr. Minister, earlier in the day we attempted to get other 
information from you, information with respect to what other 
provinces had done about chiropractors. You didn’t give us that. 
Now we are asking for a report for which you paid $37,000. 
You gave us what you got out of it, which was about 50 words. 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: is that all you got for $37,000? 
Give us the report itself, Mr. Minister. You have consistently 
throughout your estimates refused to answer questions in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is not a game to see which minister can give the least 
information. It is supposed to be a rational attempt to discuss 
your estimates, for us to get information and to offer 
alternatives for you people to defend them. It’s not supposed to 
be a game of hide-and-go-seek with the minister, whereby you 
disappear into one irrelevancy after another, every question 
you’re asked. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: either give us the report, or give 
us an explanation as to why you won’t. So far you’ve given us 
no explanation as to why the report can’t be made available. 
Mr. Minister, I will postulate for you the reason. The reason is 
because there were other questions included in that report which 
have nothing to do with health care, everything to do with this 
government’s image, and you’re asking the taxpayer to pay for 
that. 
 
If that isn’t the case, Mr. Minister, give us the report. If there is 
something else in there that is not in the public interest to 
disclose, let us know the nature of the something. Otherwise, 
give us the report, and quit this inane game of hide-and-go-seek 
whereby we ask a question and you dodge into a totally 
unrelated subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased, as I told 
the member previously, I’d be pleased to give him the 
evaluation sheets. We have every person who attends the 
workshops fill out an evaluation sheet. If he would like to take 
the time to read through them, I’d be more than happy to 
provide them to him. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have said earlier that the 
number of people who trust your interpretation of events in the 
health care field is getting to be awfully limited. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Most of the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, well there’s some who don’t. There’s 
the nurses, the doctors. There’s the nurses, the doctors, the 
chiropractors . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But who says? The 
Minister of Energy has set . . . In terms of wild gesticulating, 
the Minister of Energy has set some sort of a new high-water 
mark. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to answer the question: why won’t you 
give us the report? Is there something in there in which it is not 
of interest to the public to see? If so, what is the nature of that 
information? 
 
I suspect, because of your refusal to answer the question, that 
there are questions in there which the taxpayer should not be 
paying for, which relate not to the health of the Saskatchewan 
citizen nor to the public welfare but to  

the health of the Conservative Party. And if you haven’t put 
those questions in there, if you’ve got nothing to hide, then 
come clean. Otherwise, if you have something to hide, I invite 
you to stand up and once again give us this silly speech about 
how very, very popular these meetings were. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you’ve got to be at your 
meetings to know whether they are popular or not. You can get 
a crowd of 300 to 400 nurses out on the steps of this legislature 
without any invitation. I’m sure if you invite them, they’d come 
out in mobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: why won’t you give us the report? 
What have you got to hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again I rise to indicate to 
the member opposite that the report was on the methods of 
mailing to reach a broad cross-section of people for 
consultation. I’ve indicated the number of people that have been 
there. I’ve invited the members of the opposition to attend all of 
the workshops. The only person of the opposition that has 
attended was an ex-member of legislature, the mayor of Semans 
— the only one. 
 
I’ll stand in this legislature and defend the value of those 
consultation meetings. I’ll share the results of those consultation 
meetings with any of the members. The new directions paper 
that has gone out on the direction that home care should be 
taking to meet the needs of this province in the next few years 
came directly from those consultation meetings. 
 
The Christmas advertising, I’ve explained three times. If they 
question the validity of that, so be it. So be it. I stand by the 
Christmas advertising program. I’m pleased to see that the 
people of Saskatchewan support it, and from that research we 
know that we can certainly do it again and again, because it’s 
hitting the mark and doing the job. 
 
Here is the directions program. Saskatchewan Home Care — 
Future Directions, came exactly right out of the consultation 
meetings of the good folks in Humboldt, P.A., Yorkton, and 
North Battleford. I could also share the letters with the members 
of congratulations from many people many people in the 
medical community, the health care community, that support 
this type of document. I don’t take the credit for this document. 
I give that credit to those people who would take a day out of 
their busy lives: senior citizens — people in wheelchairs, many 
of them — doctors, nurses, all of them that came together with 
us and with my staff to discuss the important long-term care 
directions of this province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, we might get around to 
asking you about the consultation meetings later this evening. 
Right now, we’re asking you about a survey which you had 
done through your department, which was carried out by Tanka 
Research, which happens to be the Progressive Conservative 
Party’s polling firm. That’s what the questions are about today. 
 
And you have handled this question in the same way as you 
handled the questions about waiting lists and which you refuse 
to provide information, the same way in which  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

523 
 

you have handled the questions that the member from 
Athabasca was asking about with regard to whether a certain 
project of your department was tendered or not tendered. And I 
know you will say that it was the Department of Supply and 
Services and we will certainly ask the question there. But are 
you going to sit here, and stand in this House and say that once 
you, as the Minister of Health, have requested the Department 
of Supply and Services to do a project for you, neither you nor 
your officials bother checking up to see how it is going, what 
was done, how much money was spent? You cannot kid the 
troops anywhere at any time about that kind of an issue. 
 
You continuously refuse to provide information on relevant 
questions that are asked in this Assembly. You’ve done it since 
the first day of your estimates have begun, and you’re doing it 
again today. 
 
Now whenever you get run into a corner n you don’t want to 
provide information, you make a speech. And if the speeches 
you have been giving are the speeches that have been written by 
SJM Communications, which we will be asking about as well 
later today, if those speeches that you give are given by them I 
think you’re spending pretty bad money. Because you’d better 
look for somebody else to be writing those speeches so that they 
sound at least partially credible. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you saying in this House, in answer to the 
questions, that you spent $37,000 — $37,000 to Tanka 
Research — simply to find out, and nothing else, how certain 
ads which your department was running were doing? Is that 
what you’re saying you spent $37,000 for? That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, first of all, them ember opposite 
hasn’t been paying attention to whatever was discussed. You 
know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And you know I find it 
shocking that a man who once was a Health minister, once was 
a Finance minister of the government, doesn’t understand that 
government services are responsible for government buildings. 
I mean, I find that appalling. I don’t know how you operated as 
a cabinet minister. If you don’t know, after the amount of years 
that you were in government, that government services are 
responsible for government buildings, I don’t know where 
you’ve been. 
 
I can understand how you were writing moratoriums and cutting 
back in health staff. Certainly, I can see that, because your grasp 
of how government works is sadly lacking. 
 
Certainly, I explained earlier, that the money was spent to track 
the Christmas advertising on alcohol — very, very successful. 
The second thing, and you failed to listen to this, was that we 
asked to devise a system by which we could contact the people 
of this province, to put together a system that would touch 
various people who have never been touched before by 
government to get them together in the best method to sit down 
and consult on long-term care. 
 
Now you question that 2,500 people at five meetings is not 
successful. Well, that’s your vision. I think it was. 
 

They were the people that did this tracking to see where we 
should be touching and what kind of a mailing and consultation 
service would you develop to get those people out. That’s the 
type of thing. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, it’s shocking. I mean, he was the 
Finance minister of the government. No wonder they lost. He 
doesn’t realize to this day — he doesn’t understand that 
government services are responsible for government buildings. 
That’s what he stood and said here. He doesn’t understand that. 
 
It’s very strange, very strange indeed, that a man could have 
two important portfolios and never really understand how the 
system works. No wonder that the government opposite was 
wiped out in 1982. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is right. I 
happen to have had the good fortune of being both the minister 
of Health and the minister of Finance at one time or another 
prior to 1982. He’s certainly right about that. 
 
But I want to tell him something, that during all of that time, I 
never once, nor any of my colleagues, had to spend $54,000 to 
hire an outside consultant to write speeches for us at taxpayers’ 
expense, which is what this minister has been doing. 
 
The other thing we never did is avoid answering questions. And 
the minister cannot stand up in this House and suggest that he, 
as a Minister of Health, does not know what’s going on with 
buildings and projects, even though the Department of Supply 
and Services builds them, but they affect his department he 
doesn’t know anything about them. If he doesn’t know anything 
about them then, he is not doing his job. 
 
I appreciate him clarifying what Tanka Research did the polling 
for. I want to say that. And if I’m correct, and the minister can 
correct me if I’m wrong, he said they polled to determine the 
popularity or the acceptance of certain Christmas ads over that 
period of time. He also said that the polling was done to find 
out what would be the best system to contact people in the 
consultation process. Those are the two things he said the 
polling did. Seems to me quite harmless. Seems to be nothing in 
there that should upset anybody. 
 
If that’s the case, Mr. Minister, why do you refuse to give to 
this legislature, so that the public of Saskatchewan, who paid 
for this project, can know the questions that were asked, the 
responses that you received to those very fundamental 
questions, and the analysis that was provided. Why do you 
refuse to do that? No other question, just one simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve provided that 
information four times. I’ve indicated that the advice was to 
contact reeves, to contact mayors, to contact health workers, to 
contact people in social services, public health nurses, senior 
citizens, senior activity centres, all of those types of people. 
And we did that, and it has been extremely successful. And I’m 
willing to give the members opposite all of the information 
there that these people have said. Thank you for having these. 
Here’s the directions. There’s the program I held up a few 
minutes  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

524 
 

ago, that came out of that consultation. 
 
I have shared with them the findings on the Christmas 
advertising, which will save the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
considerable money — because it costs a lot of money to put 
these television packages together. Here they’re telling us, that 
one that you’re using at Christmas, it’s becoming synonymous 
with Christmas in this province. People are looking for that. It 
reminds them — it reminds them of the danger of drinking and 
driving at Christmas. 
 
We see groups, clubs like Lions clubs and young people’s 
groups saying we’ll drive you home. People are taking a 
number of precautions to avoid driving and drinking at 
Christmas. And a lot of that comes from that advertisement. 
 
It think it’s money well spent to test the public and see if they 
appreciate what is being done and to ask them, do you think it 
should be done again. That is the . . . To spend that type of 
money, to save making another type of television production 
that might not reach your target audience as well as that, that is 
money well spent. 
 
I’ve shared that with the members, and I stand behind that type 
of research to see that if we’re spending the health care dollar``` 
where it is reaching the public, and certainly we are. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s agree to agree 
that the survey you took through Tanka Research got you the 
information that money was well spent to provide that kind of 
advertising. Let’s agree to agree to that. We don’t need to 
debate that. As a matter of fact, I think I saw some of the ads. 
They weren’t all bad. That’s not the issue here. If it was that 
positive, what you afraid of? If all of the responses you got said, 
yes, it’s good, then certainly you should not hesitate to tell us 
and to tell the public what questions you were asked to 
determine what those answers were that you received, and 
indeed what their responses were. 
 
We want to know, for $37,000 worth, what questions were 
asked, what the survey was asking, and what the responses 
were. You’ve told us what your interpretation was, and I accept 
that. I don’t know why I would do that, because anything else 
you’ve told us has been somewhat questionable in this estimates 
so far, but I’m prepared to do that for the sake of doing away 
with that argument. Now, I ask you one more time, Mr. 
Minister: will you table in this Assembly the survey that was 
taken by Tanka Research, the questions that were asked, the 
responses that were provided, and the analysis made? And if 
not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I have told him the 
outcome of the research time after time. If he wants to keep 
asking the same repetitive question, I will give him the validity 
of the Christmas advertising. I have told him the success on 
how we set up the consultation workshops. If there is any . . . 
That’s all I have to explain about it. Certainly I’ll go through it 
time after time. As many times as he wants to ask, I’ll give him 
the answer. But the answer has been repeated. We can be here a 
long time. That’s quite okay  

with me. We can spend all night. You just keep asking the same 
repetitive question because . . . 
 
Do you know what this tells me? This tell me when you have an 
opposition opposite, a weak opposition that can only ask 
repetitive questions, and the main issue on their plate in this 
session of the legislature has been jelly beans, socks, and 
clucking like chickens, that tell s me of the sincerity and the 
depth of knowledge on that side of the House. 
 
I’ve been in here for eight years, and never in my life, Mr. 
Chairman, have I seen members in this House cluck like 
chickens. I went home the other night and I had constituents 
phoning me and asking me just what on earth was going on. If 
jelly beans, socks, and chickens, and repetitive answers is the 
height of the opposition, then I think this session of the 
legislature should draw to a halt quickly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The boys are in 
great spirits tonight. You know the fact is that the Premier 
decided . . . He chickened out and decided not to call an 
election, so it has relieved them of their pains and their 
anticipation of being defeated. 
 
I would like to address a few questions, Mr. Minister, to you, in 
respect to a topic that is rather important to the young people 
and to the parents of this province and that has to do with 
alcoholism in the province, and basically your position as the 
Minister of Health related to the question of the amount of 
alcohol advertising that is going on. 
 
And what I would ask you specifically, Mr. Minister: first of 
all, what is your position? Are you concerned with the degree 
and the amount of advertising and the promotion of alcohol 
beverages that we see on our televisions and our young people 
are exposed to? 
 
So first of all, I really want to ask you whether you have had an 
opportunity to assess the impact of the advertising promoting 
alcohol beverages. And I’d like you to indicate whether you 
have done any studies, whether or not you have had any of the 
organizations, churches or other groups, contacting you 
indicating concern in respect to the amount of advertising, 
vis-à-vis alcoholic beverages. 
 
Certainly it has been raised, brought to my attention. It has been 
brought to my attention by educators. It has been brought to my 
attention by members of religious orders, and certainly by 
parents, and indeed by some young people, and of course by the 
legal profession and the judges. I think it’s a very major 
concern to society. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, what is your basic position in 
respect to it? Are you not in fact concerned with the nature and 
the type of advertising which really promotes it relative to 
sports activities and being one of the boys in society, so to 
speak? So I’d like you to lay out your position as Minister of 
Health, and your government’s portion, in whether or not you 
have in fact had the opportunity to re-evaluate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the member opposite asks me if I 
had been contacted by any church groups regarding  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

525 
 

alcohol advertising. I recall one night of meeting with a number 
of church groups, along with an organizer of the NDP party by 
the name of Don Faris. We had a meeting that night that Mr. 
Faris tried to orchestrate, which blew up in his face. So that was 
the one contact that comes to my mind with church people. 
 
Certainly the issue of alcohol consumption, as I stated 
previously in my questions regarding the Christmas alcohol 
advertising, indicates the concern that we have as a government 
towards the consumption of alcohol. I am pleased to see that 
Saskatchewan has led in the country in the insistence that there 
be advertisements of a positive nature that would come on the 
television to indicate the dangers of drinking. Fifteen per cent of 
the advertising is of that nature within this province. So I 
support that. 
 
(2100) 
 
I’m also very pleased to see that the liquor consumption 
patterns in Saskatchewan have been declining, that there has 
been no indicated appreciable increase in the consumption over 
the last few years, that the drinking patterns of the young people 
in Saskatchewan are similar to what they were 10 years ago. I 
think these could be improved. I don’t question that. But 
certainly there is no substantive research to show anything 
different that in Saskatchewan the per capita consumption of 
alcoholic beverages, absolute alcohol, declined by 4.8 per cent 
between ’79 and ’80 and ’83-84, and sales by volume have 
increased 0.7 per cent; but the population 15 and over increased 
faster than 5.7 per cent. So I think that certainly the educational 
aspects of the ads is having an impact and I’m pleased to see 
that Saskatchewan is leading the way in that regard. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I’d like to ask the minister: does your 
department monitor the nature and the type of advertising that is 
done in respect to the promotion of the use of alcohol 
beverages? And I ask you, if indeed you do monitor it, are you 
satisfied with the quality of the type of advertising that our 
young people are exposed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I watch very few ads and very little 
television myself. I understand that it’s the Liquor Board . . . I 
watch very few of these myself. But the Liquor Board is the 
group and government that are responsible for monitoring and 
making sure that the 15 per cent mark is being met. My 
indications are that in excess of 15 per cent of the educational 
type of advertising is taking place. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, last year I asked you if you could 
me a figure as to the cost, the health costs for alcohol-related 
treatment. And I recall you supplied me with that information. 
And the cost, as I recall, and you may correct me here, but it 
was somewhere around $7.5 million. I want to ask you whether 
you feel that that cost could in fact be reduced substantially if in 
fact your department were aggressive in putting forward a 
preventative type of approach to the use of alcohol, and in fact 
taking a position of not allowing the nature and the type of 
alcohol ads that are presently being put forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figure that you’re referring to is the 
budgetary figure for SADAC — that the Saskatchewan Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Commission.  

And of course, I think you must realize that advertising is 
certainly not responsible for that total budget. There’s many 
things . . . There’s many people out there suffering from many 
addictions that this commission does some very good work for. 
 
I think it would be interesting to note that Saskatchewan 
actually has set the scene for new regulations that my colleague, 
the Hon. Jake Epp, is trying to bring across through the CRTC 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) across Canada. Jake Epp has approached the 
CRTC to have a system of public education on alcohol 
advertising based entirely upon the Saskatchewan model. He is 
proposing that the CRTC at this time, and I support Jake Epp 
very strongly on that. To that end, I would like to inform the 
House that as of today I sent the following telegram to the Hon. 
Jake Epp, Minister of health and Welfare of Canada. It says: 
 

My Dear Mr. Minister: I congratulate you on the 
initiatives outlined in your recent submission to the 
Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission on alcohol advertising on radio and 
television. The recommendations put forth in the brief are 
progressive and promote healthy lifestyles and education 
which I fully support. We are very pleased with your 
recommendation that alcohol advertisers devote 15 per 
cent of commercial time to health promotion messages on 
a national basis as the Government of Saskatchewan 
initiated in 1983, and the restrictions on content which 
reflect the actions taken by my government. Again we 
commend you on your initiatives on this issue and hope 
that the CRTC implements your recommendations in the 
near future. You can count on my support in any future 
actions on this very important issue. 

 
I will be meeting with Mr. Epp later this month in which we 
will be discussing the new patent protection Act on drugs as I 
explained to the Leader of the Opposition, our stand on that, on 
the first night of estimates. I will also be discussing this with 
Mr. Epp and lending Saskatchewan support to bringing in that 
type of health promotion advertising, at least 15 per cent, to be 
done across Canada. I think we in Saskatchewan should be 
proud to see that the federal government are following our 
initiative in this field. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that, and you seem 
very proud that what in fact you are doing here is that you had 
15 per cent, that was advertising, indicating the possible bad 
effects of use of alcohol . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Moderation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Moderation . . . 15 per cent of the advertising, 
and you also went on to say there has been a decrease in the 
amount of consumption. I guess my question to you is that: are 
you perfectly satisfied then, having said that, that the amount of 
advertising is not having a harmful effect upon our young 
people, and that the decrease is solely as a result of this 
magnificent 15 per cent anti-drinking advertising as opposed to 
the 85 promoting it? Or would you agree that the decrease in  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

526 
 

some of the consumption of alcohol is more directly related to 
the economic conditions of high unemployment, and welfare, 
and people without enough money to even go to a beer parlour 
to have a beer, really is the fact? 
 
So really what I want to know is — I’d like you to put it as 
succinctly as you could — whether you are indeed satisfied 
with the 85 per cent advertising promoting it, and that 15 per 
cent against it and that it’s decreasing because of that 15 per 
cent. I just want to know your position, whether you think that 
the young people of this province are really getting a fair deal 
when it comes to the advertising and the promotion of alcoholic 
beverage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think that certainly, and I’m advised that 
in Saskatchewan with the monitoring the liquor commission is 
doing, that it’s actually more than 15 per cent, and I 
congratulate the television stations that are . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes that there is actually more than 15 per cent 
taking place. So I would say I think that’s very commendable. 
 
Secondly, I am pleased to see that the level of consumption is 
decreasing, certainly. I am pleased, and as I said with Mr. Epp, 
Mr. Epp’s suggestion is that over time there’d be more 
education and perhaps over time we can have a greater 
percentage of this health promotion advertising. I must say that 
there wasn’t any of this previously. We know that there was 
advertising in the magazines and so on. At least we have 15 per 
cent positive and there’s more than 15 taking place in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I wouldn’t stand here and say that I’m satisfied with the scene 
as it is today. I think we have a responsibility — all of us as 
legislators — to work towards a situation where we can 
improve the whole aspect of education about the various serious 
dangers of not only alcohol but of drug abuse by our population 
and especially our young population. 
 
To that extent, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to say that we’ve put 
in place, and the report is in to me and soon to be released, a 
report on youth alcohol and drugs in Saskatchewan. And that 
committee that worked so diligently on there, went into a 
number of high schools, spoke to over 300 students, had over 
144 briefs and hearings and have, I believe, grabbed the essence 
of the problem in Saskatchewan and have brought some very 
sound recommendations to me as the minister and to our 
government, which we will be implementing as the time 
unfolds — some of them immediately, some of them more in 
the long range. But certainly, Mr. Chairman, as the Minister of 
Health, if I wasn’t concerned I would never have commissioned 
the report. I’m pleased that the report is in. I’ll look forward to 
taking action upon it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you so much for that brief and concise 
answer. I would like to ask you just one more time: are you 
satisfied with the liquor advertising content, 85 for, 15 
prevention? That’s what I’d like to ask you without a long 
speech. Could you indicate whether you’re satisfied or whether 
you’re, as a Health minister, promoting an increase in the 
amount of preventative advertising, encouraging people not to 
use it rather than encouraging it in every sport event that you 
see on  

television? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I see the member 
opposite takes exception to my answers. Mr. Chairman, I think 
it’s noticeable. I don’t ask him what questions he should ask 
me. I think I have the liberty to decide on the answers I will 
give him. It seems only fair and decent to do that. Certainly, he 
said, are you satisfied. I think the very fact that as Minister of 
Health I would commission a study to look into the seriousness 
of drug addiction, of alcohol and drug combinations and 
misuse, is a concern to me as the Health minister of this 
province. 
 
When I have high school teachers coming to me and telling me 
that there are young people hooked on drugs, not attending 
school, dropping out, committing crimes to get money to 
purchase drugs, certainly as a responsible citizen of this 
province, as a member of this legislature, and as the Minister of 
Health, I am deeply concerned. To that end, we have 
investigated, we have found out from experts in the field what 
recommendations we should be making, what actions we should 
be taking. So obviously, to the member opposite, I am 
concerned and we are going to be doing something about it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that you have 
commissioned a study in respect to it. I’d like to ask you who 
did the study — the composition of the staff or who did the 
study; the nature of it, of that study; when in fact the study was 
commissioned; and is the study in fact completed; and could 
you in fact provide us with a copy of the study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe I instituted the committee in 
September. They reported to me just a couple of weeks ago. 
The report has come in to me. I haven’t released it yet. I will be 
in the very near future. And when it’s released to the public, I’ll 
make sure that each and every one of you get a copy of it. 
 
The members of the committee was what you asked. The 
chairman was Mr. Bill Davis, a private citizen from Weyburn, a 
man who’s involved in the Lions. The lions have — I don’t 
know if you know of the Quest program that they have in some 
of the high schools. It came out of the United States. It’s a 
program . . . The member for Regina North East may be aware 
of this, that the Lions clubs are putting into the various high 
schools of Saskatchewan, I think, a good program on drugs and 
alcohol. Bill Davis has been very instrumental in that. So we 
chose him as the chairman. 
 
A student representative on the committee was Neda Al-Katib 
from Davidson, was one of the students. Dolores Ast was on 
from the Department of health. Frank Dornstauder from the 
Department of Social Services was on the committee. Tim 
Greenough from Saskatchewan Health was on the committee. 
Steuart Herman from the Saskatchewan Native Alcohol Council 
Corporation; Robert Kennedy from the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police; Gerald Kleisinger from the Saskatchewan 
Department of Education; Glenda Klombies of Parent Resource 
Institute for Drug Education, or better know as PRIDE; Corey 
Liebrecht, a student representative; Ethel Quiring from the 
Saskatchewan Teachers Federation; Carol Skelton from the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

527 
 

Abuse Commission; and Doug Switzer from the Rainbow 
Youth Centre. 
 
(2115) 
 
The report has just come to me. It will be . . . In a very short 
time, I will be making it public. I am just presently sharing it 
with some of my cabinet colleagues. And as I said earlier, when 
it is public I will end each and every member of this Assembly 
a copy. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister whether he could 
provide us with the cost of the study that he refers to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t have them all tabulated yet, but 
I can assure you it is minimal. The cost would be the travel of 
this group to various parts of the province. And they didn’t all 
go to each hearing; they split up and went there. I think there 
would be a per diem for some of them, some costs to do with 
accommodation and meals when they were out, and then the 
other portion of the costs will be the printing of the report — 
but very minimal costs as far as reports go. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well could you undertake to provide us with 
that when that’s tabulated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will provide it for you just as soon as 
everything is in. My officials tell me that not all the people have 
submitted all their chits at this point in time. So I couldn’t give 
you . . . We could probably give an estimated figure fairly 
quickly, but for an exact one I’d have to wait till all the 
expenses got in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn to another subject. And I ask the 
minister: in respect to some of the basic health services that we 
have in Canada, I think there is certainly some advantages to 
having some standardization of the quality of health services 
throughout Canada, in the various regions of Canada, whether 
the province be a wealthy province of Ontario, or Alberta, 
British Columbia, or otherwise, or less affluent perhaps in 
Newfoundland. 
 
And steps have been taken in the past to bring about some 
standardization of quality of our health care system. And I think 
the concern, Mr. Minister, that we have is the actions of your 
counterpart in Ottawa, the federal government, in respect to the 
established program funding. I think it is a major concern, what 
is happening in respect to the established program funding. 
Because we find that, in the May 23 budget by Mr. Michael 
Wilson, he said that he wanted to cut the federal transfer 
payments to the province by $2 billion by the year 1990-1991. 
And he has implemented that proposal and the federal EPF 
(established program funding) reduction is now taking place. I 
guess the first question I want to ask you is: as a result of Mr. 
Wilson’s budget of May 23, what is the calculated loss of EPF 
funding which would be apportioned — well, the total cut if 
you have that because it’s apportioned to higher education, and 
it’s apportioned to health. 
 
So if you can give me the total loss as a result of the Wilson 
budget to the province of Saskatchewan for this year, and if you 
can give me the total loss of revenues as a result of the Wilson 
budget, towards the funding of health here in Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The Minister of Finance is presently in 
negotiations and discussion with the federal Minister of Finance 
on this. I think it would be pretty difficult for us to put an exact 
figure on what the reductions would be for health. Certainly 
from our provincial point of view we would be pleased to see if 
there would be no reduction. But it’s in discussion and 
negotiation between the Finance departments of the federal 
government and the provincial government at this time. So to 
give an exact figure, I wouldn’t be able to. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, in drawing up your budgets 
you’re obviously going to have some less money for Health, 
and in drawing up this budget here you had to make a 
calculation. Did you make any calculation as to the decrease as 
a result of the federal budget in respect to established program 
funding? I don’t know how you can draw up a budget without 
having known, because it’s set out in the federal budget as to 
the amount that is going to be cut. It would appear, from our 
calculations at least, but perhaps I’ll ask you . . . I would 
certainly think that your officials . . . You may not know the 
exact number, but can you give us an approximate amount, a 
loss of funds as a result of the cut-back of the established 
program funding from the federal government as result of the 
Wilson budget? It doesn’t have to be the exact cents. But surely 
you have an approximation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — When we struck our budget we did it 
without any consideration of a cut-back from the federal 
government. We have given a considerable . . . And I think you 
realize 11.6 per cent increase in health care spending is a 
considerable increase in these times. We did that. We will 
honour that commitment. We don’t know how much the 
decrease due to the Wilson budget will affect us. So I don’t 
know how we could set a budget based on that when we are not 
sure how much that reduction will be. 
 
But I can assure you and you, Mr. Chairman, and the people of 
this province, that we have put an addition of 11.6 per cent into 
the health budget of the province of Saskatchewan and that will 
be provided regardless of the impact of the Wilson budget on 
the EPF funding. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well are you saying then that so far as funds 
from the federal government, in your budget . . . You’re saying 
that you have over 11 per cent increase in the budget. That’s 
what you are saying. And what I’m asking you: could your 
estimates be, in fact, inaccurate in that you have not in fact 
taken into account a decrease in the amount of funding that you 
will receive from the federal government? I want that cleared 
up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The revenue doesn’t come into our 
budget, it comes in . . . The EPF funding comes into the 
Consolidate Fund through the Finance department’s budgeting. 
 
Our budget indicates that we are spending $1.2 billion in health 
care in Saskatchewan regardless of the source of that money. 
That is up to Finance to negotiate that with the federal 
government. Our commitment is that we will  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

528 
 

spend 11.6 per cent more on health care this year than we did 
last year. That’s $1.2 billion. That’s sound. That’s our 
commitment. That’s $1,200 for every man, woman, and child in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I guess I want to ask you . . . I don’t want 
your long dissertation again. What I really want to know is: 
have you got concerns over this very drastic decrease and its 
contribution in its established program funding? I want to ask 
you: what is your position? Have you met with the federal 
counterparts? Have you any concerns as to the direction and the 
undermining of the universality of our medicare and our 
hospital service, if in fact the federal government starts to 
underfund the services? Let’s face it. Under the established 
program funding a very, very significant amount of funding 
came from the federal government. Do you have any concerns? 
Have you met with your federal counterparts to put a position 
forward in respect to the very significant amount of cut? 
 
On our estimation here, we find that the loss to Saskatchewan, 
in approximation, there’s going to be a $2 billion cut in the EPF 
by 1990-91. And we can estimate out of that, in Saskatchewan 
. . . It will be about $100 million impact on Saskatchewan by 
that year. We calculated out as Saskatchewan having about 5 
per cent of the population, and if you calculate it out on that 
basis you’ll find that it’s about $100 million by 1990-91. Now 
that’s a very, very significant cut in its contribution to the 
standardization of the hospitalization and health care across the 
country. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, what has been the position of 
your government in approaching our federal counterparts in this 
so-called co-operative federalism while they are taking actions 
to undermine the basic medicare and health care in Canada? 
What has been the position that you have taken to protect our 
health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, I remember last year at 
the Health ministers’ conference all the ministers in Canada 
discussing the funding of health care with the federal minister 
and indicating that we did not want to see a reduction from the 
federal side. But I can assure you that my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, has been in consultation with the federal 
Department of Finance, and I’ve sat beside my colleague for 
eight years in this legislature. I know him very well, and I think 
if there’s a man in this legislature that can get a fair share for 
Saskatchewan down in Ottawa, two of them sit very close to me 
right here — the Premier of the province, who was in Ottawa 
the day before yesterday fighting for the farmers of this 
province, and the Minister of Finance who is very, very capable 
of articulating the Saskatchewan position, and I can assure you 
is a gentleman that won’t back down when it comes to fighting 
for what we need in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well isn’t that just an absolutely wonderful 
statement: that we see we’re going to be losing substantial 
amount of money through the cut-backs by the federal Tory 
Party government. And he stands up and says, well I met, and I 
said we didn’t want any cut-backs. No, no, we would like to 
have the same funding. 
 

But the reality, Mr. Minister — after you have said that — the 
federal government said, we’re going ahead with it. Are you not 
concerned that the quality of health care and the standard of 
health care that was provided by all provinces as a result of the 
major funding by the federal government will be undermined? 
Do you not have a concern in respect to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think if you want to know if I’m 
concerned about expenditures in health care in Canada, I think 
you want to look at the fact that this government this year has 
put $126 million more into the health care budget of this 
province than in the previous year. And we have led other 
provinces year after year. I don’t believe there’s a government 
in Canada that has a greater commitment to health care than the 
Devine government in Saskatchewan. One hundred and 
twenty-six million dollars, 11.6 per cent into financing health 
care, and the member opposite stands up and says, are you 
concerned about spending money on health care. 
 
(2130) 
 
Certainly we’re concerned. We’re leading the nation. One point 
two billion dollars is our expenditure in health care. I’m 
concerned about any cut backs. My colleague is concerned. And 
I have said that I believe the discussions on EPF funding 
handled by Gary Lane in Ottawa are in good hands. I have 
confidence; my colleagues have confidence. And I can tell you 
that Saskatchewan’s position will be articulated in a strong 
manner, in a convincing manner, and he will stand up for 
Saskatchewan, as I will in health care, as our Premier has done 
in agriculture and oil, and has led — and has led Canada as a 
leader in these type of initiatives. 
 
No other premier — no other premier in this country has a 
permit book. No other premier in this country has the guts to 
take on agriculture as the Minister of Agriculture. I would 
challenge the NDP, when their leader ever went — ever went to 
Ottawa to talk about agriculture. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, getting a Tory to guard and protect 
our health care is like getting a fox to guard a chicken coop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s exactly what we have. And I’ll tell you, 
to the people of this province, and I want them to know, that the 
health care that we have known, and that Tommy Douglas put 
into place, is going to be undermined. 
 
The minister stands up and says, we spent over a billion dollars 
in health care. I’ll tell you, he hasn’t paid for it. And he’s $2 
billion in debt. What he has taken is the taxpayers’ credit card 
and has tried to buy their votes until the next election is over 
with. And at that time the cuts of the federal Tory budget will 
take place. And I’ll tell you, my friend, health care cannot be 
sustained properly unless you have good solid substantial 
assistance from the federal government. And I’ll tell you, the 
people of Saskatchewan know what you’re up to because they 
know what Tories are. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

529 
 

And I want to remind the minister that there’s the Nielsen task 
force report. Now that is an interesting little report that also 
deals with health care. And do you know what it recommends 
— do you now what it recommends? I’ll tell you what it 
recommends. The study team recommends to the task force: 
 

That the government, in collaboration with the provinces, 
consider changing its role from a focus on provincial 
illness treatment programs to one that emphasizes personal 
responsibility for one’s health through healthier life-styles, 
illness, disease prevention and so on. This would involve, 
inter alia, partial federal disengagement from the 
financial, or direct substantive influence on provincial 
illness treatment plans. 

 
What does that mean, Mr. Minister? Have you read the Nielsen 
report as it relates to their thrust in health care? I ask you: have 
you read it, and are you concerned? And I ask you what 
representations have you made to protect the health care for the 
people of this province which was put in place by the New 
Democratic Party, which was founded by Tommy Douglas, 
which was built by New Democrats? — and I will tell you will 
be protected by New Democrats whenever a Tory government 
tries to undermine it, as they are doing in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So I ask you, Mr. Minister: have you read the 
Nielsen report? Have you read that? And what is your response 
to the direction that they’re going to get out of the direct 
funding of health care? 
 
You don’t even know how much it’s going to cost the health 
care system here by the cut back of the $2 billion. You haven’t 
even calculated it out. You haven’t even read the Nielsen report. 
You don’t even have a position on it. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what is your position vis-a-vis the 
Nielsen report and the disengagement of the federal government 
in funds in the promoting and the development of a 
standardized health care across the country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, again I rise and the 
member opposite said, well, how do . . . you haven’t even 
considered what the cut-back will be. Mr. Chairman, how do 
you consider what the cut-back will be when the negotiations 
are going on and no one knows if that cut-back . . . what size it 
will be. That amazes me. If there even will be one. There’s 
nothing carved in stone saying you’re going to get this much, 
Saskatchewan. My colleague is negotiating. He may be 
successful in convincing Ottawa that there should be no 
cut-back. So to stand here and say, how do you know? when 
negotiations are still going on is sheer, utter lunacy. How would 
you expect to know if you haven’t come to a decision? I 
challenge them. 
 
And you know I’ve heard him stand in here and he waves the 
Nielsen report and he hollers about the Nielsen report and how 
dangerous it is and so on. One of the things that . . . the preface 
of the Nielsen report is that it is a report and  

suggestions only, and it will be done co-operatively with the 
provinces, and there will be a great deal of discussion before 
there’s any implementation. For him to stand here and wave it 
around and make loud noises and gestures, as if the Nielsen 
report is ripping Canada apart, when the Nielsen report is just a 
number of suggestions — only suggestions — of ways the 
federal government can operate in the future, which are 
premised on the basis of dialogue and discussion and 
co-operation with the provincial governments; for him to stand 
up here and let on it’s a fait accompli, and to wave it around and 
make large noises and protestations, is simply not in the best 
interest of this legislature. Because all it is is a discussion paper, 
and I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, and the other members of 
this House, that we will take an active part in discussing any of 
the concerns in the Nielsen report that pertain to health care. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very fascinating 
display by the Minister of Health. I mean he has just again 
displayed with immense clarity how uninformed he is. If he 
doesn’t yet understand that what the Nielsen report is 
recommending is already what the federal government is 
implementing, then he has not been doing his job, because all 
throughout that report, in various sectors, there are 
recommendations which simply, through the Deputy Prime 
Minister, gives sanction to what the federal government is 
already doing. And you know that, Mr. Minister, you know that 
very well. It’s the same old story, whether it’s a Conservative in 
this legislature or a Conservative in Ottawa, they say one thing, 
and they do something else. 
 
Now let me just tell you what the Primer Minister said. The 
Prime Minister said two years ago, or he characterized medicare 
as a sacred trust. Those famous words of Brian Mulroney. 
Everything is a scared trust in front of the television camera and 
in front of the radio microphone. Well what’s happened to that 
sacred trust, when today that trust is being threatened by 
unilateral cut backs in the federal funding for health care. And 
all that the Nielsen report is doing is supporting those unilateral 
cut-backs which are already taking place, and the minister says, 
well the Minister of Finance is negotiating. 
 
What is there to negotiate? And if indeed this Minister of 
Finance of yours, Mr. Minister, is negotiating, then I simply ask 
you: don’t you think he has failed miserably? Because for all 
his negotiations, what have the results been? The results have 
been a cut in funding through EPF for health and 
post-secondary education. That’s the result of the negotiations 
of the Minister of Finance, into whose tender care you have 
totally given up the leadership in Health. 
 
Now I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that I regret very much 
hearing you say that you believe that you do not have a role to 
play in these negotiations with the federal government. Because 
to say that the ministers of Finance of the provinces and Ottawa 
are going to do the negotiations and you, like Caesar, will wash 
your hands of it all, is doing exactly what the federal 
government wants you to do. You know, and your officials 
particularly know, because they deal with the officials in 
Ottawa, as they should; and they no doubt do a very effective 
job. You know, because they have told you that unless you, as  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

530 
 

the Minister of health, insert yourself into these negotiations, 
health is going to get a short shift in these negotiations. And if 
they haven’t told you that, then they’re not doing their job. But 
I happen to believe that they have told you that. 
 
Throughout the years in this country, Mr. Minister, any time 
ministers and departments responsible for packages dealing 
with social programs gave up their responsibility to ministers of 
Finance, they lost. And the people who were the benefactors of 
those services lost as well. 
 
You are now telling us in this House, by saying that you have 
nothing to do with these negotiations, that you’re not interested 
in them. You are saying that you have given up the leadership 
in the health field. And I tell you, Mr. Minister, that that is 
dangerous. We’re concerned about that. We’re concerned about 
that because we happen to know what the results might be. 
 
Now you tell me; have you made any contacts with the federal 
government, with your counterpart the federal Minister of 
Health, with regard to the threats to establish program funding? 
And what has been the nature of your submission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I listened with 
interest again to the one-time minister of Finance in this 
province, and I fail to understand how he even made the 
portfolio work. He doesn’t realize that the EPF funding, the 
established program funding, has always been the prerogative 
of the Minister of Finance, and it is negotiated between the 
ministers of Finance. And that’s what I said my desk mate is 
doing with the federal Minister of Finance; he’s negotiating 
that. And I have faith that he will negotiate a good deal. 
 
They talk about the Nielsen report. Certainly the Nielsen report 
indicates new initiatives and prevention. I’m interested in 
talking about that. New initiatives in health promotion that the 
federal government may put more funds available for 
prevention and health promotion and the promotion of good 
life-styles. As Health minister, I’m anxious to sit down with my 
federal counterpart and talk about these things. I think these are 
new and exciting directions that we can be taking in health care 
in Canada. They ignore that. They don’t talk about that. 
 
Certainly there are things in the Nielsen report that I believe can 
be very, very fundamental to improvements in health care. They 
don’t say that. They like to use the old scare method — try and 
scare people — as if their health care is going to be taken away. 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that a contribution of 11.6 per cent 
increase in this year’s budget indicates that certainly health care 
in Saskatchewan is going to be protected. I say that a $1.2 
billion budget indicates that health care in Saskatchewan is 
going to be protected. I say that a $1,200 expenditure in health 
care for every man, woman and child in this province indicates 
that Saskatchewan is going to protect the health care of its 
people. 
 
And I just want to say — and that minister was minister of 
Finance in the previous government — that since 1977, when 
he was Finance minister, that the EPF has always been 
negotiated between the Finance ministers  

provincially and federally. I can understand that when he went 
to Ottawa he maybe wasn’t in on the negotiation because he 
was a little out of place in the big city probably, and probably 
the leader did all the negotiation in those days. But EPF funding 
negotiations between ministers of Finance has continued in this 
province since ’77 when that member was the minister. 
 
So certainly, I said earlier in this House, I’m scheduled to meet 
the Minister of Health in Ottawa later this month. We will be 
discussing many things pertaining to the delivery of health care 
in this province. 
 
I have stated in the last two days our position — our position on 
the use of prescription drugs, on the protection situation. And as 
tonight I have read the telegram that I sent to the hon. minister 
regarding the advertising of liquor on the televisions across 
Canada. At our meetings we will certainly be discussing EPF 
funding, new initiatives, initiative where we have co-operated 
in the last while with the federal government on the 
“break-free” generation which is having a tremendous impact 
upon the young people of Saskatchewan and Canada and 
stopping smoking. 
 
(2145) 
 
I take credit for this for Saskatchewan because we led the nation 
in non-smoking initiatives. Saskatchewan has more 
non-smoking schools than any other province in Canada, and 
those are due to initiatives of the Health department on 
non-smoking with our young people. 
 
So for the people opposite to think that Jake Epp — Jake Epp, 
who is a good friend of mine . . . I was a high school teacher in 
Wolseley, Saskatchewan, and Jake Epp was a high school 
teacher just out of Winnipeg in Manitoba. We share the same 
background. I count him as a very good friend, and I can tell 
you that I will work with him to try and bring about better 
health care in Canada. And some of the initiatives of the 
Nielsen report may be part and parcel — may be part and parcel 
— of that new system of delivery. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very significant 
day in this province, because today we have heard from this 
government during the consideration of these health estimates 
that it is not making a sufficient effort to stand up for the whole 
concept of universal health care and medicare throughout 
Canada as we have known it — as we have known it. 
 
We have here the Minister of Health, who is not prepared to 
accept the fact that along with the Minister of Finance — and 
yes, indeed, the Minister of Finance, whoever he may be, 
whether it’s the member from Kindersley and now the member 
from Qu’Appelle — negotiates established program funding. 
But no minister of Finance from a province like Saskatchewan 
would be doing it alone, with the Minister of Health sitting 
there and saying, I really think he’s going to do it; I don’t have 
to worry about it. If the Minister of finance and that Minister of 
Health cared about what is happening to health care across 
Canada — because the federal Tory government is pulling out 
funding to the tune of $2 billion over the next few years by 
1990 . . . 
 
  



 
April 10, 1986 

531 
 

Don’t stand up in this House, Mr. Minister, and say you have 
not an aggressive role to play. Do you know the last time your 
government and your ministers stood silently by while a federal 
government went about changing some very significant 
programs? I’ll tell you when it was. It was during the issue of 
the Crow rate debate. The silence, Mr. Minister, was so 
deafening that what has happened is that farmers today are 
paying a big price, and the main reason they are paying a big 
price is because you gentlemen stood by . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order! I don’t think the 
Crow rate is the basis for our discussion here tonight. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I beg to differ. It’s not the 
question of the Crow rate, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you questioning my ruling? Order, 
order, order! The question for consideration here are the Health 
estimates, and the Crow rate has no significance in these 
discussions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, making an analogy between 
the negotiations of this government with regard to the Crow rate 
as being the same as the negotiations with this government . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you challenging the Chair? Are you 
challenging the Chair? Are you challenging the Chair? If you 
are challenging my ruling, then I guess we will have to call in 
the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I am making an analogy 
about negotiations with regard to health funding that are not 
taking part, and they’re not being undertaken by this Minister of 
Health and this government adequately, in the same way as they 
were not taking part when the similar kind of situation existed 
with regard to the Crow rate. That happens to be within the 
rules of this House, and that’s the analogy I’m making. And 
what I’m saying is this: that if this government and this Minister 
of Health sits back as silently as he has been doing in these 
negotiations on EPF, as this government sat back on the 
negotiations with regard to the Crow rate, the same thing is 
going to happen to universal health care in Canada . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . the same thing is going to happen to 
universal health care in Canada and national standards across 
Canada, as has happened to the Crow rate which the farmers of 
this country and this province and western Canada have lost. 
And today they are paying the price. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, this Nielsen Report, which the minister 
referred to, and he refuses to refer to the other significant part 
said: 
 

That this would involve, inter alia, partial federal 
disengagement from financial, or direct substantive 
influence on provincial illness treatment plans, leaving the 
provinces to the fullest extent possible, responsible for 
raising  

revenues for the cost control of their health insurance 
system. 

 
And the minister refuses to say that that is important and that he 
has a role to play in negotiating so that this does not happen. 
 
He said that the Minister of Finance is going to negotiate. Well 
let me tell you, Mr. Minister, what has already happened. Here 
is the budget, the federal budget, Mr. Wilson’s budget. That 
gentleman, with your Minister of Finance, is going to negotiate 
with, or supposedly has already, without any help from you, 
because you’re going to sit by and hope that Mr. Epp is going to 
standby and defend Saskatchewan. Heaven help us, if that’s 
what happens. 
 
But already, before these so-called negotiations have even 
gotten anywhere, the budget states, from Mr. Wilson: 
 

To achieve in major transfers to the provinces, to achieve a 
balanced package of expenditure reductions and spread the 
burden of expenditure reductions fairly, the government 
will be seeking reduction in transfers to the provinces of 
about $2 billion by the end of the decade. 

 
And are you prepared to stand up in this House and say that 
that’s not significant? Are you going to stand up in this House 
and say that the fact that Saskatchewan will lose out of that 
about $100 billion a year shouldn’t cause you to think that in 
these negotiations that’s probably one of the most significant 
items that you should be doing something to make sure that 
Saskatchewan people’s interests are protected. 
 
You’re going to turn it over to the gentle and tender mercies of 
the Minister of Finance, who is going to be more interested in 
what he’s doing with his deficit than he’s going to be interested 
in what’s he doing with your health programs, which you’re 
supposed to be providing some leadership for. And you’re not. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that if you haven’t already made 
submissions — because you have been the minister for four 
years — if you haven’t already made submissions to the federal 
minister about concerns with regards to cut backs in established 
program funding, you have been negligent in your duties and 
your responsibilities. And you have failed the people of 
Saskatchewan. And so I ask you because I don’t want to believe 
that. I happen to have a certain amount of respect for you and 
the work that you’ve done, and I don’t want to believe that. So I 
am going to ask you if you have taken any effort, telexes or 
letters or other forms of communication to the federal Minister 
of health with regard to the threats that are coming up on 
medicare and health care? Will you be prepared to table that 
communication so that we can see what you’ve have done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I think if 
you look over the actions of this government in health care, you 
can see many of the things that we have done. I mean that’s 
obvious to anyone in the province of Saskatchewan. If you look 
back at the records we  
  



 
April 10, 1986 

532 
 

described the other day, in nursing home construction, in 
hospital, now in staffing, new co-operative programs; we could 
go on and on. I could go on with a whole litany of things that 
we have done in health care. 
 
The member opposite says, have you negotiated or have you 
discussed or have you talked to the Hon. Jake Epp? I told him 
that Jake Epp and I talk many times about issues. 
 
I indicated to him that when I came to the patent protection and 
the use of generic drugs in the drug plans of this province — 
last year it was at the Health ministers conference — it was put 
on the agenda by Saskatchewan, and I led the discussion, and as 
you see, and I showed in the estimates the other night, we have 
telexed Mr. Epp to show that we would not approve of any type 
of an extension that would bring costs to the drug plan of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, tonight I read out another letter to him, or telex, where we 
are urging him to go ahead with a type of restrictions on 
advertising on liquor across Canada. So I think you can see that 
we are certainly in constant communication with them. And 
secondly, I have said we will be meeting at the end of this 
month, in which we will be discussing a number of issues. 
Certainly we will be discussing the Nielsen report. We will be 
discussing funding of health care in this country. We have at 
every Health ministers conference that we have attended. 
 
At least with Mr. Epp, he stays in the same room and talks to 
us. We never had that type of possibility with Monique Begin; 
she wouldn’t even meet with us. Jake Epp is a gentleman who 
calls us down and says, look at fellows, let’s address this 
together because we believe that Jake Epp wants to improve 
health care in Canada. I believe that strongly. I know Jake Epp 
as an individual. 
 
So for that member to stand up and say that we will not take our 
part in leading in Canada, in safeguarding the health care of this 
nation, is certainly a misdirection, an attempt to mislead. 
 
I just want to point out, in connection to the Nielsen report — I 
want to point this out — you know they take the Nielsen report 
as if it is the last chapter of the Bible. They seem to think it’s 
the last chapter of the Bible. I want to give you a little 
illustration, because I said the Nielsen report is a discussion 
paper as to new directions that can be taken within this country. 
 
I know that the people opposite are bankrupt of any new ideas. 
Be it mortgages, be it tax reduction, be it health care, they 
couldn’t think of a new idea if they were paid. That’s the 
situation they’re in. But just to illustrate that the Nielsen report 
is nothing more than a discussion paper. I believe one of the 
recommendations of the Nielsen report is to scrap the Hudson 
Bay line — the railroad, the Churchill line that goes up to 
Churchill — the Hudson Bay line to the Churchill line. Nielsen 
recommends scrapping that. Since the report has come out, do 
you know what the federal government has done? Don 
Mazankowski, the Minister of Transport, hasn’t scrapped it. 
He’s put $17 million into upgrading the line. But they take the 
Nielsen report as a fait accompli, as the last  

chapter of the Bible. There’s a good example of where Nielsen 
recommends one thing, the federal government turns around 
and says, Nielsen, you’re wrong on that recommendation. 
You’re absolutely wrong. We’re going to put the money into 
that railroad system. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Could we have a little more 
quiet in here so we can hear the debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. MacLeod: — I move that the committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, order. The House Leader has 
requested permission to rise and report progress. 
 
A Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to speak to the motion. The House 
Leader made a motion, and I want to speak on it. Thank you 
very much; I shall be very brief. 
 
I’ll say to the Acting House Leader, you may run, but you can’t 
hide. We are going to get back to this issue, and I’ll tell you, 
you may adjourn it tonight, but we’re going to get back to this 
issue and we’re going to deal with it. This opposition is not 
going to let . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Have you got a point of order? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I want to speak on the motion. I said 
that. This is a debatable motion and I wish to debate it. I will 
say to the government House leader, you may run but you 
cannot hide. This issue is worth an enormous amount of money; 
you people may not care, because you’re not going to be in 
government that long. I’ll tell you we care, and we’re going to 
get back to it. So adjourn it if you like, but we’re getting back to 
the issue just as soon as you people got the guts to call these 
estimates again. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. This is not a debatable 
motion. It has been moved. I do now leave the Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 
 
 


	EVENING SITTING

