


















































April 16, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 16, 1986 
 

 
631 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my distinct 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 
two groups of students, both from St. Augustine elementary 
school in the constituency of Regina Victoria. There’s a group 
of grade 3 and 4’s, and they’re accompanied by Mrs. Leona 
Burkhart; and a group of grades 7 and 8’s, accompanied by 
Dale Reed, James Martin, and Brian Pasternack. Both groups 
are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I wish them a pleasant and 
an entertaining and an educational stay here in the legislature, 
and I look forward to meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures 
and refreshments. I ask all members to give them a warm 
welcome here in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Myers: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, 42 students from Prince Phillip 
school in Saskatoon. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Mr. Tad Cherkewich and Mr. Nestor Byblow. 
 
I might mention at this time that I also graduated from that 
public school, as did the member from Regina Rosemont. And 
at the present time the member from Saskatoon University, his 
child attends Prince Phillip school as well. So the ties in this 
legislature go back quite a ways in regards to this school. I 
would wish the students a pleasant visit and a safe trip back 
home, and would hope that all the members of the Assembly 
would join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague from Melville, the Minister of Labour, it’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the House, a 
group of 24 students from Ituna High School, They’re 
accompanied by Mrs. Fleming. They are also accompanied by a 
bus driver, I take it. You had to have gotten here somehow, but 
I don’t have the gentleman’s name, and I apologize for it — or 
the lady’s name, whatever the case may be. I believe they 
deserve congratulations for the type of stamina they have. I 
understand they are going to be with us in the Chamber for one 
hour, rather than the normal one-half hour. I will be meeting 
with you at 3:30 for pictures, refreshments, and questions. And 
I ask the House to help me welcome you here to the Assembly 
today. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crop Insurance Payments for Use of Air Reels 
 

Mr. Engel: — I have a question for the part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. Can you inform Saskatchewan farmers on what 
date crop insurance corporation decided to make a major 
change in their coverage plan, which retroactively  

provides farmers who used air reels to harvest their ’85 crop an 
extra $8 per acre from crop insurance? When was that decision 
made, when did this new policy come into force, and when was 
it publicly announced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the decision was made 
subsequent to last fall. And I have, Mr. Speaker, the whole 
question with respect to the policy on air reels under 
advisement, because of the concerns raised by farmers and 
others that have been doing whatever is necessary to get as 
much of the crop as possible. And I will be making a statement 
with respect to that in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. If this extra 
payment was made to encourage farmers to use air reels at 
harvest time, why was it not announced at the end of July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the announcement was 
made because it was brought to our attention that some 
individuals across the province had gone out of their way to get 
as much of the crop as possible, and we were advised that there 
may be 30 or 40 farmers who had invested in air reels, which 
could improve their ability to harvest. So we made the decision 
at that time. 
 
It is now under review because of the concern raised by 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, who are saying many farmers sprayed for 
grasshoppers six or seven times and that also protected the crop 
and the production and reduced expenditures from crop 
insurance. People who bought double swath attachments also 
had major expenditures. 
 
So I am reviewing it, Mr. Speaker. There have been no 
payments go out to people who have bought air reels. It’s under 
advisement, and I’ll be making a statement on it in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Final supplement, Mr. Speaker. Will you be 
making an announcement as to . . . if this is going to be in 
effect, are you covering off people that bought 40-foot 
swathers; are you giving them the same $8 an acre? What is the 
proposal, and how should farmers apply under that existing 
program, those that did use air reels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am saying right now that 
we are not paying anybody with respect to special equipment 
that they have purchased to harvest their crop. I have had 
complaints come in from farmers across southern Saskatchewan 
who say, look, there’s many ways that you can capture more of 
the crop and that you can save more of it. Air reels are one; 
double swath attachments are another; spraying for 
grasshoppers are some more; specials kinds of equipment, new 
kinds of pick-up reels, and so forth. So they said, make sure that 
you carefully look at this before you make the payments, 
because once you start making one payment, then you’re going 
to have to pay for every conceivable thing that any farmer ever 
did with respect to improving his ability to harvest. 
 
I have it under review and I’ll be making a statement in the very 
near future. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. I would  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

632 
 

like to get a point cleared up, because many of the crop 
insurance offices in southern Saskatchewan are advising 
farmers and are having them fill out forms saying that they’ve 
purchased air reels and used them. And the advice that the crop 
insurance officials are giving to people is that there will be, in 
fact, a payment of $8 an acre. 
 
I want you to be clear on this point. You’re now telling the 
farmers that there isn’t at this time, a payment to be made of $8 
an acre for those farmers who used air reels. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that I am not 
making any payments till I review it, because I’ve had concerns 
raised by other farmers who have made many expenditures on 
equipment, and they’re saying, to be fair you would have to pay 
every farmer in the province, whoever bought or purchased or 
spent money to help harvest it, as opposed to saying this 
particular kind of equipment would be all right to pay for, and 
that kind wouldn’t be and another kind wouldn’t be. I am 
saying I’m going to review it. To date I have not made any 
expenditures. Crop insurance officials are carrying on with 
respect to the application forms because that’s what they’ve 
been advised to do. 
 
But I’m saying here today that I haven’t made any payments, 
and I’m going to be reviewing it to make sure whatever we do 
is going to be fair, and provide as much common sense to the 
farmers who have raised the concerns with me saying, look, 
there’s many forms of equipment. You can’t just pay on one, so 
you better review this. And I’m reviewing it, and will report to 
the legislature as quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the Premier. I want you 
to know that in fact you have caused a great deal of confusion 
in the minds of your employees, as well as in the minds of the 
farmers, because the farmers are being told that there will be an 
$8 payment, and today in the House you say there isn’t going to 
be. And you have caused a great deal of confusion. 
 
One of the other areas in crop insurance where confusion was 
caused last year was the raising of the coverage from 80 or 70 
per cent coverage up to 100 per cent. Now farmers are in the 
process of seeding crops, and they would like to know whether 
that will apply in the coming crop year, that all coverage will be 
raised up to 100 per cent. Here again, the crop insurance 
officials were getting different reports, some saying it will be 
raised to 100 per cent, and some saying, no, you’ll be at 70 or 
80 or 90, whatever your contract says.  
 
Can you clearly indicate to farmers, who are planning their 
seeding program, will coverage now be 100 per cent, or will we 
do as we did last year, wait until the middle of the summer and 
then change the agreements so that confusion will reign again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve said today 
is that I am receiving advice from farmers, and they’re saying 
that you can make modifications to the programs so that they 
can be fair, and they’re applied fairly across to all farmers in 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 

And with respect to the air reels, that’s exactly what I’m doing, 
and I will respond in the very near future when I’ve had a 
chance to evaluate all their concerns, and I will make a 
statement. 
 
Secondly, with respect to bringing them up to 100 per cent, we 
said that we would do it last year because of the combination of 
drought after drought after drought. I am saying to them now, 
and I will add in the statement that I’ll make later, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will not raise it indefinitely up to 100, regardless of 
what will happen, year after year after year. They are up this 
year to that position, and they’ll start, Mr. Speaker, from there, 
and then, if you have subsequent years, on and on, there has to 
be some incentive in there to make sure that there is as much 
productivity as possible. It cannot be done indefinitely, to say 
regardless, regardless of the cropping conditions, you will for 
every have 100 per cent. They’re advising me, no, that’s not 
fair. Because of the three or four years of drought, yes, we 
raised it up so there wouldn’t be a penalty, and you can start 
fresh from there. And that’s the point that I’ll make in some 
detail as soon as I can respond in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. Then you’re 
guaranteeing for this coming year that the coverage will be a 
minimum of 100 per cent? I want to get that clear. I think that’s 
what you’re indicating. But farmers would like you to be clear 
on the record that their coverage will be a minimum of 100 per 
cent coverage on crop insurance this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I’ve said is that we’ve 
brought them up to 100 per cent because of last year, and that 
was the base on which they could operate. What I’m saying 
from now on, and I will put the details in it, Mr. Speaker, as 
quickly as I can bring them together on the advice I’m receiving 
from producers, that they will start from a base, and from then 
on, Mr. Speaker, they can’t be guaranteed of 100 per cent year 
after year after year or else there’s be no incentive at all to have 
productivity. 
 
And they’re advising me, yes, fair enough. You brought us up, 
and we will start from there. I’ll provide full details of the entire 
crop insurance package along with the disaster mechanism 
which we are working out with the federal government. And 
farmers want to hear about that, as quickly as I can put it 
together. If I can do it in a matter of days, I certainly will, 
because I’ve had the calls. They are providing me with the 
advice, and I’ll make a very clear statement on all the 
alternatives and everything that’s available, both federally and 
provincially, as quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary. I understand now 
that there will be 100 per cent coverage, and I’m sure that 
farmers will be interested in knowing that and look forward to 
your announcement. 
 
One other issue that caused a great deal of confusion in crop 
insurance was raising the minimum bushels from 1.9 bushels, I 
believe it was, up to 5. Will that be in place for the coming year, 
that any crops under 5 bushel an acre will be written off in the 
event that a drought does occur and the same situation will 
exist, that 5 bushel an acre will  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

633 
 

be the bottom base line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will be making 
announcements with respect to that, with respect to 1.9 bushels 
and up to 5 bushels. There were concerns; there were concerns 
raised, that there’s significant difference in terms of the 
operation of the farms if you raise it to 5 bushels. We had 
farmers request, certainly in the Assiniboia area, that we raise it 
because there’s no point in running your combine over 1.9 
bushels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we will be doing now is looking at a 
combination of practices, perhaps a feathering of between 1.9 
and 5, and they can phase it in up to a period of 5 bushels to the 
acre to make it as reasonable as possible, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
putting it together and advising the farms as quickly as I can in 
the next few days. 
 
Mr. Engel: — A question on the same line, Mr. Minister. The 
crop insurance forms that are going out, and that are out now — 
and I’ve had many calls on this one. And I just want to clarify 
this so we know exactly where it’s at. This is the third year that 
the Gravelbourg area particularly, and in that area, has faced a 
severe drought, and that puts them in the bracket that people 
that were at 120 per cent coverage and 115 per cent last year are 
now 80 and 70 per cent coverage. 
 
Where are those guys going to be this year because of the 
drought we just faced? Are they going to be covered at 70 or 80 
per cent, or are they going to be covered at 100 per cent? I want 
that clarified because farmers are phoning me, and I’ve had lots 
of calls every day on that one because they’ve finally found out 
from their office. When one phones the area office, they were 
told what their coverage was. They are all phoning in. They are 
all finding that this is the third year it’s triggered in the last six 
years, and they are all under — they’re around the 70 and 80 
per cent depending on how big the pay-out was. What is their 
coverage going to be this year because of last year’s drought? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the farmers last 
year in the Assiniboia area, when I was there, said that they 
have had year after year after year of drought, and they were 
down to 70 per cent of 70 per cent, or 49 per cent coverage. 
And for many of those it represented a problem and some 
decided they couldn’t even purchase it because it wasn’t enough 
coverage. So we made the changes and we’ve brought people 
up to 100 per cent. 
 
At this point I am receiving advice from farmers, and the board 
of directors of crop insurance is receiving advice from farmers, 
on reels; on the 1.9 to the 5; on what the coverage should be and 
so forth. The board of directors and the crop insurance people 
are putting a package together for me so that I can make a 
statement in the legislature to lay all those pieces of information 
out clearly to the public and so farmers know what is exactly 
the case. 
 
What the farmer wants is to have the strongest and fairest and 
most common sense crop insurance changes that we can make. 
Many of the changes that we made last year, for salvage and so 
forth, were very well respected and  

appreciated, in the Assiniboia area particularly. Those changes 
we made from 1.9 to 5 were also appreciated, but there are 
some problems with that, and I recognize the problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the other parts and programs, with 
respect to crop insurance, I want to make the changes that are 
positive and well received by farmers, and I also am listening to 
them because they are phoning me and phoning my ministers. 
And I will make the announcement, Mr. Speaker, as fast as I 
can get the advice from the crop insurance people, the board of 
directors, and those that are doing the review, and I’ll provide it 
to the legislature as quickly as I can. 
 

Introduction of New Legislation 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, since you have obviously 
run away from a spring election, it seems to me that this 
legislature should be considering all of that legislation which 
your government promised a month ago in the throne speech. 
We have been here a month and yet none of the major 
legislation in the throne speech has even been introduced. Only 
20 government Bills have been introduced into this Legislative 
Assembly, and nine of those Bills have been directed to 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
You, for example, indicated in the throne speech that this 
government would make legislation or bring measures to 
protect municipalities and hospitals and school boards from 
dramatically escalating liability insurance costs. We yet do not 
see a proposal or the legislation. I ask you: what will those 
measures be, and when will the details be made available to 
municipalities and hospitals and school boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be several 
notices coming in in the next two or three days. I mean, 
obviously the members opposite have been delaying estimates, 
as they go through hour after hour after hour and day after day 
on Health estimates. I mean . . . and they’re going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  I’ll tell you, we’ll take as long as we 
want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well all right, if you want the answers, 
you can’t do everything at the same time in the legislature. If 
you want to have estimates with respect to Health, well, Mr. 
Speaker, we can be here till September on Health estimates if 
they so choose. So if they want to ask the questions on Health 
and they want to review them, just make it perfectly clear that 
the public knows, if the opposition want to ask questions, we’ll 
be here to answer questions. And we’ll be here as long as you 
decide you want to ask the questions, because we’ll be here to 
answer them. 
 
We will proceed. We will be providing the notices, and it will 
carry right through the legislature. This session normally lasts 
anywhere from 30 to 60 to as much as 70 days, Mr. Speaker, 
and the hon. member is quite aware of that. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

634 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like the Premier to tell this House how he thinks the fact that the 
Minister of Health is not providing answers in estimates are 
holding up the preparation of legislation to deal with liability 
insurance which the Minister of Health has nothing to do with. 
What have the estimates got to do with you, Mr. Premier, and 
your government preparing legislation which you promised one 
month ago — that’s over a month ago — and yet have not seen 
the light of day in this legislature? 
 
Is it because you weren’t prepared to have it in the first place, 
thinking you would call an election? Now you have got cold 
feet; you’re not going to call an election; and you don’t have the 
legislation to propose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of observations. 
We know, and the members of the opposition know, that the 
Speech from the Throne and the budget were very well received 
by the public in the province of Saskatchewan — very 
positively received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And, Mr. Speaker, we also know . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t 
want to hear this. I mean, it’s the same old games that they’re 
going to holler and scream in their seat. But I’ll just tell you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear 
it. They can still cluck and call and do all the things that they do 
over there. 
 
But the point is that the Speech from the Throne was well 
received; the budget was well received. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
problem is, when the Minister of Health gives his answers 
because the Minister of Health has done a tremendously better 
job in Health than the opposition ever did, so they don’t like to 
hear the answers. 
 
Well if they want to continue to ask questions in Health, it takes 
time in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And as long as they want to 
question the Minister of Health, he will provide the answers. 
And if it takes the time, that’s their responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 
yesterday. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No. Supplement. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  The member has a supplement. We’ll take the 
supplement. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Premier. When will your government introduce 
the legislation and regulations with respect to the throne speech 
promise of a voluntary Saskatchewan pension plan? 
Saskatchewan people have heard your . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thompson: — Saskatchewan people have heard your 
promise. What they want to know now are the details, so that 
they can see if you have delivered on that promise. How soon 
might Saskatchewan people expect the legislation and the 
detailed regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we promised, Mr. Speaker, 
that we would take the tax off clothes in Saskatchewan, and it 
was delivered, and the people love it. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
promised that we would provide rural gas distribution systems, 
and we delivered, and they loved that. We said that we would 
provide interest rate protection to farmers and home owners and 
small business, and it was delivered, and they liked that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said that we will provide the first-time-ever 
Saskatchewan pension plan for home makers, for families, for 
small business, and so forth — and, Mr. Speaker, we will 
provide it, and it will be introduced in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. And the members opposite know that, because when 
we make a promise, we deliver on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Government Advertising 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 
yesterday with respect to government advertising, and the 
member from Regina North East had raised it with the Deputy 
Premier and raised it with me. 
 
Three observations that I want to make. The member from 
Regina North East stated in the House on April 1st that the 
government and Crown corporation Advertising totalled $17 
million in 1984-85. The actual expenditures for both 
government departments and Crown corporations was 
$11,502,705 for both placement and production. Mr. Speaker, 
this is 48 per cent less than the member from Regina North East 
tried to lead the public to say that it was. 
 
Second observation, Mr. Speaker. The comparisons in the last 
three years of the former administration in what they spent, they 
spent $20,676,542. In the first three years of our administration 
we spent less than that, Mr. Speaker, and that did not make 
provision for inflation or increases in advertising rates. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker — I want to make the point. The member 
from Regina North East asked if the 1985-86 advertising figure 
will top $20 million. Well the final figures for 1985-86 are 
obviously not available yet, but I can say, Mr. Speaker, that it 
won’t be above $20 million, in fact, it will be well below $20 
million. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Supplementary question to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, will you undertake within the next 
week to table all of the expenditures that were done by the 
Crown corporations during the year 1984-1985, in the form of a 
supplementary to your response. And will you undertake to 
table in this legislature your planned government expenditures 
for this coming fiscal year, which you obviously have, or you 
would not have included them in the budget. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

635 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, those figures and those 
numbers will be available in Crown corporations as the hon. 
member knows, and they will be made available in due course, 
and they will be available at that time. 
 

Payments to Inner Dimension Design Associates 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice 
of a question from the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
regarding a contract that was awarded in August of 1984 to 
Inner Dimension Design Associates. I should point out at the 
beginning, Mr. Speaker, that this issue was thoroughly explored 
in Estimates a year ago and, in fact, the contract was sent across 
to the member from Regina Centre, so possibly he could share 
that information with the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
The member opposite, however, identified one of the principals 
of this company as the wife of the deputy minister of Supply 
and Services. He somehow implied that the contract had been 
awarded by the department to a firm managed by the wife of the 
deputy minister. He correctly indicated that the letter awarding 
the contract was dated August 14, 1984. I should point out that 
the deputy minister of Supply and Services was, in fact, married 
on June 29, 1985, approximately a year after the contract had 
been awarded. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, please. Order, order. Order. I’m going 
to caution the members that when I’m on my feet I’m going to 
demand order, and I’ll ask an apology from the member from 
Shaunavon right now for not obeying the rules of this Chair. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I was making more noise 
than the government members, I will certainly apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  I asked for an apology. I left no opportunities 
for stipulations. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I assumed I had made an apology, and I 
apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: —Mr. Speaker, to continue. It’s 
important to note that no contract was awarded to Inner 
Dimension Associates since the deputy minister’s marriage. In 
fact, a couple of points just to condense the whole issue. 
Consulting contracts, Mr. Speaker, things like architects, 
engineers, interior designers are very seldom, if ever, tendered. 
During that time period in the preceding fiscal year many 
interior design firms — I believe there are three in Regina — 
received contracts from Supply and Services. There’s clearly no 
conflict of interest here, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
no contract has been awarded to that firm since Mr. Cutts and 
Miss Devitt became engaged. And so I think the issue has been 
clearly gone over last year, and I think that that should respond 
to the concerns raised by the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the  

minister for that explanation, if you want to dignify it with that 
term. I would, by way of background, say that I would be 
interested in the minister’s comments with respect to this matter 
when it was suggested last year in Estimates that marriage was 
being contemplated by the deputy minister of government 
services and this lady at the time this contract was given out. 
That was not denied when the deputy minister was in the House 
during Estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you whether or not it is the policy of 
government services now to award contracts of this sort without 
any pretence at tendering it and without any pretence at giving 
everyone a fair opportunity to bid on these contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, under 
usual circumstances consulting contracts — and I indicated the 
types of firm: architects, engineers, interior design people — 
are usually simply awarded. Tenders are not part of the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to comment that I have some problems 
understanding the line of questioning. During this session we 
have had questions about jelly beans and woollen socks. We’ve 
had the member from Regina Centre sitting in his chair 
clucking like a hen. Now we’re into this type of question. Has 
there ever been an opposition less in touch with the real 
concerns of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker? I take 
some exception to the attempt to drag these two very 
professional people through the mud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I ask the Minister of Culture and 
Recreation who, I believe, has responsibility for the Centre of 
the Arts. I ask the Minister of Culture and Recreation whether 
this firm has done any consulting work for your department or 
for any of the agencies for which you’re responsible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I would take notice of that 
question and come back to the House with the details. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

White Paper on a Proposed Code of Ethical Conduct for 
Saskatchewan Public Office Holders 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few 
comments with respect to a code of ethical conduct that I will 
send over a copy to the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, 
as I have indicated in the House on a number of occasions, this 
government has been committed to the development of a 
conflict of interest guide-lines for cabinet ministers and for 
legislative secretaries which would go beyond the requirements 
of The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of 
Interests Act. 
 
I believe that it is in the public interest, Mr. Speaker, to have in 
place clearly defined guide-lines for public officials which will 
assist them in ensuring that the decisions of public importance 
will not be influenced by private considerations, and the public 
office will not be used for personal gain. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

636 
 

To this end, I am pleased to be tabling in the House today, Mr. 
Speaker, a white paper on a proposed code of ethical conduct 
for Saskatchewan public office holders, related conflict of 
interest guide-lines for cabinet ministers and legislative 
secretaries. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, conflict of interest 
guide-lines are already in place for public employees. 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, appointed former chief justice, the Hon. 
E.M. Culliton, an eminent person in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to conduct hearings throughout the province on 
the proposed code and the guide-lines, and based on input from 
these hearings, Mr. Speaker, amend the code and guide-lines 
and put them into effect. It is hoped that through the process of 
eliciting public reaction to the proposal that the code and the 
guide-lines will reflect what the citizens of Saskatchewan 
expect of public office holders in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might, I just want to quickly review the basic 
principles, Mr. Speaker, of the proposed code of ethical conduct 
for public office holders in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is based on seven principles, and I will just briefly go through 
the principles, Mr. Speaker, and the rest will be tabled, and 
certainly the members of the media can have it. The seven 
principles are as follows: 
 
1.  Persons holding public office in Saskatchewan must not 

only act within the law, they have a further obligation to 
act in a manner that will bear the closest public scrutiny. 

 
2.  Any conflict between the private interests of public office 

holders and their officials duties must be resolved in favour 
of the public interest. Upon appointment, and while in 
office, public office holders are expected to arrange their 
private affairs in a manner that will prevent conflicts of 
interest from arising. 

 
3.  Public office holders shall neither solicit gifts or other 

benefits, nor, other than for incidental gifts or customary 
hospitality of nominal value, accept transfers of funds, 
gifts, or other benefits from private sources. 

 
4.  Mr. Speaker, public office holders shall not step out of 

their official roles to assist private entities or persons in 
their dealings with the Government of Saskatchewan where 
this would result in treatment which would not be available 
to others under similar circumstances. 

 
5.  Public office holders shall not take personal advantage of, 

or private benefits from, information obtained in the course 
of their official duties. 

 
6.  Public office holders shall not directly or indirectly use, or 

allow the use of, government property of any kind, 
including property leased to the government, for anything 
other than officially approved activities. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 
7.  Public office holders shall not engage in personal conduct 

which exploits for private reasons or personal gratification 
their position of authority, or which would tend to discredit 
the professionalism of the public service. 

 
The white paper goes on, Mr. Speaker, in some detail, outlining, 
in conflict of interest guide-lines, those things which you have 
to do with respect to administration, also investment and 
management of private assets, things that you have to declare, 
things that you don’t have to declare, and the general conduct of 
employment inside and outside public office, and any 
preferential treatment. 
 
I’m happy and quite confident, Mr. Speaker, when this process 
is finished and we have full public participation by the Hon. 
E.M. Culliton, that we will have the strictest and the most 
straightforward public guide-lines for elected officials anywhere 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I really have only two 
comments on this — two or three. Firstly, we have a 
government which, even if it called an election today, would 
have been in office longer than any government since World 
War II, and at this time in the legislative cycle it decides it’s 
going to bring in a white paper. For four years it has done 
nothing, when it ought to have done things, and it has done 
nothing. That is point number one. 
 
Point number two, I think what is offered to us is a code of 
ethical conduct for cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries, 
not for members of the legislature. It is still, in the opinion of 
members opposite, not even worthy of investigation whether a 
company owned by a member . . . Let us say the member for 
Regina North East does business with the government. It is not 
presumably even appropriate for investigation whether a 
member of the legislature . . . Let us say the member for 
Melfort does auctioneering business for the government. It is 
not even worthy of examination and investigation whether a 
member of the legislature should be a partner in a development 
which engages in resort development and, as such, has close 
dealings with the government. These issues which have been 
raised in this legislature are not even going to be looked at, are 
not even covered by the white paper. 
 
So I think, in those circumstances, we have a government which 
obviously wishes, firstly, to not have to address the issue during 
this term of office; secondly, wishes not to deal with the 
problem as it relates to members of the legislature; and thirdly, 
wishes to deal with it by the enunciation of what are really 
rather high-sounding principles, but without an rules which will 
govern anybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

637 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to join 
in the deliberations here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to join 
in with my colleagues in doing the estimates that are very 
important to providing programs and services to the people in 
this province. I’m particularly concerned with respect to people 
in my constituency, the services and programs effected by this 
administration, and thus I want to raise a few questions with the 
Minister of Health. 
 
I have received a number of correspondences dealing with 
health issues, Mr. Minister, and as well I’ve got in terms of my 
discussions with constituents, I have a number of related 
questions which I’d like to deal with in detail. But getting back 
to the basics with regards to estimates, Mr. Minister, I look at 
the 1986-87 book of Estimates which is actually the book that 
puts out the programs for health and nursing homes and medical 
services for the people of this province. 
 
And I look at the section dealing with health which is under 
your department, your administration, Mr. Minister, and I 
notice that there’s been a cut of funding in your services for the 
northern administration district. A cut — on page 49 under item 
19, subvote 47 — a cut of 4 million . . . 
 
(1445) 
 
Pardon me, there has been a cut from 4.6 million down to 4.5. 
And I wondered, Mr. Minister, why is that when the minister 
had previously talked about providing adequate and improving 
adequate health services to the people in remote northern 
Saskatchewan at the time when he cut back the transportation 
food and transportation subsidy program and replaced it with 
tremendous government ads, advertisements, dealing with your 
budget and all types of government propaganda, which totalled 
and exceeded far more than the $250,000 that was cut back, that 
was an essential need for the communities in Wollaston Lake 
and Kinoosao, who are both of those communities in my 
constituency. I’m sure that my colleague for Athabasca had 
raised that particular question with respect to the communities 
in his constituency, but I’m referring to the communities in my 
constituency. 
 
Those communities have indicated to me — and I have a 
petition here, Mr. Minister, which was sent to your government 
as well, dealing with that very basic issue, which is under your 
jurisdiction incidentally, with a good majority of names of 
residents living in those remote areas. And they have provided 
me, Mr. Minister with itemized costs of necessary and essential 
food costs: the cost of groceries and the cost of essential items 
necessary to provide food, clothing, and shelter in those remote 
areas. 
 
And I want to ask, Mr. Minister: you know, how can you justify 
the cut-backs that you have indicated on page 19 of your 
1986-87 food Estimates? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the question first raised by 
the member regarding what he indicated was a cut-back is just 
simply not correct. And I would refer you to page 49 of the 
Estimates. And if you look at the triple asterisk at the bottom of 
the page, it says, “A portion of this subvote is included in the 
subvote Grants and allowances for Home Care (for ’86-87).” 
So, simply put, the $576,000 that is going to be spent on 
northern home care is shown under the home care subvote, and 
the actual funding increase for northern health services is really 
an increase of 418,000 or 8.9 per cent. 
 
So it’s just the way it’s entered in the Estimates, sir. Certainly 
there is no cut-back to northern health services in funding. 
There is an 8.9 per cent increase. 
 
Regarding the food subsidy program, I have explained many of 
the aspects of that to the member from Athabasca in his 
questioning. Certainly we were under . . . it’s been indicated to 
us that a portion of that was going to northern outfitters. We 
didn’t think that was necessarily correct. I have indicated that 
my colleague, the Minister of Social Services is reassessing the 
program — if there are people who are in need, from his point 
of view, that we would be taking a second look at that. 
 
My colleague, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, has 
told me that, in regard to this, he has asked for submissions 
from groups regarding ways that perhaps the service could be 
supplied. All indications from northern health services branch is 
that to just reinstate the old food subsidy program would not be 
the best method to go. So if you have a suggestion, certainly we 
would take it under consideration. 
 
As I understand at this point in time from my colleague, the 
Minister of Justice and the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, who 
has asked for these submissions, only one has come in — and 
that’s from the candidate that is running in one of the seats for 
the coming election with our party. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, before going into other estimates or going 
any further in terms of the itemized questions I’d like to follow 
up on, you raised an interesting point, Mr. Minister. Your 
colleague for P.A.-Duck Lake has mentioned to you just a 
matter of a few seconds or minutes ago that he has asked 
special groups or organizations to submit alternative options of 
replacing that program. Am I correct? 
 
And the question then, Mr. Minister, is: which groups was he 
referring to? You indicated to me just now that the only one 
submission that was received was by the Progressive 
Conservative candidate, Mr. Pat Cardinal, who I know is 
running for the PC banner, PC government, in the Athabasca 
constituency. Why just this one individual has submitted this? 
 
You know, it really confuses me, and I’m sure it confuses the 
people of this province, and really confuses the people in the 
North, you know, why the Minister of the Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat could put out a very crucial message out 
there and have only one submission sent in. I really can’t 
understand that. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

638 
 

Has he been communicating with only one organization, 
namely the PC candidate for the Athabasca constituency? Is that 
the reason why he has received only one submission? Or has he 
contacted, Mr. Minister — and I say this very seriously — has 
he contacted the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local 
Governments, which are represented by the majority of northern 
communities? There’s at least 21, possibly 24, communities 
represented in this one organization. 
 
Has he written a formal letter requesting options to replace or to 
provide a service of equal quality to those remote northern 
communities? Has he submitted a formal, official letter to all 
the communities living in the northern administration district? 
Has he submitted letters, official letters, to the official 
organization representing local governments — say, in the 
urban centres, the town people, the communities with town 
status, village status, hamlet status; the two native 
organizations; and the various people that provide leadership 
and are influential in some way or another in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the minister, I’m sure, has been in 
discussions with a number of people. I suppose, from 
discussions with him, he indicates that one of the persons that 
he asked for suggestions was an elected representative of the 
people in that area, namely yourself, last year in his estimates. 
He asked you if you had any suggestions. It’s been a year and 
he has received none. So I think, you know, it’s incumbent 
upon you, when you represent a portion of that area, to come 
forward with some suggestions. He tells me he asked you last 
year in estimates — and I’m sure we can trace that down — and 
that there has been nothing forthcoming. 
 
Also he has been in discussion with AMNIS (Association of 
Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) and other 
groups in the North there. But as I say, we’re willing for 
suggestions. If you have a suggestion, please come forward. I 
would be willing to entertain that. I’m not saying we’d 
necessarily adopt it, but we would listen to you. Come down to 
my office and I’d be willing to discuss it with you at any time. I 
think you know that. So I give you that commitment. If you 
want to have further discussion on this with me, you know 
where my office is, and the door is open to you at any time to 
come down and discuss it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much for the invitation, Mr. 
Minister. If I were confident enough in your government and 
your administration and the policies of the Conservative Party, I 
certainly wouldn’t hesitate to provide and request humbly the 
type of changes and policies needed for the North. 
 
And getting back to the statement you made about the minister 
for the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, I vividly recall 
Hansards of estimates that we did in the last fiscal year, 
whereby he requested alternative suggestions by both myself 
and my colleague for Athabasca. And I can vividly recall giving 
him a suggestion, giving him and the government a suggestion: 
reinstate the food and transportation subsidy. That was our 
position; that was our suggestion. 
 
And basically, I vividly recall as well the member for  

Athabasca, my colleague for Athabasca, giving some more 
detailed information and requesting your government to 
reconsider reinstating that program. He was very thoroughly 
informed about the issue. The program was cancelled on June 
15th of last year. The subject matter was of dire concern to all 
those remote northern communities. And I will go back and 
mention them: Kinoosao, Wollaston Lake, Black Lake, 
Fond-du-Lac, and Stony Rapids. But since that time, Mr. 
Minister, we have had nothing but cuts in the programs and 
government services in the northern administration district. 
 
I’m sure that my colleague for Athabasca has raised a numerous 
amount of questions pertaining to the issue that I’m raising 
now, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure that he has done a thorough 
job. But I want to ask the minister again, before I go on: can the 
minister provide me with that official, with that formal request 
that was made by the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, the minister 
for the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, regarding the 
suggestion for input by the North or by the organizations in the 
North? 
 
Was it just a verbal request that he made to his PC candidate, 
Progressive Conservative candidate, Mr. Pat Cardinal, or was it 
a formal, official statement, a letter issued to all northern 
communities? Was it just partisan or — pardon me — that’s the 
wrong expression for it. But was that request made to only one 
Conservative member running in the next general election, or 
was that request made to all people in fairness? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly he has discussed this 
verbally with a number of groups. I said he’s discussed it with 
AMNIS, also with northern development advisory council. So 
there have been a number of groups that he’s been in discussion 
with. And to follow that up further, you should direct your 
questions to him when you have your opportunity to question 
him under the native secretariat. 
 
You know, I want you to know that there’s been a number of 
initiatives that have taken place in the North in the last while to 
improve medical services. I talked in detail about the 
development of the doctor services up the west side of the 
province, mainly Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, 
and Uranium City, up through Beauval, up through that area, 
which certainly there’s been an improvement. 
 
There’s been an appointment of a director of northern . . . of 
mental health for northern Saskatchewan, a greater emphasis 
and more money put into the home care program, and 
expansion of alcohol prevention and treatment services. 
 
So I think there has been a number of health initiatives that 
have taken place in northern Saskatchewan. Certainly on the 
food transportation subsidy program, as I’ve said, my colleague, 
the Minister of Social Services, is exploring this. If there’s 
people who are in dire need, he is looking at some type of a — 
development of some type of a program. 
 
And again I just say, I would encourage you, or anyone else 
who would like to have input into the development  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

639 
 

of a program that will be meeting the needs of people and not 
simply putting food into fishing camps and things of this nature, 
to come forth with such suggestions. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to go 
back and ask you one more time, Mr. Minister. I noted that you 
did point out some programs and some initiatives that you have 
undertaken in your department, but I dispute most of those. I 
have yet to dispute most of those items. 
 
(1500) 
 
But I want to go back to that member for P.A.-Duck Lake who 
happens to inform you, just a few minutes ago, that formal or 
official requests have been made to northern communities. Can 
the minister at this point in time, seeing as how we’re dealing 
with your Estimates — this item falls under your jurisdiction, 
Mr. Minister. You gave me that answer: that are written, or 
formal or somehow a request had been made of northern 
communities asking for alternative options to replace the food 
and transportation program. Can the minister provide me, or his 
colleague provide this Assembly and to the people of this 
province, particularly the northern administration district, what 
this formal request was in detail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly it’s pretty hard to detail 
conversations that another minister would have with groups in 
the North. As I say, he had made verbal representations to 
various groups and had discussed the topic. From our 
standpoint and the research I have done, that to reinstate the 
food subsidy program as it was previously would not be in the 
best interests; that probably some changes are necessary. 
 
It may well be that you think a program that allowed a lot of the 
subsidized food to go into fly-in fish camps is the type of 
program we should have. I question that. I said that my 
colleague, the Minister of Social Services, is looking at this 
situation at the present time. 
 
You can see that my colleague in charge of the native 
secretariat has been in discussion with groups so I think that . . . 
And again I come back and ask you if you would be so kind as 
to come forth with a proposal yourself, being a representative of 
that area. That has been a year since that invitation, and you 
have not come forward, but I’m asking you again if you would 
like to do so. But for you to question whether there has been the 
appointment of a director of mental health is just simply not 
credible; there has been. 
 
There are doctors on a much longer staying time in places such 
as Uranium and La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse that is being well 
served by the medical people, qualified medical people at this 
time. There has been $125,000 go into both La Loche and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse hospitals for nursing staff and supplies. There’s 
been an expansion of home care in Buffalo Narrows, and we 
have a major consultative process for improved services in 
long-term care up the west side of the province. So I think there 
has been a number of initiatives that have been undertaken to 
certainly improve northern health care services. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I just noted, Mr. Minister, that you indicated  

to me, to this Assembly, that the programs that you have 
provided for all went towards the west side. May I remind the 
minister that I represent the east side, the constituency named 
Cumberland. And may I remind the minister that not once did 
you mention one community on that east side. Not one 
community was mentioned relating to the Cumberland 
constituency. 
 
For the record, Mr. Minister, I want to read to you, in case you 
haven’t seen it personally, the resolution and the petition that 
was forwarded to you regarding the food and transportation 
program. And it goes on to say: 
 

Food subsidy program. Whereas the provincial 
government through Health services have indicated 
(through the public media, mind you) that it is the 
government’s intention to cancel the food transportation 
subsidy program for Wollaston Lake, Kinoosao, Stony 
Rapids, Black Lake, and Fond-du-Lac. And whereas this 
program is important and essential which helps families in 
the North with the high cost of living. Be it resolved that 
the government be requested to reinstate this much-needed 
program for the remote and isolated communities that are 
having hardships such as high unemployment, high 
welfare dependency rates, and extreme high costs of 
living. 

 
The resolution was passed and carried unanimously and 
endorsed by those communities, Mr. Minister. Now just a 
moment ago you indicated to us, to my colleague from 
Athabasca and myself, what suggestions we had. That is your 
suggestion, and that is the suggestion that we requested from 
you, from your department, Mr. Minister, from your 
government. We wanted some compassion, some 
understanding. That is the option that was requested by people 
in those areas. 
 
They indicated in their petition to you that there’s a high 
dependency on welfare. There is high unemployment, and there 
is a very, very serious issue here regarding the extreme high 
costs of living. And I’ll just quote, Mr. Minister, the people in 
those areas went so far as to study and compare costs between 
those remote northern communities and the cost of food in areas 
such as P.A. And let me tell you, in ’85 — and I’m sure it’s 
increased drastically by now — but in ’85 a dozen eggs cost in 
the South $1.95, but in remote areas like Wollaston they came 
to $2.60. And for one litre of milk the price was $1.45, and in 
the remote areas it was $1.85. Bread was $1.45, and in the 
remote areas it was $1.70. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you know nothing has been done to . . . And 
may I mention just the other day we were talking about aids to 
farmers, government aid to farmers, and the price of gas. For 
your information, for the information of members of this House, 
a gallon of gas in northern Saskatchewan, in Wollaston Lake, 
cost $3.50 a gallon. Fuel for their homes costs almost — I 
believe heating fuel cost $2.50. I’m quoting from information 
that was provided last year, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure that that 
has definitely increased tremendously. 
 
But again I go back to the arguments that have been provided 
by the people in those respective communities. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

640 
 

They have serious issues, Mr. Minister, and those issues have 
been neglected by your administration. They definitely have 
been neglected and deliberately, by this government. I said 
deliberately. 
 
The only time that your government, Mr. Minister, has given 
any notice to people in the northern administration district is 
when you want resources from the people of the North. That is 
the only time. You want to recognize the North in terms of its 
abundance of resources. You look at the North, and you don’t 
look at the people of the North. You look at the North in terms 
of profits over people. That is the conclusion I’ve come to, Mr. 
Minister. You look at the North in terms of its resources, in 
terms of its forestry, in terms of its mining activities, in terms of 
its tourism attraction; but let me tell you, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
I’m going to stop here for a moment and really, really . . . I’m 
very, very . . . This is about the third, fourth, or sixth trip that 
that minister from P.A.-Duck Lake, the member for P.A.-Duck 
Lake, has wandered across the aisles to forewarn you of some 
issues or provide you with some information relating to the 
North. That is how illiterate the minister is in terms of issues 
pertaining to the North. 
 
You say you provide services for the North; you provide 
adequate health services for the North, Mr. Minister. But when I 
get up to raise questions about health services in the North, 
about northern programs and services, the minister has to 
inform you. Every time I get up on my feet, that minister for 
P.A.-Duck Lake has to get up and inform you exactly of what’s 
happening in the North, because you don’t know, Mr. Minister, 
what is happening in the North. That is the only conclusion I 
can come up with. 
 
The Minister of Justice laughing — laughing at the issues of the 
North . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That is what you’re doing. 
We’re going to get at estimates under your portfolio, Mr. 
Minister of P.A.-Duck Lake, and we’ll get after you. We’ll be 
ready for you. 
 
That is how ill-informed . . . The conclusion I come up with, 
Mr. Minister — both ministers, the Minister of Health and the 
Minister for Justice — that is how ill-informed you guys are. 
You have to provide information to each other whenever one of 
the northern members gets up to raise a question pertaining to 
the North . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s just impossible. 
 
I just noted that one member on the government side of the 
House said I was too mean, but I must say that your government 
is more than just mean. It is vicious and very arrogant. Very 
arrogant. There is no compassion on that side of the House. 
When it comes to the people that really direly need help in this 
province, you ignore them. 
 
Since your government took administration, took the reins of 
power on May 26th of 1982, the welfare dependency rates in 
the North have increased and doubled tremendously and the 
Minister of Justice can’t dispute that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Definitely you can’t. The welfare dependency rates have 
increased; the suicide rates have increased; the alcoholism rates 
have increased; family breakdown has increased; 
unemployment has doubled or increased. 
 

In many of the remote northern areas the only people that do 
have jobs are the civil servants, the Hudson’s Bay managers, 
the teachers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And possibly 
Greenpeace, like the Minister of Justice says. And probably the 
Minister of Justice has a job; the Minister of Indian and Native 
Affairs has a job. And his friends, his political patronage friends 
and buddies, have jobs. That’s about the only people that have 
jobs. 
 
And I look, Mr. Minister, at your Health estimates, and it 
indicates to me that staffing and funding for the dental program 
— the dental plan, the mental health services, the drug plan, and 
the northern health services programs, are cut back. And yet 
you can state to me, Mr. Minister, that you have improved those 
services. But I dispute, and I said I would dispute, the answer 
that you gave me a few minutes ago. Because it’s in the books, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
More specifically I’d like to raise the question, Mr. Minister, 
talking in terms of the Cumberland constituency, can you 
provide me with specific information about the type of 
programs that you are providing in terms of health, dental 
services, etc., including the community health worker program? 
What have you provided for, say, Cumberland House, Sandy 
Bay, La Ronge, Wollaston Lake, Sturgeon Landing, Kinoosao, 
Southend Reindeer Lake, Weyakwin, and those remote northern 
areas like Pelican Narrows? What type of services have you 
provided? Have you increased or tried to improve the services 
for health and the various essential programs I mentioned 
earlier, regarding the dental health plan, the mental health 
services, the drug plan, and the northern health services 
program? 
 
In terms of staffing, in terms of detailed information, can you 
provide me with some detailed information about those 
programs? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can provide you 
with some very interesting information. And this would be 
increases in northern health services from 1981-82, when the 
previous government was in power, to now 1986-87: for mental 
health services and administration, mental health administration 
in northern Saskatchewan, the increase in that period of time, 
Mr. Chairman, has been 258 per cent increase — 258 per cent 
increase in expenditures of dollars over that period of time for 
mental health services. For Medi-Vac, a 34 per cent increase 
over that period of time; for home care, a 41 per cent increase in 
expenditures for northern health services and home care; and 
for community health workers and health education, a 36 per 
cent increase. Rather substantial increases, I would say, Mr. 
Chairman, to provide services in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The member asked, more specifically, about his own 
constituency. I can say that along the east side there’s been 
improvements in alcohol treatment initiatives, with new funding 
for an out-patient centre in Cumberland House and increased 
funding in the Sandy Bay out-patient centre. 
 
As well, Mr. Chairman, it’s very interesting to note a  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

641 
 

concern that was raised by the member opposite previously — I 
notice he has omitted it at this time — but last week the Premier 
of the province was in La Ronge, Saskatchewan, told La Ronge 
to go ahead with the planning of their new hospital, an acute 
care hospital, with the provision for long-stay patients — those 
needing special care homes. So that is the kind of services that 
are going into northern health services under this government. 
 
The member stands and makes great protestation about the 
northern health food subsidy program. I can say that it went to a 
few designated communities. I can also say that in those 
communities some of the people who were running fly-in fish 
camps were accessing that subsidized food. We have looked at 
programs that would benefit many more communities, such as, I 
say, hospitals in La Ronge; home care services across northern 
Saskatchewan — something that never existed before; 
improvement in alcohol treatment and in mental health services; 
and notwithstanding the very substantial increase in medical 
services by a number of doctors being in there on a continual 
basis serving such remote hospitals as Uranium City on a 
continual basis. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I noted, Mr. 
Minister, that you reiterated over and over again the rates of 
increases that you have provided for health services, for dental 
health, for drug, mental and health services, for a drug plan, for 
staffing, and for various northern health programs. But, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t know really, you know, what to think of those 
increases that you’re talking about, discussing to me about. 
 
I have a letter here from the La Ronge Hospital, and it’s from 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and following that letter I 
see nothing but headlines accusing you and your government of 
dodging the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. I have one here 
before me: “Taylor accused of dodging nurses.” Another one 
here where it says, “Northern Saskatchewan is still being 
treated poorly.” I have another one here that says, “Health care 
crisis attacked.” I have another here where it says, “Drug plans 
are threatened.” And another one here, Mr. Minister, where an 
actual picture is shown of nurses protesting your government 
and your budget and your health program outside the legislature 
— 300 strong — Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
In regards to this health care crisis item that’s headed, “Health 
care crisis attacked,” I noted that the member for P.A.-Duck 
Lake and the member for Prince Albert were invited to attend 
meetings held by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And they 
skipped out; they jumped out. Where were they? Where was the 
Minister of Justice? And where was the member for P.A.-Duck 
Lake? Where was the member for P.A.? And where was the 
Minister of Health when those nurses brought to you, on your 
doorstep and the doorstep of the legislature, and invited you to 
various communities in the province to deal and to discuss with 
you mutual issues of concern regarding health? Where were 
you? 
 
And you keep discussing, keep telling the members of this 
Assembly and this province that you have increased programs. 
And you mentioned just a moment ago, Mr.  

Minister, that the Premier was in La Ronge. I agree he was in 
La Ronge. I was invited to that same meeting that was being 
held in La Ronge on that particular day. The chamber of 
commerce people invited the Premier over. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you go? 
 
Mr. Yew: — I had to speak . . . I had a debate to do here in the 
legislature. You guys continuously change . . . You haven’t got 
a program for the fifth session of the 20th Legislature — you 
haven’t got a program. We haven’t had one second reading on 
an entire Bill presented in this House for 21 days. This is our 
21st day of session, of this session, and we have no Bills, and 
we haven’t even had one estimate completed. Not one estimate 
has been completed. 
 
I go back to the Premier’s visit in La Ronge. Certainly he met 
with the people back there. Do you know the type of people he 
met with? Business people. And it related again to our 
resources, to the northern resources. He was there discussing 
the northern opportunities there that exited. He was there to 
discuss the Weyerhaeuser project. He was there to discuss the 
major resources that could be extracted and taken away from 
these northern people. That’s what he was talking about, I’m 
sure. Where were the opportunities there for the northern people 
themselves? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go back to one specific statement that 
you made relating to the North. And you said in your statement 
that the Premier promised the people in that meeting that they 
could go ahead and plan, and plan for that La Ronge hospital 
and the nursing care home. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: can 
I have official statement, in writing, confirming the time, the 
date, the cost of that particular project, as to whether or not it’s 
going to commence? Is it another of your major five-year 
programs, part of that major announcement where you keep 
coming out — just before an election — you keep coming out 
with major government initiatives that you and your 
government want to undertake. You’ve had four years in office 
to follow up on the essential services and projects that are direly 
needed in this province, particularly essential services that are 
being neglected in terms of the people in remote northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You certainly don’t turn your backs on those people when you 
want to go and get to developing their resources. But when it 
comes to providing services and programs, you don’t know that 
people in the North exist. That’s my basic assumption, and 
that’s the only conclusion I can come up with. 
 
But getting back to the Premier’s visit, is there a stated, official, 
formal commitment made to the people of La Ronge and the 
region regarding the commencement of that new hospital that is 
direly needed by that community and region, regarding the 
nursing care home? Can the minister provide me with detailed 
specific commitments that were made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think anything as definite as the Premier 
of the province going to a community and saying to them: get 
started with your planning; get on with it. There’s money in this 
budget; there’s money in this year’s  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

642 
 

health budget to assist them in their planning, so I would 
encourage them to go ahead with this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a minute just to point out one 
point. The member has been rambling quite a way around all 
aspects of northern Saskatchewan, talking about employment 
and so on. I just would like to keep it straight in the record that 
he and his party are the group that would close down the 
uranium mines. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I remind the 
minister that we’re dealing with Health estimates and not 
uranium mines. But I surely don’t take exception because I, too, 
raised the issue of the resources up North, and mainly I was 
comparing the performance of your government. The 
performance of your government in the last four years have 
been direly poor as it relates to the North. 
 
I asked the minister once before, and I’ll ask him again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where is that written commitment for that 
much-needed project, the La Ronge hospital? Where is that 
written commitment? What date is it going to begin, and what is 
it going to cost? What type of a facility is it? Where are the 
plans? You know, where is the detailed information regarding 
that particular project? 
 
It’s a service; it’s a health facility that is direly needed. The one 
that’s there, the minister will agree with me that it is totally 
inadequate to provide the services that are needed by at least 23 
communities on that north-east side of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, my 
memory goes back to a discussion of this. And I recall a visit 
that I had in my office about two and a half years ago from a 
gentleman, a fine gentleman that used to represent the seat that 
the member does, Mr. MacAuley. Mr. MacAuley came in to see 
me — and he knew me when I was in opposition — came in 
and said, I’ve been trying for a hospital for La Ronge, he said, 
for as long as I’ve been elected. And he said, my cries have 
fallen on deaf ears. He said, maybe you will listen. 
 
Well I think it’s very indicative that we did listen because the 
Premier was in La Ronge, told the people there: go ahead, start 
your planning, put your plans in place, not only for a hospital 
but for a long-term care facility that will be complementing the 
hospital. I think that’s a first for development in northern 
Saskatchewan, and that has come about because of the 
initiatives of this government. And I can tell you that that will 
be built. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I vividly recall you mentioning the 
former member’s visit to you. The former member of the 
Cumberland constituency visited your office. And I will agree 
with you, that was an honourable man such as . . . I’ll go even 
beyond that to state to you, Mr. Minister, and to members of 
this Assembly, that he was much a man like the member for 
Wascana. He was very much respected, and he was very well in 
tune with the people in that community, in those northern 
communities. And he, I’m sure, felt the same way that I feel for 
the member for Wascana — as I felt for you, initially. 
 
But my conclusions have diminished somewhat in  

respect to yourself, Mr. Minister, because you’re carrying the 
policies and the philosophy of this party too far. You’re not 
making a stand like the member for Wascana. You’re not 
getting up there and doing what you think morally is right. 
You’re carrying the party policy and philosophy. You’re afraid 
to stand up and be a person that can be very much admired and 
respected. You have to say . . . you’re a yes-man to this PC kind 
of government. You’re not a member that stands up to the rest 
of those fellows back there. You know, I’m certainly 
disappointed. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I’ll go back to my original, question, Mr. Minister: is there 
a written commitment by the Premier as to when this project is 
going to go ahead? That is number one. And number two: what 
has happened to the community workers’ program that we had, 
community health worker program? Has it been scrapped, or 
has it been improved in terms of funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, there’s been no reduction in the 
community health worker program. It’s increased in funding 
from 248,000 to 256,000 this year — it has been an increase. 
And certainly I think a government that will indicate that 
they’re building a state of the art, first-class type of facility in 
La Ronge, certainly has a commitment to northern health care 
services. You may say: where’s the written agreement? I think 
it’s quite . . . History proves itself in this province, and if the 
Premier of the province says he’s going to do something, he 
does it. 
 
I think if you look back at the gas tax and the reduction of 
interest rates to help the farmers . . . We could go on and on all 
day. He said we will do it, and it is done. If he says we’re 
building a hospital in La Ronge and it is the type of hospital that 
will have facilities for long-term care — which I should say will 
be something new and unique in that area; something that, as I 
said, Norm MacAuley had asked for for eight or 10 years; never 
had his request answered. And I’m sure if you went and seen 
him, he would tell you that it’s going to be developed. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I still haven’t 
received a definite and positive acknowledgement that this 
project is going to go ahead. What I keep hearing is that we will 
deliver on our promises. Basically, that is what the minister is 
telling me. We will deliver projects such as we delivered to 
Peter Pocklington — oil breaks, royalty breaks, tax holidays to 
big oil companies and corporations. That is what you’re telling 
me. 
 
But when it comes down to essential services and programs 
needed by the people at the community level, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve failed to deliver. And history, as you stated a moment 
ago, proves itself to the point. 
 
I have a letter, Mr. Minister, from an elected member. I brought 
it with me, but it will take me a minute or two here to find it. A 
local government official, elected to represent people in his 
community, in his town, indicating to us and to the people of 
this province that your government has neglected the North and 
that it has failed to commit any definite social and economic  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

643 
 

opportunities in the northern administration district. 
 
So I don’t know if there is anything credible at all in terms of 
the response to estimates at this point in time, Mr. Minister, 
because like I said before, we’ve heard a lot of government 
announcements, a lot of government propaganda. Millions of 
dollars are being spent on TV, on radio, on newspaper ads, 
regarding your government’s commitment for the next five 
years. 
 
What do we have today, Mr. Minister? A $2.8 billion deficit. 
How can you deliver on your promises, your commitment, with 
a deficit as high as it is today? You have put the people of this 
province well over $2 billion in debt, and yet you keep making 
these big major announcements of what you’re going to deliver 
— of many projects that you are going to deliver. But the only 
promises, Mr. Minister, that I know that you have been accurate 
with, and have proven to be very reliable with in terms of 
commitment, is the type of breaks and incentives and initiatives 
you have been giving your big corporate friends — the 
Weyerhaeusers. 
 
You just sold out to Weyerhaeuser the northern forest . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member is straying from 
the estimates and I would ask . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Order, order. Order. 
 
I have stated my case here, and the member will please get back 
on the estimates. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just for the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for 
members of this Assembly and people of this province, the 
minister himself talked about uranium development and how 
we are in a . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The kind of straying that the 
member was doing led into what the minister replied . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. 
 
I have stated what my ruling is. The member will get on to the 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My apologies, Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you indicated to me, turning to the community health 
worker program, that the budget has increased from 248 to 
256,000. That’s an increase, Mr. Minister, of some $8,000. In 
person-years, in terms of job opportunity, Mr. Minister, is there 
any difference in that figure, or is that figure only indicating or 
covering the cost of inflation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Two topics that . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, 
if they want to shout and holler then that’s fine, if that’s the 
purpose of the House. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out to you and to the member 
opposite some improvements that have taken place in the dental 
plan. He asked about that a while ago before he went on to 
ranging all over northern Saskatchewan. Certainly in the dental 
plan . . . Previously it used to be there would be about a 27 per 
cent completion rate of the children that would be completed in 
having their dental check-ups done and the improvements to 
their teeth take place. I’m proud to say  

that now it’s at 65 per cent — 65 per cent are being completed 
now within a year, as to 27 per cent which was the rate 
previously. 
 
We’ve had a new dentist go into the North; added one more 
dentist. The member questioned about services to Pelican 
Narrows. We have a new dental clinic in Pelican Narrows. The 
member also asked about the La Ronge hospital. I have 
instructed my deputy to have members from his office and 
SHSP go to La Ronge to follow up on the Premier’s 
announcement, to help them start making the plans for this new 
facility. That will be taking place in the very near future. 
 
The member asked about the community health workers. We 
have 14 community health workers in northern Saskatchewan. 
The increase is for wages and benefits for them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to raise another 
specific question. In terms of wages paid to the director of 
northern health services, Mr. Minister, can you provide me with 
that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you want to ask another question while 
we’re getting that figure, go right ahead. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’ll go ahead, Mr. Minister, while you’re digging 
up the information relating to the director for northern health 
services. In terms of the community health worker program, 
Mr. Minister, has the program been encouraged by your 
government in terms of increased training, much-needed special 
trades, training requirements; that component of the program, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The director of northern health services is 
paid in accordance with the classification levels of the Public 
Service Commission. His salary is $4,841 a month. 
 
We have four in-service meetings a year for community health 
workers. In-service is where they come and learn on the job 
new skills that will help them to perform their duties better, and 
they indicate to me that all except two — so that would be 12 of 
them — have completed all aspects of the course. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms of the community health 
clinics in many of the communities in my constituency, like the 
one in Sandy Bay . . . We happened to meet on one occasion in 
Sandy Bay, Mr. Minister, whereby you stopped with your staff 
and had a very brief visit with the health clinic in that 
community. I’m referring to Sandy Bay last summer. In terms 
of that clinic and the clinics other than Sandy Bay, we had some 
problems pertaining to staffing in Sandy Bay, and you 
remember as well that we had problems pertaining to providing 
accommodations. Have those problems been resolved, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The staffing in Sandy Bay has been a 
complete contingent of staff for the last year and a half. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My next question, Mr. Minister. You have 
Wollaston Lake, which is quite remote, and Kinoosao and  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

644 
 

possibly Brabant and Sturgeon Landing. The type of programs 
or services that you provide in terms of the public health nurse 
and visits by other medical professionals, do you feel that that is 
adequate — that those trips and those visits and those much 
needed services are adequate for those communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Wollaston gets its health services with a 
contract that we have with the La Ronge physicians, and I 
understand that service is satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I didn’t get the Minister’s response to that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I understand it’s a first-rate service 
supplied by the medical people in La Ronge under a contract to 
service the health care needs of Wollaston Lake, which is 
basically a federal contract, as I understand. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
the other day we discussed, in the committee, liquor advertising 
and the bad connotations of that and the negative influence that 
it has on the population, particularly those who are most 
susceptible. 
 
I recall you saying to the House, and I thought that the figure 
was rather interesting, that there was a reduction between 1983 
and 1984 to 1984-1985 of a 3 per cent in alcohol consumption, 
and I just wondered if you could confirm that. Is that what it is 
for that period of time, or do I have the period of time wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the per capita consumption of 
absolute alcohol is down 3.1 per cent in comparing calendar 
year 1983-84 to calendar year ’84-85. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Has there been a similar reduction 
between ’84-85 and ’85-86, or has there been an increase? What 
is the status there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We wouldn’t have the statistics for 
’85-86 at this time, so I couldn’t report to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are there any trends that are evident? 
I’m somewhat familiar with the kind of statistics that the former 
alcoholism commission used to keep, and I used to look at them 
all the time. Are there any sort of trends that are developing? 
You would have that, I know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I give you the trends that have been 
taking place. The per capita consumption of pure alcohol has 
been declining since 1982, and if you remember, the other day I 
said, in 1979-80, in spirit consumption we were the sixth 
lowest; in ’83-84 we’re the eighth lowest. So certainly that’s 
going down. In absolute alcohol we were the fourth lowest in 
’79-80 and now we’re the fifth lowest. So I guess if you want to 
speculate from this, the trends are that it’s decreasing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So I hear you say then that in the view of 
yourself and the government there is a trend towards a lower 
consumption of alcohol, and I don’t think you need to respond 
to that one unless you disagree.  

I will accept your confirmation of that. 
 
Although there are trends, I know that there is also a breakdown 
of consumption by gender and by age category. Can you tell me 
whether the decrease in the consumption of alcohol, the 3.1 per 
cent, is uniform throughout all of the population sector and on 
both of the gender questions, or whether it is not so in all of the 
categories, teenagers, adolescents and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t have anything on consumption 
figures for age groups. We have treatment figures for age 
groups. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying that the method of 
keeping track of consumption has been changed in the last four 
years, because those figures used to be available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I don’t believe there’s been any 
change. Certainly we don’t have those figures. The minister in 
charge of the liquor board may have, but we do not have them 
in the alcohol commission. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s interesting because you seem to have 
the figure about the 3.1 per cent, the reduction in consumption. 
I would have thought that if you would have that information, 
you would also have the information on the decrease or increase 
in the different age categories. Why would you not have that 
information just as well as you have the other one? Are you 
saying, Mr. Minister, that you’re only prepared to provide 
selected information in the House, rather than all of the 
information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, I think you would have to 
check with the minister in charge of the liquor board, but I don’t 
know of any indication where they check your age when you go 
in to buy liquor. It may well be, but I don’t know that, and I 
don’t know how you would keep track of those statistics. I’m 
sure there’s surveys from time to time, surveys from time to 
time that take place, but we don’t have those figures with us. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. I will accept that you don’t have 
your figures with you but can I ask, therefore: is it now called 
the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission? The former alcohol 
commission, is it now called the Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission? Okay. Does the Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission do studies on the consumption habits of the 
population according to age categories? Does it do those kind of 
surveys and studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —Well SADAC, that’s Saskatchewan 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, keep track of treatment 
figures. Treatment figures — that’s what we keep track of. The 
people who keep track of sales is the Liquor Board, but I don’t 
believe the Liquor Board probably has it by chronological age, 
and I don’t think they ever did have, so I don’t know what 
you’re wanting to find out. But as I say, if you want to know 
anything about sales, and so on, that’s the minister in charge of 
the Liquor Board. We do keep track of statistics of treatment by 
age, and we could provide those to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I really find that quite fascinating. To 
suggest by you, Mr. Minister, that we have an Alcohol and  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

645 
 

Drug Abuse Commission which does not take a look at the 
developing patterns of alcohol consumption according to age 
categories is really hard to believe. It really is. I mean, how can 
a very important agency as this one is, a very important social 
agency, do an adequate job or make projections about what it 
may need to be doing in the future, without knowing what the 
trends are. 
 
Does not the Alcohol and Drug Abuse commission, or you, Mr. 
Minister, know whether the incidence of decreasing alcohol 
abuse or consumption is higher in adult populations; higher in 
people over 64; higher in the adolescent category; or whether 
it’s actually going up in some of those categories? How can any 
forward planning be done without that kind of information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, we monitor the 
treatment. We know we keep stats on those that are being 
treated. We put preventative types of programs into the high 
schools, and as I say, we are the only province in Canada that 
has instituted a program on youth and drugs and alcohol in 
Canada. 
 
So I think certainly we are taking this concern more serious 
than anyone else in the nation. We were wanting to see what the 
drug-use patterns and alcohol-use patterns are, and what we 
should be doing in ways of trying to prevent any further type of 
breakdown of young people’s lives because of addiction to 
drugs or alcohol. I think those are the things that the 
commission should be dealing with, and I think they’re doing it 
adequately. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you monitor 
the treatment; I’d be surprised if you didn’t. But my question is: 
how can you possibly develop the kinds of needed treatment 
without monitoring what the problem is? Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, let me 
indicate to you that we work in consultation with schools and 
other youth groups, people that deal with youth, to hear about 
their concerns. And I say, out of this came the suggestion to 
have a ministerial study — the first in the nation, I want to say, 
looking at the whole topic of drugs and alcohol and youth. That 
committee have reported to me. As I said previously, I’ll soon 
be making that report public. I think there will be some 
initiatives in there that will be very beneficial to safeguarding 
the dangers of these addictive drugs to youth in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s the action that we’ve been taking. And I want to say 
once again that we lead the nation in this regard. No other 
government in Canada has taken a study to look at the situation 
and to come up with strategies and implementations that would 
help alleviate the problem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, have any of the officials 
from the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission that you have 
with you here today been involved in this ministerial study that 
you speak of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There were people from SADAC that 
were assigned as secretary to the commission, and also we 
supplied some of the research people from SADAC to work 
with the commission. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Could you tell us some of them who are 
with you today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They were support staff to the committee. 
I read off the committee the other day to you, and I think you’ll 
remember there was a couple of students on it; there were some 
nurses; there was quite a large range. I mentioned that Mr. Bill 
Davis of Weyburn, the fellow active in Lions, you’ll recall — 
that was the committee. And there were some people that were 
there as support staff, but they’re not with me today. They’re 
not here today. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. Mr. Minister, can you tell me from 
the study, what does it say about the changing patterns of 
alcohol by the teen-age population? When you’ve had a chance 
to look at it . . . I know you’re not prepared to give me the study 
because you say you’re going to table it. So no end of 
questioning on my part — unless you’re prepared to volunteer it 
to me — no end of questioning on my part will probably get it. 
But what does the study say about the changing patterns of 
alcohol by teenagers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There are no figures in the report to 
indicate the consumption levels. Certainly there was a study 
done a few years ago in Saskatchewan regarding this. We’ve 
been concerned about that. We instituted this study to see what 
the situation was out there. I would assume that the 
consumption is similar to what it was. The pattern hasn’t 
changed too much, from what I’m led to believe. But certainly I 
would think this — and I think you must support this — that a 
good portion of the study comes up with suggestions of 
programs that can be implemented to alleviate the problems that 
young people are having with drugs or with alcohol. It suggests 
a five-year program of implementing of strategies that can be 
used. And, as I said, I’ll be releasing it fairly soon, and I will 
certainly supply you with a copy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well thank you for offering to supply me 
that when you table it. I hope it will be soon. But I really am 
quite fascinated by the display that we’re getting here today, 
Mr. Minister. And I think you really do your staff in the 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission a great disservice, 
because I happen to know and have a great deal of respect for 
the work that they do and some of the people who are there. I 
mean, it’s been a struggle to accomplish what they feel, I know, 
over the years needs to be accomplished. 
 
You stand up in the House today and you say that you have 
suggestions, and you have proposals, and you’re going to study 
this, and you’re studying that, and you’re going to table this at 
some other time. And then you stand up and say, but you really 
have not considered any data, or any kind of information, or any 
kind of supporting statistics to back up the suggestions and the 
recommendations that you are going to be considering. Now if 
that’s what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, then I suggest you send 
the committee back to do another job. 
 
Now I’m not going to suggest that, because I know the 
individuals you named in the study, and I know that they’re 
pretty conscientious people, and I know that  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

646 
 

they’ve done the job. The problem is that you’re not doing the 
job, and you’re refusing to provide the information when asked 
very simple and routine questions. 
 
My question to you is: why do you refuse to provide simple 
information such as, what are the changing patterns in 
consumption of alcohol in different age categories — in this 
case, the teen-age population? What is so dangerous to you, as a 
politician and as a government, to answer that simple but very 
important question, which I happen to be concerned about as an 
individual, as a parent, and as a teacher? 
 
I’ve seen the problem in the community. I know the problem 
among the young people who are faced with very little hope 
under this government about the lack of jobs that are available 
for them. And I think that you have an obligation, as I have, and 
so does everyone in this House, to be concerned about the 
problems that face them. Now why are you not prepared to 
answer the question about the changing patterns in alcohol 
consumption among the teen-age population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, very simply because we 
don’t have any empirical evidence that was collected by the 
committee. I don’t know how he would find this out. How do 
you find out how much and what age groups and so on, other 
than perhaps some type of survey? But I can tell you what the 
committee did. I’m more inclined . . . I’m trying to provide 
programs of treatment to those . . . Kids out there, for a variety 
of reasons, may be addicted to drugs — and there’s lots of 
them, there’s lots of them. And I want to see what we can do to 
help them. 
 
(1600) 
 
We look at the treatment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . we 
look at the treatment statistics, and we move from there. And I 
just want to say, he makes fun of the committee, thinking that 
perhaps they didn’t do a very good job. I want to point out to 
you that the committee reviewed the background material 
relating to 20 areas of concern. They received 144 submissions, 
visited 13 communities to meet with over 160 individuals who 
had submitted briefs or letters, spoke with over 300 adolescents 
at 30 schools and youth centres throughout the province, and 
met as a committee on eight different occasions. 
 
Now the member opposite wants to make light of that kind of a 
study, the first in Canada ever by a government, the first kind of 
study of that nature, where they’ve gone and talked to 300 
adolescents. They’ve had briefs from at least 144 submissions, 
160 individuals. Now if he wants to think and make light of 
that, he can stand in this Assembly and he can go right ahead 
and do that. 
 
I’m concerned, as the Minister of Health, for treatment of these 
people. We put together a committee to look at youth and drugs 
and alcohol — the first in Canada. And we will develop 
programs coming out of that committee. 
 
Now if you want to ridicule that, if you want to say that the 
people didn’t do a good job, you just stand in here and you go 
right ahead. I tell you I’m proud of that study, and I can tell you 
that there’ll be initiatives come out of there  

that will help the youth of this province. And that’s what I’m 
concerned about. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Isn’t it interesting, Mr. Chairman, how 
this minister, when he knows that he has once again been 
caught — when he knows he’s once again been caught in 
refusing to provide information, which is the case for the last 
two weeks — gets up and tries to turn the argument around into 
irrelevancies, as he has just done. The minister stands up in this 
Assembly and he says he was trying to help those who are faced 
with alcoholism and drinking abuse problems — and in this 
case, teenagers. 
 
What does he do? He and his government, in one of their first 
moves when elected, breaks down to the distillery companies 
and the large private network television companies when they 
come running to his door and saying, we want advertising of 
alcohol. And he says, you betcha I’m going to do it, in the 
words of the Premier. That’s the way he is helping the teen-age 
alcohol problem in our society. How in Heaven’s name can he 
stand here with a straight face and say he’s helping these young 
people who face this problem, and then turn around and says, 
we’re going to put ads on TV where we’re going to show them 
that you can live the good life if you only have that one drink. 
 
As my colleague said, from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: truck 
stops — don’t bother getting a booster; get everybody behind 
and push her up to the pub and go have a drink. That’s what the 
ads are saying, Mr. Chairman. And this minister has the gall to 
stand up in the House and he says he wants to help those 
teenagers who face an alcohol problem. And yes, there are some 
who face it, Mr. Minister. You know it, and I know it; a lot of 
parents know it; the community knows it. And you have failed 
in addressing the problem. 
 
How you can interpret what I have said as being critical of the 
committee, I fail to understand, and I won’t get into that debate. 
I think except only to say this: the only one who has failed the 
committee is you. Because having had an excellent alcoholism 
commission which now has a different name, which has indeed 
an increased mandate, I understand, and having had a 
committee that’s went out there and done its work which has 
been public work, you now refuse to give to the public of 
Saskatchewan and this legislature the information which all of 
those people have gathered. You’re going to make up programs 
to solve some of these problems that exist, but you don’t have 
the data and the statistics to tell you what kind of programs are 
necessary. 
 
I really don’t understand where you’re coming from. Quite 
frankly, I don’t think you do either, sir. 
 
You do a discredit to your officials in the Alcoholism and Drug 
Abuse Commission and your study and the people who did it by 
hiding that information, because you have it; I know you have 
it, and you know you have it. You know that the only reason 
you are not prepared to state those figures is because it will 
contradict everything you said here the other night about 
alcohol consumption and about alcohol abuse. That’s why you 
don’t want to state it, Mr. Minister. 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

647 
 

And I suppose I can make as long a speech as I want here, and 
it won’t change your mind because you’re here, not to provide 
the information, you’re here to stonewall. And that is far 
unbecoming of a minister of the Crown, particularly the 
minister involved in such an important issue as health care. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, have your officials, or have either the 
department or the commission in any way been involved with a 
study that’s been made by the federal government recently in 
which it talks about the consumption of alcohol in the 
population throughout Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I listened with 
interest to the sanctimonious, hypocritical fashion in which the 
member opposite stands in this House, thinking he is the 
defender of all great things and that their party was never 
involved at all in any type of alcohol advertisement. Let me just 
quote to you from Hansard — right from Hansard — 
December 3, 1982, page 1291, the Leader of the Opposition. He 
says: 
 
 We ought not to encourage the advertising of alcoholic 

beverages, and we ought not to encourage the 
consumption of alcoholic beverages in association with 
sports activities, and other activities where young people 
frequently gather. We ought not to encourage the 
consumption of alcoholic beverages at functions of which 
we are a part. 

 
That’s what he said. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for your information I have another bit of 
evidence here to show the hypocrisy of the people across the 
House. This is an NDP picnic, and it says: come to Admiral, 
Saskatchewan, on August 13th, enter a team in softball, ride 
real ponies . . . I don’t know what other kind of ponies NDPs 
ride, but these are real ponies. And then it says, cool off in the 
beer gardens — cool off in the beer gardens — sponsored by 
the Shaunavon New Democrats. Now there is the hypocrisy on 
that side of the House. 
 
Here is the Leader of the Opposition saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan, let me quote again, “We ought not to encourage 
the consumption of alcoholic beverages at functions of which 
we are a part.” Now I’m sure that the House Leader of the NDP 
in the white mud area in Shaunavon constituency is certainly a 
part of a function who says, come and ride a real pony and have 
a cool beer. There is what I call hypocrisy. 
 
And then we see their counterparts in Manitoba, the NDP in 
Manitoba, and I’d like to draw this to your attention, ladies and 
gentlemen, introducing same day home delivery service — 
Liquor Control Commission of Manitoba. In other words, 
where there’s an NDP government, dial a crock, and we’ll 
deliver it, same day, into your home. That’s their hypocrisy. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why is the chairman on his feet? Are 
you going to say something or . . . 
 

Mr. Chairman: — As soon as you finish speaking, I will say 
something. It seems to me that the member who is now 
speaking was warned earlier today that when the Speaker is on 
his feet he is not to be speaking from his seat. And he’s 
repeating the same mistake again. Obviously, the decibel level 
is going up in this House, and I would like it to calm down so 
that the debate can proceed in an orderly fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I know that when you touch a 
soft spot it shows the hypocrisy and the double standards and 
the double talk of the people opposite. Certainly you will see 
them start to holler and yell in their seats as they do every time 
in this House. I’ve seen them cluck like chickens in this session. 
I’ve seen them talk about jelly beans. I’ve seen them hold up 
socks. I know the unruliness that they present. Every time you 
touch the quick, they start to holler. It’s the only defence that 
they understand. 
 
But let me show another hypocrisy in here. The Leader of the 
Opposition made much the other night about campaign 
contributions. Well I have the registered party fiscal period 
return of the NDP party of Canada in 1976. Well they had 
contributions from Gilbey Canada Ltd., from the House of 
Seagram, from Labatt’s Brewery, from London Winery, from 
Meagher’s Distillery, from the Canadian Schenley distillers, 
from Hiram Walker — those are a few of them. 
 
In ’77 Andres Wines got into the act. In ’77. Corby Distillers 
joined in ’77. Also Seagram back in there. Jordan Wines — 
they got into it in ’77. Molson’s in ’77. So let’s get things 
straight. 
 
For the people opposite to stand up and act like hypocrites as 
they have been doing in this House, I just want to put a few 
facts out there, Mr. Chairman, to set the record straight of the 
way that the party opposite was in bed with the liquor 
companies of this country. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman. Here is a 
man who I think in accordance with his performance in this 
House, in the consideration of these Estimates, is the last person 
elected to this Assembly who can talk about being 
sanctimonious. Really! I mean, I’m sure even people who are 
advising him have to be embarrassed about what we’ve seen 
here displayed today . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He sticks out his tongue. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . by the part of this government. I 
mean, the best he can do when he feels pressed is to stick out 
his tongue at members of the opposition. Now this is 
sanctimony at its worst, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ask this minister for some questions; he leans to his staff; they 
give him the answer, and he refuses to relay it to the House. For 
some political reason he refuses to relay it to the House. 
Questions that are sincere and are important, not only to this 
House, but questions that are important to the Saskatchewan 
public and the people who are affected, and this minister, 
instead of answering the question when he knows he’s being 
caught in the act of stonewalling, gets up and makes his usual 
political speech. 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

648 
 

The only double standard, Mr. Chairman, that I see happening 
in this House is where the previous chairman would stand up 
and call to order one of my colleagues when he was on a 
different subject, but this minister is not called to order when he 
gets up on a tangent talking about Manitoba, instead of these 
estimates, and I’d like you to keep that into consideration as 
these estimates continue. The best the minister can do, Mr. 
Chairman, is make a political speech rather than answer the 
question. 
 
I want to tell him this: we didn’t change the law on liquor 
advertising when we were the government. There was no 
electronic liquor advertising prior to 1982. It’s that minister and 
his colleagues, the Premier, and all of the Conservative 
members who got bought out. The liquor companies and the 
television networks — the private networks — came to this 
government when it got elected and it bought them out. 
 
That’s the kind of operation that these people run, and that’s 
why the people of Saskatchewan are saying, we cannot afford 
another four years of this kind of government. That’s why the 
Premier got cold feet and refused to call the election because he 
went out there and his people went out there and the people 
said, you haven’t got a chance. And if there ever was any more 
evidence about why this government is in such a low state, the 
Minister of Health has just displayed it here today with his 
refusal to answer the questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, please spare us the political rhetoric. We’ve 
heard it before, and all you’re doing is repeating yourself, 
because after you make your speech you forget to answer the 
question, so here it is again. The question is: were your 
officials, in either the commission or the Department of Health, 
or were you consulted in the preparation of a recent federal 
government health survey, which was released yesterday in 
Regina to the public school board, in which it made comment 
on consumption of alcohol by the teen-age population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we weren’t consulted in the 
preparation of that report at all, but I think it would be 
interesting to note, again, the actions of the previous 
government when they were in power from 1971 to ’82, you 
know. They have these walk-in liquor stores all over. They 
were the ones that opened those. My member from Weyburn 
was telling me they have one down there and various areas 
around the province. 
 
The number of dining-rooms increased from 111 to 416 
licensed premises for outlets of liquor; cocktail rooms from 84 
to 218; club licenses from 50 to 91; and canteen licenses from 
63 to 73, so I think we want to just set the record straight and 
indicate the number of access points that the previous 
government pushed for liquor to have freer access and outlets 
during their tenure of office. 
 
Getting back to the member’s question: did we have input into 
the study by the federal government? No, we did not. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will accept the minister’s word that he 
and his people have had no influence of the study. But  

let me show you why the minister has refused to answer the 
questions about what categories there has been a reduction in 
the consumption of alcohol and which categories there has been 
not a reduction, or possibly an increase. 
 
This federal government health survey, Mr. Minister, and I 
want you to listen carefully, shows that Saskatchewan teenagers 
drink more alcohol than anywhere else in Canada. And your 
advertising has not helped that situation, sir. That’s what the 
study shows. It also indicates that 40 per cent of grade 10 
students, to give you one example, have a drink at least two 
days out of every week. 
 
Now I submit to you that your approach, that your approach to 
this problem with permitting of advertising of alcohol on 
television, is not helping this situation — indeed, Mr. Minister, 
has aggravated it. That is why you are not answering the 
questions about the statistics which you have, and you know 
you have. And your officials have given them to you, but you 
won’t talk about them because you know that those are the 
facts. And you do not have the backbone and the political will 
to do something about it because those who pay your campaign 
fees have said, we want advertising. And you’re doing what the 
piper tells you to do. He calls the tune, and you’re dancing to it, 
at the expense of society, at the expense of young people, at the 
expense of people who suffer from this problem. You are 
paying the piper who calls the tune. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And that’s a shameful way for any 
responsible government to act. That’s why, Mr. Minister, you 
refuse to answer the questions on this topic, as you have on 
many other topics. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I was led to believe that the 
report was done by three university professors from Queen’s 
University. Again, there may be some questions as to the 
accuracy of it. But certainly, the stats for Saskatchewan are that 
in children that were interviewed — and I don’t know how 
many were interviewed — but it said of those who drank once a 
month, we were the same as the Canadian average for both age 
groups that were sampled. For those that drank two to four 
times a month, we were higher than the Canadian average. But 
for those that drank at least two or three times weekly, we were 
the same as the Canadian average. 
 
Again I don’t know how many students were sampled. These 
are figures from a research at Queen’s University and there may 
be some question as to the accuracy of the research. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s 
interesting that you would have all the information at your 
disposal that happened 8, 10, 12 years ago, but you think that 
. . . The minute you get some information that happened in your 
time, then you start questioning the accuracy of it. Maybe there 
wasn’t a good enough sample taken when it talks about the kids 
that are drinking more in Saskatchewan than are in the rest of 
Canada. 
 
I want to ask you — and I picked up an ad out of the  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

649 
 

weekend paper and the question is asked . . . And it’s got a TV, 
a TV set shoving a mug of bubblies or suds at a couple of kids 
here. And it says: who is for alcohol advertising on TV and who 
is against alcohol advertising on TV? Who will listen to the 
people? Ask your local candidates. And this ad was paid for and 
sponsored by the Saskatchewan committee for family alcohol 
education. 
 
And I want to just share with members of the legislature, who 
some of the people are that are supporting this kind of 
advertising and are saying they are against alcohol advertising 
on TV. And the list includes the Saskatchewan alcohol 
commission, the World Health Organization, Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, the Catholic Women’s 
League, the Canadian Medical Association, Mr. Minister; the 
Mennonite Central Committee, the Royal College of Physicians 
of Britain, Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Regina Council 
of Women, Saskatchewan Conference of the United Church of 
Canada, the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatoon Council of 
Women. And the bottom line is 12,000 families — the largest 
number to write in to protest any government policy in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
All these people are telling you loud and clear: take a stand on 
liquor advertising. Take a stand against liquor advertising. You 
as our Minister of Health have a responsibility, Mr. Minister, to 
take a stand against liquor advertising. You as the one 
responsible and you as the one that knows there are more young 
people consuming alcohol now than ever were in 
Saskatchewan’s history — why don’t you take a stand against 
advertising liquor on TV? Why don’t you take a stand against 
it, Mr. Minister? Everybody else in Saskatchewan is except 
those of you that are influenced, like my colleague said, those 
of you that are influenced . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sure 
you can list a group that over the years have contributed to 
political parties. But I’ll tell you one thing — we weren’t 
bought off. We never accepted a bribe and listened, and put it 
on TV and on the electronic media, but you did. You did, Mr. 
Minister, and you’re responsible. 
 
How come there can be this kind of a list letting their name be 
published and helping advertise against this bubblies on TV, 
and yet you take a stand and lose your eyes and blindly reject 
the facts and say that the survey wasn’t accurate; the survey 
mustn’t have been accurate because it shows that Saskatchewan 
kids are consuming more alcohol than the rest of Canadians are. 
So the survey couldn’t have been accurate. But any other 
survey’s accurate, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that your days are numbered if 
you’re not prepared to listen to the majority of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite is always off on a wrong tangent. This study indicates 
frequency of use, has nothing to indicate about the amount of 
consumption. It doesn’t indicate that at all. It indicates 
frequency of use and if he wants to stand here and criticize 
Saskatchewan kids, let him so do because I can tell you there 
are many other positives that the study shows about young 
people in Saskatchewan — that they smoke less, that they 
exercise more, that their diet is better  

— and to say that they drink more is simply not correct. It 
indicates, as I said, that for once a month it is the same as the 
Canadian average; two to four times a month it is slightly 
higher; but at least two to three times a week it is the same as 
the Canadian average. 
 
For him to stand here and try and draw a long bow that the kids 
in this province are drinking a lot more than anywhere else is 
simply untrue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not what I said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s what you said. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s not what I said at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That certainly is. I heard you say that. 
You said that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And Mr. 
Chairman, I think those are some facts that we want to just set 
straight. I think the report . . . If you’d look at the report in 
entirety there is some very positive things about young people 
in Saskatchewan. If it is his intent to stand up here and cast 
shadows and doubts about the young people of Saskatchewan, 
so be it. He has every right to do that. I don’t do that. I’m 
concerned about the treatment of kids in this country who are 
suffering from the misuse of drugs, that are sniffing solvents, 
that have combinations of alcohol and drug abuse patterns. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have people coming to my office who are 
having to send their children to Mandan to be treated for very 
serious drug addiction. Those kind of questions concern me. 
That’s why I put together the ministerial study, the study for 
me, to look at the problems out there in Saskatchewan, to come 
up with some suggestions and recommendations by which we 
as a society can help address those problems. That’s what the 
committee has done. 
 
Once again, let me repeat, it is the first time that such a study 
has been undertaken in Canada and I look forward to the 
implementation of some of the suggestions that that study will 
have directed. I’m sure it will bring about an improvement in 
service to the young people of this province, who I will stand up 
for any time, any place. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you sure stand up for them. 
You really stand up for them. Mr. Cohen, who is now deceased, 
did a study for the alcohol commission. Other studies are 
around. This isn’t a first study, Mr. Minister. 
 
Why do you suppose, as Minister of Health and responsible for 
the health of our young people, why do you suppose the 
Canadian Medical Association is against TV advertising, Mr. 
Minister? Why do you suppose they are? Why do you suppose 
the Royal College of Physicians of Britain are against TV 
advertising? Why do you suppose the School Trustees 
Association are against TV advertising? 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister — I want to tell you why they 
are, because studies that have been conducted across Canada 
and United States in the past, and studies that I have shared, my 
colleagues have shared in this House prior to this, indicate 
loudly and clearly, Mr.  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

650 
 

Minister, that young people are more readily affected by TV 
advertising than any other group in our society. And that’s why 
more young people are using the alcohol today than were prior 
to you advertising it on TV. 
 
And I want to say again, Mr. Minister, all these people in the 
medical field, all these people that are religiously involved, the 
people that care about young people, the World Health 
Organization, everybody is arguing and saying that they are 
against television advertising of liquor and alcohol. Why can’t 
you get onside and admit that young people are more readily 
affected and more easily affected in their younger minds, that 
aren’t set in their ways like old people like me and you? You’re 
really set in your ways, Mr. Minister. You won’t agree to listen. 
You won’t agree to accept some challenge that you could do 
some good. If you care about young people that are addicted to 
alcohol, if you really care, show that you care and stand up in 
this House and admit your error, admit the wrong that’s done, 
and don’t try justifying something as grossly evil — evil, Mr. 
Minister, immoral — as advertising and pushing liquor on our 
young people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, the member opposite says we don’t 
have representation and don’t listen to people. I’ll just go 
through the people that were on that committee. Bill Davis, as I 
said, is a Lion, a member of the Lions Club. They have a Quest 
program that the Lions are putting in schools throughout this 
province, that I understand from educators is very well 
received. He’s from Weyburn. Neda Al-Katib is a student from 
Davidson, a high school student; Dolores Ast is from 
Saskatchewan Health; Frank Dornstauder is from Saskatchewan 
Social Services; Tim Greenough is from Saskatchewan Health; 
Steuart Herman is from the Saskatchewan Native Alcohol 
Council Corporation; Robert Kennedy is from the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police; Gerry Kleisinger is from 
Saskatchewan Education; Glenda Klombies is the Parent 
Resource Institute for Drug Education, better known as PRIDE; 
Corey Liebrecht is a student; Ethel Quiring is from the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; Carol Skelton is from the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission; and Doug 
Switzer is from the Rainbow Youth Centre. So I think we have 
a cross-section of very credible people on that committee. 
 
I think I have a letter here that I would like to read into the 
record, that I think indicates the support that the member 
opposite — who is talking about things being evil and so on — 
has. And this comes from a lady in Loreburn who wrote to the 
member opposite and said the following: 
 

Dear Sir: I am prompted to write to you regarding the 
letter you have sent out to churches in connection with 
beer and wine ads which are now being shown on 
Saskatchewan TV stations. I am shocked to think you 
would stoop so low as to spread political propaganda 
through church pulpits. You must be desperate. We in the 
church have a much more important task, a positive task of 
spreading the good news of the gospel. 
 
If you were concerned about cleaning up the TV 
programming, why don’t you attack the promiscuous 
shows, the violence, the profanity, and the way liquor is 
shown in such a cunning  

way, without advertisement, but made to look as though 
everyone partakes? These things have a much greater 
influence on me and my children than does an extra ad 
thrown in now and then. 
 
We can’t entirely protect our families unless we ban 
television and movies altogether. Children all over the 
province have access to cable, which advertises 
everything. It is up to us as individuals to take a definite 
stand as to what we think is detrimental, and make sure we 
tell our children, “We are in the world, but we don’t have 
to be part of it” — that is, take part in its viles. 
 
Please don’t waste any more time with the negative 
approaches to a government that is working hard to make 
this province a better place. 

 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, today 
during estimates we talked about the La Ronge hospital, and the 
need for this expansion or this new facility. It’s the New 
Democrats on this side of the House that are prepared to put in a 
new facility, a much needed facility, to improve the health 
services of that community and that region. That is the position 
of members on this side of the House. 
 
You have continuously talked about plans. I recall previous 
estimates, during questioning of estimates, Mr. Minister, where 
you talked about plans. And in one instance, Mr. Minister, you 
talked about plans that have to coincide with the federal 
government, seeing as how a good number of the communities 
in that region are people of treaty status. You talked particularly 
of the band in Lac La Ronge — the Lac La Ronge Indian band, 
and you . . . I believe we mentioned the Chief Myles Venne at 
the time, who is now again the chief that has been returned in 
the most recent election of the Lac La Ronge Indian band. 
 
In previous estimates, Mr. Minister, we talked about those 
plans, and to date I have not seen anything in detail, in writing, 
authorizing the program to go ahead. Mr. Minister, at this point 
in time I would like to ask you very specifically: what is the 
status of those plans? What is the negotiating process for those 
plans to tie in and to provide the much needed services for that 
community and that region, that region covers that entire 
north-east area. 
 
At present we have the hospital in La Ronge, and north-east of 
that we have some clinics. We have the clinic in Sandy Bay, the 
clinic in Pelican Narrows, the clinic in Cumberland House. But 
as far as the other communities are concerned, there is nothing, 
Mr. Minister. There is no health facilities available. The only 
nearest, closest health facility available to them in terms of a 
hospital with some professional medical staff, is La Ronge. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, what in terms of status of that plan 
. . . Where is that plan? What program . . . what group of 
peoples . . . what progress have you made in terms of dealing 
with that particular program, with that particular facility, in 
terms of the bands involved, in terms of the non-status people, 
etc.? 
 
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

651 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly the plans are developing. I’ve 
been in contact with the La Ronge people from time to time. 
They’ve indicated their desire to have a new hospital, also a 
long-term care facility. The Premier visited their community a 
week ago and indicated to them that they have the green light to 
start planning at this time. It was announced in the last budget 
they would be getting their hospital, but we’ve put money into 
this budget that they can start planning. And certainly the 
signing of BCRs and the commitment from the federal 
government, and all of those things have to be worked out. 
 
It’s just the same process as City Hospital are going through 
right now, planning for a new hospital that they’re getting. 
University Hospital, the General Hospital, any hospital that is 
built takes a considerable amount of planning, and they’re an 
intricate type of facility. And I want to see the best type of 
facility possible go into La Ronge that will satisfy the needs of 
the people in that area of the province. 
 
So as I’ve said previously, in the very near future, officials from 
my department are going to meet with the La Ronge board to sit 
down and start really working at this so that we can get that 
facility up and going, and that it will be a very good facility that 
will meet the needs of the residents of the area. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Now you say, Mr. Minister, and I quote you, that 
the La Ronge board — I presume you’re talking about the La 
Ronge Hospital board — are going to be meeting shortly. You 
mentioned, Mr. Minister — I don’t think you heard me — you 
mentioned in your own words that the hospital board in La 
Ronge will be meeting shortly. And I assume that they will be 
meeting with officials of your department and officials of the 
Lac La Ronge Indian band, the Peter Ballantyne Indian band, 
and so forth, the Montreal Lake band, etc. 
 
Mr. Minister, to date, that is all we’ve been talking about is 
plans for discussions. That is all that has been discussed in the 
last four to five provincial budgets that your government has 
proposed and introduced in this Assembly. That is all we have 
been talking about. Nothing but plans, negotiating processes, 
but to date we have not seen an itemized, detailed plan of 
action, a commitment — a specific commitment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now you mentioned again, as you did in previous estimates, a 
BCR, a band council resolution. I want to know, Mr. Minister, 
have you at this point in time received a band council resolution 
that has been processed and negotiated accordingly with the 
needs of the Lac La Ronge Indian band, the Peter Ballantyne 
Indian band, the Montreal Lake band and the other bands 
further north in conjunction with the Lac La Ronge hospital 
board and officials of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we haven’t received a BCR, but I 
indicate to the member that the planning stage . . . The Premier 
has said that the hospital is going ahead and that they’re to start 
planning immediately. I have indicated to this House that in the 
very, very near future my officials will be meeting with the 
board of the La Ronge hospital to  

plan this facility which will have long-term care beds attached 
to it — a first for northern Saskatchewan. Certainly part of that 
planning process will be to bring in the bands that the member 
has mentioned and get the BCRs signed so that we can have 
that contribution towards the hospital. That’s part of the 
planning procedure. That planning procedure is going to begin 
in the very, very near future. 
 
Mr. Yew: — It is very clear, Mr. Minister, that we haven’t 
progressed very, very much in respect to the provision of much 
needed medical and health services in northern Saskatchewan 
because anyone can see that to this very point in time, after the 
presentation of the fifth budget by your government, that we are 
still talking about plans. Plans to talk with the bands; to talk 
with the La Ronge hospital board. You’ve discussed it; you’ve 
made big government announcements. 
 
Recently your Premier went to La Ronge and made a promise 
that the facility is in the making. It’s in the making, it’s in the 
program — this big five-year program that you keep reiterating 
about. But to date everyone can see — perhaps not in these 
Chambers — but everyone in northern Saskatchewan, I can 
assure you, can see that there has been no progress made. 
 
And at the same time, while this is happening, Mr. Minister, a 
tremendous amount of revenue is coming out of northern 
Saskatchewan. I look at the government document for 1983-84. 
Well over half a billion dollars came out of the resources that 
have been developed and extracted and taken away from the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. Every time there is a service 
or a program approved for the North, then you guys holler and 
jeer that, goldarn it, those are hand-outs, those are hand-outs to 
the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I can assure you, Mr. Minister, and the members of this 
Assembly, that we are contributing our fair share to the 
provincial treasury. We are contributing more than our fair 
share. I look at the estimates and the documentation that 
provides funds to the provincial treasury for 1983-84. They 
totalled well over $503 million. That’s well over half a billion 
dollars. And just in terms of licences and permits for trappers 
and fishermen alone, $28 million, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now you have generated and put into the . . . The Northerners 
have contributed, and your government has taken well over half 
a billion dollars in northern resource revenues. Just how much, 
Mr. Minister, have you put back into northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly we honour our 
commitments. Of the Health capital budget of 75 million, 60 
million has already been committed to projects. And, you know, 
the member stands and says that there hasn’t been a number of 
things done for northern health services. Well I indicate that the 
start of planning for a La Ronge hospital is certainly a 
contribution to northern health services. I look at the 
appointment of a mental health director as a commitment to 
northern health services. I look at stable medical practice up the 
west side as a major commitment to northern health services. I 
look at the addition of a new dentist in the North as a  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

652 
 

commitment to northern health services. I look at a new dental 
clinic in Pelican Narrows as a commitment to northern health 
services. I look at the improved home care program in Buffalo 
Narrows as a commitment to northern health services. I look at 
$125,000 for nursing staff and supplies to Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
La Loche hospitals as a commitment to northern health 
services. I look at the major consultation process which will be 
looking at long-term care in the North as a commitment to 
northern health services. And certainly the new facility in La 
Ronge, which will have long-term care beds — the first in the 
North — as a commitment to northern health services. 
 
So for you to stand here and say there’s been no commitment 
by this government to northern health services, that there 
haven’t been new initiatives, that when we see there’s 14 
community health workers and all but two of them have 
completed a very good training course, when we see the number 
of children in the North having their dental inspections and 
improvements done much more readily and more of them done 
per year than there were previously — it’s just simply not true 
for the member opposite to stand up and say there hasn’t been 
major improvements in northern health services over the last 
four years. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again have to stand up 
and dispute that claim that you feel that you have put significant 
effort into the provision of medical and health services in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, because you quoted just 
now, a few minutes ago, that your government has put $60 
million in various programs. Now that 60 million that you 
referred to — I don’t know where it is; whether it’s all 
contributed towards the medical and health services and 
programs for the North, but I did catch one phrase of your 
presentation, that you contributed 125,000 towards the nursing 
facility and services, services and facilities required by 
Ile-a-la-Cross and La Loche, I believe. 
 
(1645) 
 
But, Mr. Minister, that is a far cry from the budget that was 
proposed by this legislature in 1982 for the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. At that particular time, I remember — I recall 
vividly and I have the records to document it — $91 million 
was proposed, earmarked, for people in northern Saskatchewan, 
to improve the much-needed services pertaining to the social 
and economic requirements and needs of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. That figure that you just quoted, Mr. Minister, is 
far short from the figure that was proposed in 1982. That is for 
the records. 
 
The question I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, very specifically, 
is: how much funding have you put aside towards the planning 
of this new hospital and nursing care home in La Ronge? Just 
how much funding have you provided on the estimates that we 
have in front of us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s very difficult to indicate what the 
total cost will be until you hire the consultant and so on — I 
think you would understand that — until you get some firm 
figures from them. But my estimate would be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 50 to $60,000. 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you clear . . . you 
know, put it in more precise terms, Mr. Minister. I look at your 
Health estimates here, on pages 48 to 51. That covers your 
entire program, I presume. Nowhere in the subvotes do I see 
that specific item. You quoted 60 to $65,000, and you don’t 
have a figure for sure until you hire the consultant. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you know, can you commit yourself to X 
number of dollars, commit yourself to more specific details as 
to when the process will be in place to provide for this facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s considerable noise from your 
colleagues. It makes it hard to hear what your question is. But 
let me indicate to you that, as I pointed out, it’s fairly tough to 
know exactly how much money it will be. I gave you an 
estimate between 50 and $60,000. I think your line of 
questioning was: where do find that money in the Estimates? 
And I would refer you to the property management Crown. It’s 
in the back page of the Estimates. You’ll see in there $75 
million for capital projects. So the money that would be there 
for your planning of the La Ronge facility would come out of 
that capital commitment of $75 million. 
 
I think you misunderstood me before when I was talking about 
commitments, and I mentioned the $75 million figure and that 
60 million of that for this year has been committed already, just 
to indicate to you that . . . You know, you were questioning, if 
we make a commitment, do we come forward with the money? 
And I was using that as an example to show you what actually 
happens. But if you’re looking for your $60,000, you look into 
the last page of the Estimates, under the property management 
Crown, you’ll see a statement that says: Health, $75 million. 
That’s where the money would be, in that subvote. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I want to 
ask you: out of that portion of the Estimates you quoted $75 
million, but you’re not certain of the cost. You say that that 
money is committed. You say that 50,000, possibly 65,000, will 
be earmarked or allotted for that particular plan. 
 
I want to ask the minister at this point in time: how much of that 
money would definitely be committed towards a La Ronge 
hospital board, and how much of it will be directed to the local 
Lac La Ronge Indian band, the Peter Ballantyne Indian band, 
etc., to coincide or to co-ordinate with the consultant that would 
possibly be initiating this study? Just what process of funding 
are you committed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think there’s some misunderstanding. 
That money is for planning. I don’t know what they will be able 
to hire a consultant for. But that money won’t be going to the 
bands at all. That money will be for planning of a facility to hire 
a consultant who will sit down and look at all the factors in La 
Ronge that have to be taken into consideration. That’s how you 
build a hospital. You look at who needs the hospital, what kind 
of services they need for the long-term care, how many people, 
what you need. You get a consultant for this. He  
  



 
April 16, 1986 

 

653 
 

charges you a fee to do this. All right? 
 
So there’s that amount of money in this year’s budget to help do 
this in La Ronge. But as far as money to the bands or anything 
of that nature, that isn’t part of it. You know how the BCRs are. 
They have to — the band requisitions have to come through that 
they expend their dollars from the federal government towards 
that hospital. That would be a part of the planning that comes 
in. 
 
But I wouldn’t want to mislead you by thinking that there’s any 
of that $50,000 will go to the bands. It won’t. It will go to the 
hospital board for the planning of their facility. And I’m sure 
they will have to hire a consultant. And what he will cost at this 
time, I don’t know. I don’t know. I’m estimating that 50 or 
$60,000 should allow the La Ronge hospital board to do all that 
it is required of them to do in this year in planning for that 
facility. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I wonder . . . When will you make 
the announcement public then? You know, this is a major 
initiative we’re talking about. This is a major program. This is a 
dire-needed facility that will service and provide for essential 
services for the community of La Ronge and that whole region. 
I, to date, have not seen anything specific. You have committed 
in this House 50, possibly 65, possibly $75,000. I don’t know. 
You haven’t stated one specific figure. You’ve quoted figures. 
You’ve jumped on your figures. 
 
And I want to ask the minister then, you know . . . Have you 
initiated a written consent to the La Ronge hospital board that 
you will proceed with this plan, with this study, in conjunction 
with the local officials. Have you a written commitment, and if 
not, when will you issue the written commitment to the La 
Ronge hospital board? But a second item to my question with 
regards to that facility, Mr. Minister, is, how long do you 
anticipate this process or this study to be in process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again let me indicate to the member 
that I think the very fact that the Premier of the province went 
into La Ronge and said, start your planning, has to impact that 
this project is to go. The very fact that I have indicated to you in 
this House that I have 50 to $60,000 — and let me reiterate my 
figures — 50 to 60. You were talking something about 75. I’m 
not talking about 75. I’m talking somewhere between 50 and 
$60,000 that will be provided to the La Ronge hospital to 
facilitate the planning. 
 
Now let me get one thing straight. I believe that the La Ronge 
hospital board should plan their hospital and they should hire 
their consultant and we will work in co-operation with them. 
What you seem to be telling me is that you want me, as the 
Minister of Health, to say, this is how you should do it. You’re 
wanting me to say something, in a letter, that you must do it this 
way; that’s what I hear you saying. 
 
We don’t believe in this. We want the local board to get on with 
planning it, to work with the bands, and to hire a consultant. We 
will help them. I will send my fellows there — as I’ve told you 
three times — in the very, very near future to work with the 
hospital board and let them use the expertise that we have in the 
department to help  

them come up with a facility that will serve the needs of La 
Ronge, now and in the future. That’s what we’re going to do. 
But if you’re trying to indicate that it’s better that we, down in 
Regina, say to La Ronge: look, this is what you must do — I 
cannot agree with that philosophy. I prefer to let La Ronge 
develop their priorities, and we will work in conjunction with 
them. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, you certainly made the wrong 
interpretation of my questioning with regards to estimates and 
that particular facility for La Ronge. I certainly don’t advocate 
you doing the entire work, Mr. Minister, certainly not your 
government, not your administration. If you want something 
properly meeting the needs of people in any particular 
community or region, it has to be co-ordinated and done by the 
people of that particular area. 
 
And I’m saying, Mr. Minister, that the people I’m referring to 
are the people in La Ronge, the La Ronge hospital board. I am 
saying, you know, that that board must be committed by your 
government — a commitment must be made in writing by your 
government — a written consent that X number of dollars are to 
be funnelled to the La Ronge hospital board and to the other 
people associated for this study. I’m not encouraging you to do 
it, Mr. Minister. It has to be done in conjunction, certainly in 
conjunction with your officials. 
 
My next question to you — now that we’ve got that cleared up, 
I hope — is: how did you arrive at $60,000, Mr. Minister, how 
did you arrive at that figure, and have you got that commitment 
in writing? Certainly the Premier of this province made a 
commitment on his public relations tour with the chamber of 
commerce in La Ronge. Certainly he made a commitment. 
 
But what are commitments just before an election? A 
commitment is made out of desperation, many times, Mr. 
Minister. You guys are making all kinds of heavy, heavy 
commitments — the oil upgrader, the Husky oil upgrader, 
Gainers, the Weyerhaeuser deal up in P.A. You’ve made all 
kinds of commitments. 
 
You know, the people of this province are confused. It’s been 
four years in the making, Mr. Minister, and to this point in time 
I have yet to see concrete evidence that that facility will go 
ahead, that that hospital will go ahead, that that nursing care 
home needed for La Ronge, Stanley Mission, Weyakwin . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. The member from 
Cumberland was trying to ask a question. I believe that the 
minister was having difficulty hearing him from all the noise in 
here. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I think this would be an 
appropriate juncture to rise, report progress, and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


