













































April 8, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 8, 1986 

 

433 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Population Trends 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to direct 

my question to the Deputy Premier, and it has to do with the 

Saskatchewan population drain. We had a series of questions 

yesterday but, as I indicated to you yesterday, you seemed to 

think that it was not a big matter in respect to the drain of 

population from Saskatchewan. Well, Statistics Canada reports 

that in 1985 Saskatchewan had a population loss of more than 

6,000 people — 6,040 people. And your own internal 

government figures show that the population drain for the first 

two months of this year is even more dramatic. 

 

So I ask you again, Mr. Minister, have you any specific plans to 

provide work opportunities and job opportunities to these 

people who are fleeing from the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, February over February, 

’86 over ’85, 17,000 more people working today than were one 

year ago. And, Mr. Speaker, over the next weeks and months 

there will be many, many more added to the rolls of the 

employed in Saskatchewan because, Mr. Speaker, we have 

projects like the paper plant coming on in Prince Albert that the 

NDP are against. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, an upgrader, and a fertilizer and 

ammonia plant coming on in Regina that the NDP are against. 

We have a Rafferty-Alameda-Shand project coming on in 

Estevan that the NDP are against, and we have bacon plant in 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP are against. We 

have a Dupont plastics plant in Saskatoon that the NDP are 

against. We have a Canada Packers chicken plant in Saskatoon 

that perhaps the member from Regina Centre should take a look 

at, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are against that. That particular plant 

is protecting over 120 jobs that would otherwise be lost because 

of the existing plant in Saskatoon being shut down. 

 

We have the Shackleton engineering plant in Cut Knife. We 

have the Canapharm pharmaceutical organization in Wolseley, 

and I don’t know how many more, Mr. Speaker, but I could 

spend a lot of time — Supercart here in Regina. And the list 

goes on and on and, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve only just begun. 

These projects will be up and running; some of them are; more 

of them coming on — 17,000 more people today, Mr. Speaker, 

working than there was a year ago, and those people, the doom 

and gloomers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are against every 

project that we bring to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask a supplement to the Minister, the 

Deputy Premier. I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, that 

the people that are leaving this province, and the young people 

that are unemployed, the 47,000  

unemployed, the 65,000 on welfare, are not looking for press 

release projects. They’re looking for concrete jobs, my friend. 

And what I’m asking you — there were 57 people leaving this 

province each day during January and February — have you 

any specific job creation programs that will come on 

immediately in May, in June, in July for these people to have an 

opportunity to find a meaningful job, rather than the press 

release job creation projects that you’re going around the 

province somewhere down in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite take 

some delight, I guess, in making fun of the upgrader and the 

ammonia project, and of the wheat pool and the federated co-

op, and of the CdF Chimie organization from Paris who are 

investing considerable sums in this project, and as they did with 

Weyerhaeuser when Weyerhaeuser came to Prince Albert to 

invest in the pulp mill, and the fine paper plant that will create 

significant numbers of jobs in that area. 

 

I just point out, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things, Number one, 

we have the largest labour force in our history; number two, Mr. 

Speaker, today we are tied for second place in Canada — latest 

statistics — second place in Canada for unemployment 

numbers. It’s the best in Canada; tied with NDP Manitoba. And 

I point out, Mr. Speaker, that consistently over the last four 

years we have led the nation — led the nation, Mr. Speaker, as 

having the best unemployment record in Canada. 

 

Now as it relates to an immediate program that is designed to 

help young people find employment over the summer, 

Opportunities ’86 — isn’t that what it’s called? 

 

Now I’m going from memory, Mr. Speaker, but I believe the 

last day that I answered this question in the House . . . the last 

day that I answered this question in the House — because it 

seems to be the only question that hon. member has, and he 

keeps asking the question in hopes, Mr. Speaker, that he might 

get a little ink. But the press gallery aren’t interested in what . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — But to answer the question . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The Deputy Premier seems to take this very 

lightly, but I’d like to indicate to him that during January and 

February, Saskatchewan, are you not aware? suffered the loss of 

population of more than 3,400 people, an average of 57 per day. 

How can you stand in this Assembly and indicate that 

everything is going well in Saskatchewan? 

 

You have also the third worst job-creation record in the history 

of Canada. Newfoundland and P.E.I. are the only two provinces 

that have a worse record. What I’m asking you, will you be 

serious and indicate: are you not concerned with the massive 

exodus of people from this province and the lack of opportunity 

forcing them to leave? 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

434 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I am concerned with any 

exodus — not for any reason, but with any exodus. And if the 

exodus — if one exists, and I’ve long ago learned, Mr. Speaker, 

that I don’t take the figures thrown around fast and free by 

members opposite as gospel — but, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that 

our Opportunities ’86 program — I think there have been 5,400, 

if my memory serves me right, applications made under that 

program by something over 2,000 companies and organizations 

in the province of Saskatchewan for 5,400 positions to date — 

to date, Mr. Speaker — and the advice that I gave the other day 

on that particular program when this question was asked, that if 

there are any other interested organizations to apply under this 

program, that they should do so quickly because it would 

appear that that program is going to be over-subscribed. 

 

Employment of René Archambault 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 

of Education. It has to do with the matter of this expenditure of 

taxpayers’ money. The taxpayers are not only concerned about 

the level of their taxation, but the way this government is 

spending their money. 

 

My question the minister is: can the minister tell the Assembly 

whether one René Archambault, the Premier’s brother-in-law, is 

still employed by her department in the Official Minority 

Language Office, and if so, is he on permanent staff or on 

contract as a consultant? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 

the question. It’s the first one I’ve had in over a year. There are 

two components to the question, Mr. Speaker. One the issue of 

taxation levels, the good member from Regina might be 

interested to know that once again this year the provincial share 

of the cost of education is going to increase, which indeed is a 

very positive sign. 

 

As it relates to the gentlemen in question, I do not have that 

information with me. It is my understanding that he is still with 

the OMLO (Official Minority Language Office), but I will take 

notice of the specifics and bring them back to him. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That really 

isn’t good enough. Let me tell the minister something that she 

ought to know. I’m going to ask her a question, and then she’s 

going to have to respond to the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Two years, Madam Minister, there was an order for return put 

in this legislature — two years ago — René Archambault, 

employment from May 8, 1982 to March 22, 1984, and it 

continues. The return was ordered by this legislature in 1984, 

and you still have not provided the information. What is the 

problem here? What prevents you from answering a 

straightforward question? Is this gentleman employed by your 

department, or is he not? And if simply you are saying that you 

do not have that information, I question the validity of that, 

because this question has been around for two years. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s make it clear 

what was said to the member, if he would listen. I said it is my 

understanding that he is indeed employed with  

OMLO. But there was a second component to the hon. 

member’s question: was he full-time, temporary, on contract? I 

do not have that specific information with me; therefore, I took 

notice and I will get it back to him. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

that the minister has finally clarified that. It has taken two years 

and finally we do get an answer. I have a further supplementary. 

 

In 1984-85, the Public Accounts which were just recently 

tabled, it is shown that the Official Minority Language Office, 

Mr. Archambault’s employer, also gave him a grant — besides 

his salary — of almost $1,000. Can the minister explain how 

this works? How is an employee of a department or a branch of 

a department in which he is an employee, also able to arrange 

for himself a grant of nearly $1,000? Will you explain that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, what we will have to do is 

clarify the member’s first question, and that is: how is 

employed? Is he on contract? Perhaps he’s on contract with 

College Mathieu, which comes through federal grants along 

with provincial grants. And then we will clarify his second 

question for him. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It does not 

matter whether an employee or a department is an employee on 

salary or on a contract. The fact is that this person, this brother-

in-law of the Premier, was working for the Official Minority 

Language Office. How does the minister justify, regardless of 

how this person is paid, a grant for this individual of nearly 

$1,000? There is something wrong here, Madam Minister. It 

would appear to me as if somebody knew somebody and was 

able to arrange something. And I really think that’s a 

questionable procedure. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well firstly, Mr. Speaker, it does indeed 

matter as to how he’s hired. For instance, if he is in fact on 

contract, it could be a component of that contract. I have given 

my word I will bring that information back to the member, and 

that stands. 

 

Premier’s Trip to Ottawa 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Deputy Premier, and it deals with the Premier’s panic trip to 

eastern Canada. The Premier claimed he was gong there to get 

some action on low prices. Well just a few minutes ago he got 

his answer when the Canadian Wheat Board announced initial 

prices for this coming year. Those prices are going down, down, 

down, and the predictions that we were reading about were even 

very modest. 

 

My question is this: since the price of wheat has dropped by 81 

cents a bushel; or $30 a tonne, during little Grant’s trip to 

Ottawa, is there any way — is there any way, Mr. Deputy 

Premier — that you can convince him to come home right 

away, early? The farmers can’t afford that kind of help. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that doesn’t 

break new ground in stupidity, I don’t know what does. We 

have the Premier, the Premier of Saskatchewan, this  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

435 

 

very day in Ottawa meeting with the Minister of Agriculture, 

meeting with energy people, meeting with the Prime Minister, 

meeting with a federal, Mr. Speaker, a federal Conservative 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And it obviously 

bothers . . . And it obviously bothers . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary for the 

Deputy Premier. The Prime Minister of Canada is in Florida, 

likely going to take in a ball game in Georgia, the Expos’ 

opener, on his way home Thursday. That we know. 

 

The minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, Charlie 

Mayer, was in Saskatoon just at 2 o’clock making the 

announcement of the wheat board. Who is meeting with and 

talking about low prices if that is the case? What is he doing? 

What happened with his meetings that this serious a drop would 

be effected? Why is Canada not concerned, and why is the 

minister not raising that issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan is in eastern Canada, lobbying for a healthy . . . 

an understanding for a healthy energy sector and a healthy 

agriculture sector for all Canadians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know that members opposite don’t take this seriously. 

They’re back into their old doom and gloom mode, Mr. 

Speaker. But yesterday I understand the Premier met with the 

Premier of Ontario, and talking about energy and some security 

of supply and self-sufficiency, and trying to avert a potential 

problem, Mr. Speaker, of becoming victims of the predatory 

nature of the pricing régimes that are in place today. 

 

Now I understand, Mr. Speaker, that that meeting went quite 

well and that the Premier of Ontario understands that a healthy 

oil sector or energy sector has certain benefits flow to it, the 

province of Ontario. All Canadians benefit from that. In 

addition, the Premier of Saskatchewan is meeting with officials 

of the federal government in Ottawa — officials, ministers, and 

McKnight, MP for Kindersley-Lloyd. And I expect, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Premier will report fully on his trip when he 

comes back. 

 

Now the kinds of things that he’s been asking for is an increase 

for the domestic price of wheat. He’s ask for, Mr. Speaker, a 

half a billion dollars to flow to western Canada out of the 

western grains stabilization fund. 

 

And I know those members are against that, Mr. Speaker. Those 

members are also against the 6 per cent money that we provided 

for Saskatchewan agriculture; they’re against the support we 

gave to our beef sector during a drought; they’re against the 

support we gave to our farmers and R.M.s when the 

grasshoppers and the drought were here last summer. They are a 

bunch of doom and gloomers, Mr. Speaker, and of course they 

wouldn’t appreciate the efforts of our Premier in Ottawa. 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a lot of words but no 

comment on the question. The question today facing farmers is: 

what should we do? Eight-one cents a bushel drop in the price 

of grain — 81 cents a bushel, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 

encouraging you to go down and ask for a deficiency payment. 

You came up dry. For 18 months, Lorne Nystrom had a Bill 

before the Parliament of Canada, before your friends, on a two-

price system. You haven’t said a beep to this day on agreeing 

with either one of those two. When is the Premier going to do 

something? 

 

Will you now admit what Saskatchewan voters have been 

saying for months, that this Premier couldn’t run a corner 

grocery store, let alone a province? And it’s time for him to call 

an election and face the music. Will you admit that? And in 

your role as Deputy Premier why don’t you do the honourable 

thing and call an election now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Premier, Mr. Speaker, trusts me 

with a whole lot, but he’s not going to trust me with the 

responsibility of calling the election. He wants to have that very 

distinct pleasure for himself, and I think that that’s right and 

proper. 

 

When we compare, Mr. Speaker, when we compare the support 

given to agriculture and small business by the Premier of this 

province and this government, compared to any other 

government in Canada, and certainly compared to any place of 

that particular ilk, the people of Saskatchewan, when they are 

given a chance, Mr. Speaker, will see that this government is 

returned, and returned with a very comfortable majority. And 

my bet is, Mr. Speaker — or my speculation is, because you 

can’t bet under the Elections Act — my speculation, and I 

predict that the member for Shaunavon will not be back, the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will not be back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Price Drop in Initial Grain Payments to Farmers 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I address this question to 

the Deputy Premier, and I will try to get him to address the 

problems of farmers instead of the very real political problems 

faced by his party. 

 

In the face of an 81 cent a bushel drop in initial payments, will 

the Deputy Premier give this House an assurance that he will 

contact the Premier and urge him to urge the federal 

government to eliminate all federal taxes on farm fuel? That 

would cut nearly 3 cents a litre, or 12 cents a gallon, and would 

at least partially ameliorate the very serious problems that will 

be faced by farmers who are seeing our initial prices drop at the 

behest of the federal government by 81 cents a bushel. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Two points to be made on this 

question, Mr. Speaker. The first point is, I’ve just saved you the 

price of a phone call because the Premier went down to Ottawa 

fully aware of the problems of farm input costs, and all of those 

things, I’m sure will be on the table as part of the discussions. 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

436 

 

The second point I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is the 

question of removing taxes from fuels coming from that 

member who had tax on fuels in this province for years and 

years and years, Mr. Speaker, and only after 1982, when the 

Devine government took office in this . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, he says that’s not true. He says that’s not 

true. The fuel tax impacts right across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. It did then; it would now if they ever got back in. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, they have made it very clear in all kinds 

of public forums that in fact they would be putting that fuel tax 

back on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the 

Deputy Premier have any other comment with respect to the cut 

initial payments of 81 cents a gallon, other than to talk about 

fuel petroleum taxes and their action four years ago? 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

would read it for you. My question is this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

do you have any other comment on the announcement of an 81 

cent a bushel drop in the initial payment to farmers — 81 cents 

a bushel? Do you have any other comment other than to refer to 

actions of your government four years ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think an 81 cent a bushel — yes, 81 

cent a bushel — decline is very bad news indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

Very bad news indeed. Now they sit there, they sit over there, 

Mr. Speaker, acting as if we sit here in Canada and consume all 

of what we eat. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they have no appreciation — no appreciation 

— for market pressures, market influence, etc. None 

whatsoever. Our Premier, Mr. Speaker, has made it clear that 

we, in Saskatchewan, cannot survive on $3 wheat. We cannot 

survive on $10 oil. And I add this: we cannot survive with the 

NDP. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our Premier is in Ottawa today — our 

Premier is in Ottawa today — and on his way by Ontario, 

stopped to get another ally to call for, in addition to other 

things, $10 a bushel for domestic wheat, a $500 million 

payment out of the western grains stabilization fund . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I know, Mr. Speaker, that those 

people are against the efforts of our Premier. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 2:32 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 19 — And Act for Granting to Her Majesty Certain 

Sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1987. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:34 p.m. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Protection of the Oil Industry 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 

of my remarks, I will be moving the following motion, 

seconded by the member for Morse: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the program and policies it has adopted 

to stimulate our oil industry and create thousands of jobs 

for families in this province, and further expresses support 

for the position of the Government of Saskatchewan that 

the governments of the oil-producing provinces and the 

Government of Canada must move to protect the jobs of 

workers and the welfare of families whose livelihood 

depends on a viable Canadian energy industry, and further 

supports the view that all Canadians should be concerned 

about the implications of OPEC regaining its stranglehold 

on the world-wide oil industry thereby threatening 

Canadian energy self-sufficiency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear at the outset what this 

debate is all about. We are enjoying the lowest fuel prices in the 

country. The Premier knows the industry. Only a short while 

ago he predicted 30 cents a litre for prices at the pumps, and he 

was right on, Mr. Speaker. The Premier, Mr. Speaker, is 

responsible for fuel prices sharply reduced because of his 

actions. 

 

The Premier and the government are determined to build 

confidence and growth and are further prepared to defend 

vigorously what we have built over the last four years. The 

Premier is determined to press relentlessly into the future for 

Saskatchewan in terms of growth and expansion for all sectors 

of our economy. He is further prepared, as is this government, 

Mr. Speaker, to defend and secure jobs created in the oil patch 

and to further job expansion throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and this government are known to consult with 

people, to listen, and to act. Examples, of course, where we’re 

prepared to build, after listening and consulting: in the areas of 

agriculture, small business, tourism, industry, and of course, 

energy. The Premier is a man the people of this province trust. 

They believe in him and they trust in him, Mr. Speaker, and 

they believe in him because the Premier of this province 

believes in the people of Saskatchewan, and he trusts the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very obvious that of course 

the same could not be said for the NDP members in opposition. 

The people do not trust the NDP in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re just about seeing a free-for-all in oil prices 

these days. It’s almost fun to go to the gas station. But 

underneath it all there’s a feeling of chaos. There’s a feeling 

that it can’t last, and of course it can’t last. Sooner or later, and 

perhaps sooner that we realize, OPEC will again pull itself 

together. Once it does this, it may well fight to recover all the 

money it thinks it lost when prices fell. 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

437 

 

A year or so ago OPEC oil was costing about $40 a barrel. Now 

it’s $10. If OPEC gets a stranglehold on the market again and 

moves to recover its lost revenue, it may double that $40 to $80. 

Imagine paying over $1 a litre for gas. Remember when OPEC 

was building up its muscle, it threatened that one day gas would 

cost $100 a barrel to buy. Think of the vengeance it will wreak 

when the bickering finally stops, Mr. Speaker. We already 

know that unrealistically low prices do large segments of our 

population lots of harm, and no one any good. Look at our 

farmers. Low grain prices are threatening their very existence, 

yet low grain prices have never meant cheaper bread, cheaper 

cookies, or cheaper pizza. 

 

The Saskatchewan oil industry funds fully one-quarter of all 

government services. One-quarter of all revenues needed to 

fund schools, hospitals, and other services comes from the 

Saskatchewan oil industry. Without the oil industry, either taxes 

would have to climb significantly or services would have to be 

cut. Without the oil industry thousands of jobs would be lost. 

Without the oil industry many small businesses in rural areas 

and urban centres would be in trouble because the oil industry, 

either directly or indirectly, busy goods and services. 

 

How can we ensure that Saskatchewan consumers pay fair 

prices for gasoline, and also ensure that the oil industry in our 

province prospers and protects us from some future OPEC 

grab? This government has a record of stimulating the oil 

industry and assisting drivers. Not only did we revise the 

industry but, by cutting the provincial tax on gasoline, 

Saskatchewan drivers have saved $650 million since 1982. 

That’s right. When drivers in other provinces were paying high 

prices for gasoline, Saskatchewan drivers, because of this 

government’s actions, were paying the lowest gas prices in the 

nation. 

 

We want our drivers to continue to pay the lowest prices in 

Canada for gasoline. One way we can do this is to ensure that 

the oil industry in our province doesn’t either wither away and 

die but prospers and gives us the security we need. 

 

The price of oil has dropped by about 75 per cent in recent 

weeks. Obviously it won’t stay that way. No producer will 

continue to sell his products at a cut-rate price of 75 per cent. 

 

So what might be a fair price for oil, fair for the producers and 

consumers? Well a cut of 50 per cent would be a boom for 

consumers, and it would keep the industry happy. At $20 a 

barrel for oil, consumers would have been given a 50 per cent 

cut from the highs of $40 a barrel, and because the industry 

could manage with a $20 barrel oil, that cut would last for 

years, not just weeks or a few months, but a long-term 50 per 

cent cut. 

 

So in a very real way with a realistic $20 a barrel for oil, 

consumers would lose absolutely nothing in the long run; 

indeed, consumers would gain in the long run because they 

would be assured that when OPEC recovers it could not charge 

whatever wild-eyed sum it wanted for its oil. It could do that if 

we let our oil industry die. 

 

As long as we keep our oil industry prospering we can keep out 

of OPEC’s grasp for ever. We can enjoy realistic  

and fair oil prices and never again face $40 a barrel oil costs. 

But we can’t do these things unless we plan sensibly and act 

quickly. We can do this by showing OPEC that we intend to 

support our own oil industry and make it grow. All we have to 

do is use our common sense. We need the same tenacity and 

determination that we have used to solve problems and face 

challenges in the past. 

 

After having saved Saskatchewan drivers $150 million every 

year since 1982 because of the gas tax cut, we must now make 

sure that such cuts become permanent and that a fair and 

reasonable gas price is established. Ironically the shambles that 

is now OPEC has given us that opportunity we have always 

needed. Now we do have the chance to break OPEC’s grip for 

ever. To do so, we must offer, not only the oil industry, but 

consumers, fair, stable and long-term security prices No driver 

wants to roll up to his or her gas station and see gas at 30 cents 

a litre one day and maybe $1.30 the next. Drivers want a decent, 

fair and steady price for gas. Drivers want to know how much 

they’ll have to pay for gas, not only today, not only next week, 

or months down the way. 

 

(1445) 

 

No one would rent a house if he or she did not know month-to-

month what the landlord was going to charge for rent. 

Remember what happened when mortgage rates sky-rocketed. 

Again, thanks to this government, mortgage rates were 

stabilized in Saskatchewan. 

 

We can stabilize oil prices too. We can prevent a horrific roller-

coaster ride on oil prices just as we safeguarded residents from 

the roller coaster ride on mortgages. All we have to do is stick 

together, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what Saskatchewan people 

have always done. By sticking together we can have everything 

we want. We can have low but realistic prices. We can have 

long-term security from the ravages of OPEC, and we can keep 

our jobs going. It’s entirely up to us, Mr. Speaker. It’s entirely 

up to us, Mr. Speaker. We can stick together and win. If we 

want to, Mr. Speaker, as a legislature, stick together and face 

the problems that this province has to deal with, then we can 

solve them. 

 

The Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, has that tenacity; he 

has that determination. He has the trust and he believes in the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That is not something, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 

Opposition obviously has. If he still had it, he would still be on 

this side of the House. He would still be the premier. But he’s 

not. He’s not the premier in this House anymore. He’s not the 

premier of Saskatchewan. He’s the Leader of the Opposition; 

he’s the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

And there’s a very solid and real reason why we have a Devine 

government in the province of Saskatchewan — because the 

people of this province believe in our Premier and they trust 

him. He is a person, as I said at the outset of my remarks, who 

is prepared to consult with people, to listen to people, to work 

with them to bring about resolutions to problems, to deal with 

them fairly. That’s what he’s prepared to do. 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

438 

 

He’s not prepared to sit in his office here in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, day after day after day as the former premier did. He’s 

prepared to get out of the city of Regina, move around this 

country, move around this province, visit with the people, to 

deal with the very issues that affect their daily lives. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of Premier we have. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is why I support Mr. Premier, and I support this 

government. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I say the people of 

this province will continue to support the Premier of 

Saskatchewan — because he has the will, as I said, the tenacity, 

the determination, the wherewithal to go out and resolve the 

problems. He has that, and I admire him for it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by saying that we can be 

like the OPEC Arabs and fall apart in chaos — like the NDP, 

falling apart in chaos, without caring about what happens 

tomorrow. Happily, Canadians, and especially Saskatchewan 

people, are not like OPEC Arabs. Saskatchewan people are 

intelligent people. Saskatchewan people are fair people, Mr. 

Speaker. And Saskatchewan people look to the future together. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I therefore move the following 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to deal 

with this resolution in a number of areas, and I want to just 

point out the five different things that I see in this motion that 

have significance. 

 

There deals here with five, I believe, different comments about 

the various areas in this motion as it relates to the energy policy 

of this government. We have, first of all, the kinds of programs 

that we have dealt with, the policies that we’ve dealt with. It 

talks in this motion, Mr. Speaker, about job creation. It talks 

about the power of the OPEC countries And it also talks about 

the threat to the Canadian energy self-sufficiency. 

 

I want to deal in a number of areas on these various topics. And 

at the conclusion I’m gong to just talk a little bit about how it 

impacts in my constituency in this oil business and in the 

overall sector of energy. Oil isn’t the only part of this that we’re 

talking about. We have to deal with it in the broader scope of 

energy, and that included oil and gas as it relates in particular to 

the south-west. 

 

First I would like to commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan, as it indicates in the motion, “for the programs 

and policies it has adopted to stimulate our oil industry and 

create thousands of jobs for families in this province.” And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

Since 1982 the oil and gas industry has undergone dramatic 

changes. Investment and production have reached new heights, 

breaking records each year. Employment, both direct and 

indirect, has increased, and the oil and gas sector has become a 

key source for provincial revenues. All this has occurred as a 

result of  

new policies and initiatives undertaken by the Saskatchewan 

Conservative government. 

 

Three basic objectives were established for the oil and gas 

sector, which were to be realized through policy changes: first, 

a revival of the oil and gas industry; second, an increase in 

provincial oil revenues; and third, creation of new job 

opportunities. 

 

Keeping these in mind, the oil industry recovery program was 

brought into effect in 1982 and a gas pricing policy in 1983. 

Both these programs resulted in activity levels that surpassed 

everyone’s expectations, Mr. Speaker, including those who set 

the policy. 

 

Oil and gas drilled in 1985 totalled 3,848 wells, an increase of 

30 per cent from 1984, and 476 per cent from 1982. That is a 

dramatic increase. Due to this phenomenal increase in new 

drilling, investment increased dramatically and amounted to 

over $1 billion, or 25 per cent of the total capital formation in 

the province in 1985. 

 

Land sales totalled a record 184 million in 1985, an increase of 

335 per cent from the 1983 levels. Crude oil production, which 

had decreased since the early ’70s, increased to 72 million 

barrels. And, Mr. Speaker, that was a record in the province of 

Saskatchewan for production. At the same time, due to 

phenomenal drilling activity, the remaining recoverable 

reserves of the province also showed a steady growth. 

 

Our own provincial revenues from oil and gas increased by 

almost $270 million from the fiscal year of 1981-82 to the 

1985-86 fiscal year. More than 400 new oil companies were 

established in the province since the beginning of this program, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that is a significant step forward. It 

also did one other thing, Mr. Speaker. There were 137 service 

companies established in the oil industry. These are very 

important to the private development and initiative of 

individuals. 

 

Direct jobs in the oil and gas industry have doubled since 1981 

to over 7,000 workers in 1985. Also, due to growth in the 

service and supply companies, indirect jobs were also created. 

Reinvestment rates have approximately been more than 100 per 

cent of industry cash flows. And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

criticized time after time regarding the various areas of our oil 

policy. They said that the oil industry had just taken it out and 

put it elsewhere. But no, sir, they weren’t. They were putting 

more than 100 per cent of their cash flow back into the 

development of the oil patch in this province. And that, I 

believe, is the reason why we had the record number of job 

creation in this province. 

 

Besides bringing in its own policies and programs to aid the oil 

and gas industry in the province, the government also played a 

pivotal role in the signing of The Western Accord, the 

petroleum sector is no longer subject to discriminatory tax 

policy. 

 

Nineteen eight-five also saw the start of the construction of the 

co-op upgrader which will guarantee a market for  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

439 

 

the heavy crudes. And in particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

relate that to the south-west part of the province. The south-

west part of the province produces roughly 35,000 barrels a day 

and, of that, about two-thirds of that will be available for 

development through the upgrader here in Regina. 

 

The people in the south-west really have appreciated two very 

important things in the oil industry. Number one was the fact 

that it could grow; and number two was the fact that we 

initiated through a very common interest with the Federated Co-

op a development of a new upgrader here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think that is the number one factor. The third 

thing as it relates to the upgrader, is the energy sector in the use 

of natural gas as it relates to the fertilizer plant that is going to 

be but together with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those kinds of job creation activities is the reason 

why we put a motion in our House today of this nature, because 

it wouldn’t been there under the former administration. And I 

know that, because I’ve lived in this province all my life and I 

know that that’s the kind of energy policy that this government 

would initiate, and not that government. 

 

In 1985, as I said, was the beginning of the co-op upgrader. The 

project will require an investment of 650 million, plus 200 

million in the fertilizer plant, creating 3,000 person-years of 

employment, 80 permanent jobs, and roughly 200 permanent 

jobs in the fertilizer industry. That, Mr. Speaker, is very 

important in this discussion, and I believe that it’s the kind of 

thing that we need to have. 

 

In 1983 a new pricing policy for gas was introduced, aimed 

largely at revival of the industry. It was nothing, because of 

some of the initiatives that had been taking place under their 

administration when they didn’t give an opportunity to invest 

and drill our own wells and get our own gas and oil industry 

going. 

 

In 1985 further changes took place. A new gas price, a new 

royalty formula for gas was established. The royalty provisions 

which incorporated sensitivity to well productivity greatly 

improved the economics of marginal production of gas. Besides 

changing the pricing of natural gas, increased markets were also 

secured under these policy changes. First, more of our own gas 

will be supplied to west B.C. Their government took and got it 

all from Alberta, and we paid Alberta Heritage Fund for it, and 

now we have an opportunity to put back into our own province. 

 

Second, projects using natural gas as feed stocks are being 

encouraged, like the fertilizer plant here in Regina. Third, gas 

exports are being allowed under the condition that significant 

exploration commitments are met. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

very important feature in the kind of a national energy policy 

and a provincial energy policy that we have adopted. 

 

As a result of these pricing activities, activity in the gas industry 

in Saskatchewan has risen dramatically. In 1985 the number of 

gas wells drilled increased to 437, as compared with nine. In 

1982 there were nine gas wells  

drilled; in 1981 there nine gas wells drilled; and in 1985, 437. 

 

Here is another important feature, Mr. Speaker. Reserves have 

increased dramatically from that point on. And I believe that, in 

my opinion, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

recognize the importance of the oil industry in our province. 

Every one dollar in four was supplying hospitals for this 

province, was supplying schools for this province, was 

supplying . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 

member his time has elapsed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this debate 

and I want to at least comment on the member for Morse in the 

sense that when he was talking he was at least talking about oil. 

The earlier speaker, I didn’t detect the subject matter of the 

resolution during the course of his remarks. 

 

I want to direct my attention to the resolution, and I want to 

point out that this resolution arises because of the débâcle in the 

government’s oil policy. And I hope they don’t deny that their 

oil policy is in a shambles. Otherwise, why would the Premier 

be going to Ottawa yesterday to urge the federal government to 

reverse the policy which this same Premier was urging upon 

that federal government short months ago? 

 

There is no question but that the government is now saying 

what we said last year was wrong. What we wanted last year 

was wrong. We now want regulation. A year ago we said the oil 

industry should be regulated. Government should stand back. 

The market should set the price. That was the policy of the 

government opposite a year ago. 

 

And they cheered The Western Accord. I cheered some things 

about The Western Accord — the removal of federal taxes, 

which had been opposed by all provincial governments, not 

surprisingly, but certainly all provincial government, including 

the one in Saskatchewan. But I certainly questioned the total 

removal of any price control on oil. And I particularly 

questioned the total removal of the price control on old oil 

which allowed the major companies to have a veritable bonanza 

and gave very little to the independents. 

 

(1500) 

 

And it’s the independents which should have received the 

concern of the government opposite, and the independents who 

didn’t receive the concern of the government opposite. No one 

denies, and anyone can read the literature, and no one denies 

that The Western Accord was a bonanza for anybody who 

owned oil that was found in the ’60s. But for people who had 

just entered the industry in the mid-70s it was not a bonanza. 

And yet the government opposite said: hurray for Esso, hurray 

for Texaco, but never mind the independents. 

 

And then they launched their own policy. At a cost of $300 

million a year they stimulated the oil industry. And they 

certainly did. They certainly stimulated the oil industry at a cost 

of $300 million a year. And what was  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

440 

 

their justification? Long-term permanent jobs. Long-term 

permanent jobs, they spoke of last year, based upon a régime of 

unregulated prices and low royalties. 

 

Today they’re saying: oh, oh, we didn’t do too well. We now 

don’t want unregulated prices because the jobs which we said 

were long term and not permanent are not long term and not 

permanent, and in fact are being lost by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people. And if they weren’t being lost by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan people, this resolution wouldn’t be 

here. 

 

So we have a government that favoured The Western Accord 

and is now saying, wrong policy. They had an oil policy of low 

royalties to create jobs, long-term permanent jobs, and they’re 

saying: oh, oh, yes we spent the billion dollars, but we don’t 

have the long-term permanent jobs. Think what would have 

happened if they gathered in that billion dollars and spent it 

elsewhere in Saskatchewan to build other enterprises; there 

would have indeed been long-term permanent jobs. 

 

Now let’s take the other thing they were saying last year. Last 

year they were saying, we believe in free trade. We believe that 

there shouldn’t be tariff barriers. We believe that oil prices 

should be set by the market. What are they saying today? The 

Premier is going to Ottawa to say: I don’t believe that any more. 

I don’t believe that any more. We don’t want prices set by the 

market. We are not talking about free trade. We do not want 

free trade in oil. That is the basic message of the Premier in 

Ottawa. We do not want fee trade in oil. 

 

And he is saying about wheat: we do not want free trade in 

wheat. In fact, we need some sort of a subsidy for our wheat 

growers. He is right today on the latter. He’s right today. We 

need a subsidy for our wheat growers. But he was wrong last 

year when he was saying, we want free trade. Now he can’t be 

for The Western Accord last year and against it today; and for 

his policy of stimulating the oil industry in order to get 

permanent jobs last year and admitting they’re not permanent 

today; and being in favour of free trade in oil and agricultural 

products last year and saying, we’ve got to have subsidies for 

one and tariffs for the other today. How can one have any 

confidence in a government which advances policies that are 

merely months in duration. 

 

We have a mention of the co-op upgrader. Six months ago I was 

at the sod-turning of the co-op upgrader, when sod one was 

turned. What I want to know is whether or not we’re going to 

have another ceremony when sod two is turned, because it’s not 

turned yet in six months, not turned yet. Notwithstanding the 

fact that sod two is not turned, the government opposite is 

announcing a fertilizer plant which is going to be built after the 

upgrader is constructed. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, there is a very, very serious credibility gap. 

A government which is noted, and notable, for its indecision, 

for its governing by polls, for its government by panic, and 

latterly for its cold feet in facing the real issues of 

Saskatchewan . . . We have to face our problems but, as the 

Leader-Post editorial of today says, “The province wants 

action. But if action is to be taken, it may as well be done by a 

government with a fresh mandate . . .”  

 — instead of by the Devine government which has a limited 

remaining lease on life — and they’re dead right there — a very 

limited one. 

 

Since the resolution before us fails to address the central issues 

before the people of Saskatchewan today: long-term jobs, I 

mentioned that; fair taxation, I’ve talked about; the massive 

give-aways to the oil companies; sound economic policies; and 

sound and decisive leadership, I therefore move the following 

amendment, seconded by my colleague, the member for 

Shaunavon. It reads as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first 

line be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

Regrets that the economic policies of the provincial 

government have failed to create long-term jobs 

throughout Saskatchewan, but instead have created a boom 

and bust cycle in some sectors; 

 

Regrets that the taxation policies of the provincial 

government have been short-sighted and unfair; 

 

and further, that this Assembly expresses its lack of 

confidence in the provincial government and urges it to 

call a provincial general election at once. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continues concurrent. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to rise to debate rule 16, which is being put forward by the 

government and, Mr. Speaker, I think it stands as an indication 

of where this government is coming from. Today we have 

announced the reduction in wheat prices of 81 cents a bushel, 

the biggest decrease that I have ever seen since I started farming 

in 1970 — the biggest decrease. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is the lowest price for grain, when you factor in 

inflation, since 1931. 

 

And what we are dealing with here today is the price of oil. 

Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that a government that is out of 

touch with the reality of Saskatchewan is one that should be 

turfed out, and will be, as soon as they screw up the courage to 

call an election. Because I say to you, when you have members 

from Morse and other members that get up and try to protect the 

oil companies, their buddies in the oil companies, who last year 

wanted the policy that now exists — the day the price of oil 

goes down they get up and defend them and ignore the farmers 

of the province who are facing 81 cents a bushel reduction in 

their grain prices — is a government that’s out of touch with 

reality. 

 

They’re out of touch with reality, Mr. Speaker, because we have 

many farm families who are going to go broke as a result of 

what we are facing here today with the cost of the grain going 

down 81 cents a bushel. 

 

Now I’m not denying that the price of oil is going down. 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

441 

 

I’m not denying that the price of oil is going down, and it’s 

down to about $12 a barrel in New York . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 14.50 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . 14.50 in New York, which is over 

$20 a barrel in Canadian money. I’m not deny that the price of 

oil has gone down from $35 a barrel to $20 a barrel, Canadian. 

But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that’s as high as it ever 

was during the term of office of Allan Blakeney and the New 

Democrats, the price that it is today. 

 

And I want to tell you that the crisis we had in the ’70s with the 

price of oil, with less production, wasn’t a crisis at all. We 

balanced the books. We balanced the books, we paid our bills, 

and the oil companies made money. The question is, Mr. 

Speaker, is how much money the oil companies are making. 

 

Yes, the oil companies aren’t making as much today as they 

were making last year. That’s true. The oil companies are not 

making as much money this year as they were last year But the 

question is, Mr. Speaker, is one of fairness, and whether they 

were making too much last year when they had increases of 142 

percent increase. 

 

Now I say to you that the government that rushes out to protect 

those oil companies, who were making 142 per cent increase in 

profits, the day the price goes down, and ignores farmers who 

are benefiting from the price of oil going down, is one that’s 

way out of kilter with what is going on in the province. Because 

I can tell you, there’s many farmers who appreciate the price of 

oil going down. Many of them say that the one saviour to their 

problems is if all the costs could go down. 

 

The price of their grain has gone down 81 cents a bushel. Not a 

peep from this government what they’re going to do about it. 

But a small token is the fact that the fuel we’re putting in our 

tanks right now is down ever so slightly. What these birds 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that they want the price to go up. They 

want the price to go up. Well, we have been using the word 

“birds” with these people, and yesterday they proved it: they 

were chicken when they didn’t call the election. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that these people who want the 

price of fuel oil to go up even higher than it is now, to protect 

their friends in the oil industry, I say to you is a government 

that doesn’t deserve the respect of the farming community. 

 

I know there are many farmers, including many good friends of 

mine, who voted Conservative last time. They voted 

Conservative last time and I don’t blame them. I think that 

many of the things that were put out to the people of the 

province looked attractive. They looked attractive. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I say to the farmers of Canada and the 

farmers of North America is to study history and find out when 

farmers are in the most difficult time. Every time we have 

Conservative governments in the United States and in Canada, 

where we have right-wing governments 

which force the price of grain down . . . and I’ll tell you that 

you want to look back to 1931 and find out who was the 

government in Canada, in Ottawa. 

 

Who was the government when we had the lowest price until 

today? The price today is lower than it was in 1931 in constant 

terms, and we had a right-winger in Ottawa then by the name of 

Bennett — that old right-winger who they turfed out shortly 

afterwards when the farmer realized that he wasn’t working for 

farmers. And in Saskatchewan, we had a right-winger by the 

name of Anderson. He was going to solve the farmers’ 

problems in 1929. Things were booming up till ’29 till those 

characters took over. Then we had the worst depression in the 

history of Canada until today. 

 

And once again, who do we have in government in Ottawa? We 

have a right-winger, by definition, Brain Mulroney, who today 

is in Florida. In Florida? The day they announced the price of 

wheat going down to 81 cents, he’s on a little jaunt down to 

Florida. He’s down in Florida; Grant Devine’s in Ottawa 

looking for him; and Charlie Mayer is out in Saskatoon 

announcing a reduction of 81 cents a bushel. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Members are taking 

liberties by calling other members by their names, and I’m 

going to ask the member to cease to do that and to use the 

position or the constituency that the member represents. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reference to the member from 

constituency and the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I will use his 

constituency or his title and office. 

 

The point that I’m making is that a government which puts 

farmers in the worst position they have been in since 1931 at 

the federal and provincial level, are two governments that 

deserve to be slapped on the wrists and now kicked out. 

 

(1515) 

 

We see this in every area. Rushing to the support of the oil 

companies . . . And I see the Minister of Health is here. The 

Minister of Health is here, who has no money for nursing staff. 

We have the Premier in Ottawa fighting for more money for oil 

companies. I say to you, does that make any sense? 

 

Does it make any sense when you look at the profit margins of 

oil companies last year who were making record profits and 

who are we going to the defence of? Not the nursing staff; not 

the farmers; not the working people of the province; not the 

welfare recipients. We’re kicking them around. Who do we go 

to support? Who do we rush and take the taxpayers’ money and 

fly to Ottawa to support? The oil companies who aren’t big 

enough to defend themselves. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that a government that will take 

on the welfare recipients and go to bat for oil companies is not a 

fair government, and the fact that we’re wasting the time of the 

Assembly today talking about defending the profits of oil 

companies rather than the profits of farmers stands in stark 

contrast to what a  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

442 

 

New Democratic government under a newly elected premier, 

Allan Blakeney, or the member from Elphinstone, would do — 

would do for the farmers and working people of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just as he did before. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just as he did before. And I can 

remember a time in the ’70s when our wheat prices were $6.50 

a bushel. They have now dropped to about $3, an I don’t see 

anyone on that government side rushing off to defend the price 

of wheat. 

 

But the oil companies drop from $30 to $20 a barrel, and there’s 

a panic on. The Premier has to fly away. He says he’s going to 

attack Saudi Arabia and Sheikh Yamani. And what I hear is that 

there’s massive suicides over in Saudi Arabia of oil people 

jumping off tall buildings because the Premier has threatened to 

do something to stall them. 

 

Yes, he announced in Estevan, with a partisan crown, that he’s 

going to take Saudi Arabia on. Well I’ll tell you that that guy is 

a joke. To have a Premier who is so ridiculous, looks so stupid, 

so ridiculous, on national press makes me embarrassed to have 

that individual representing me as Premier. 

 

Because I want to say that when you have an individual who, in 

front of a partisan crown will say such ridiculous things — that 

he’s going to take on Saudi Arabia, take on Saudi Arabia and 

defend his oil companies, Imperial Oil, Husky Oil, Gulf Oil, 

protect those small players against the Arab countries, and not 

say anything about farmers — is a Premier that I think is totally 

out of touch with reality 

 

And I think he has been . . . I don’t know what he’s been doing, 

but maybe listening to some of his back-benchers, maybe 

listening to some of the former cabinet who are advising him. I 

don’t know who he’s listening to. 

 

But I want to tell you that when I talk to nurses, as we did today 

out on the steps of the legislature, who are protesting for the 

first time in the history of the province . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weiman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure and honour to be able to speak this afternoon 

on the motion and my opposition to the amendment. There are a 

few brief comments I would like to make in terms of the motion 

presented earlier by my colleague from Moosomin. 

 

However, before I go into that, I would like to state and on the 

record that this is one of those few and rare opportunities that a 

member has, to be able to stand in the House and speak to a 

motion that is truly bipartisan, truly nation in scope, and not just 

provincial. 

 

And I find it very interesting that the games that would be 

played by the members of the opposition in dealing with jobs 

and job security for people of this province, in  

dealing in terms of security nationally — and I will go into that 

further — that they would try to make that a political football 

rather than have the opportunity to speak in a bipartisan way. 

 

I find it interesting that, rather than talk about the critical needs 

of the people in the oil patch, that they would denounce a 

Premier who has made an effort to try to help these people and 

the families that are dependent upon them. I find it hard to 

believe that they would condemn a Premier for falling oil prices 

that are not controlled by the province of Saskatchewan; they 

are not controlled by the Government of Canada, nor indeed by 

the great power to the south of us, but that are controlled by a 

group in the Far East, the Middle East, of which we have no 

control over. 

 

I find it very disturbing that the member for Shaunavon would 

have the audacity to stand in this House and say to those 

peoples in his area who are drilling in the Estevan area who are 

drilling, in the Lloydminster area who are drilling, that this is 

not a crisis. It’s not a crisis, he went on saying, if you read 

Hansard, because it wasn’t a crisis for them; they admitted it 

when prices of oil were down at this level during their 

administration. And that’s the type of myopic vision that they 

had for this province. Something was happening wrong and 

they said: it is not a crisis. 

 

I find it embarrassing that a colleague in this Assembly would 

tell those people, in those areas of Saskatchewan, that losing 

their jobs is not a crisis; that not being able to feed their families 

is not crisis; that the rigs may be pulled out is not a crisis, 

because we never saw it as crisis when we were in government. 

And the member for Shaunavon is on record as stating such. 

 

The member for Shaunavon ranged awfully wide in his diatribe 

against the Premier for going down east to help the people of 

this province. He did indicate agriculture. I would like to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government does not look at issues in 

isolation. It does not look at just the oil situation; it does not 

look at just the agriculture situation, the urban situation, the 

business sector, in isolation. As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

they have a preponderance and a fondness of looking at 

problems within this society with myopic vision. We tend to 

want to look at the whole picture, and when problems arise we 

will address those problems as best we can, looking at the total 

fabric of this province and not in individual isolation. 

 

I can say, along with my colleague on the side of this House, 

that we can stand proud and have nothing to be ashamed of in 

so far as the programs we brought forward for agriculture, and 

they full well know that. That we can stand proud for any of the 

programs that we brought forward for small business, and they 

know that. What they are attempting to do with this motion and 

their amendment is make it bipartisan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak about the nature of OPEC and 

what it can do to this province, to this country and, in fact, the 

western fabric. I think what we shall have to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

look what transpired during the ’70s. The NDP would not have 

us remember what happened in the late ’70s, and I will stay 

bipartisan; I will stay away from  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

443 

 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

How many of us can remember the rising oil prices in the late 

’70s by OPEC when they strangled the market? How many of 

us can remember car line-ups at the pumps because of the 

strangulation of shortages, first of all, the manipulated 

shortages? It got so bad in the United States that in cities, if 

your licence plate ended in an odd number you got to get gas 

that day, and if it was in an even number you got to get gas that 

day. That is the type of way OPEC plays. 

 

How many of us have failed to remember what happens when a 

cartel gets together that can strangle, not only this province, this 

country, the western world, indeed all the world: when they use 

that clout and that power to blackmail European nations, 

blackmail European nations which allow them to suffer of their 

own internal security — either you do this or we turn off the 

taps. But they would not have us remember that. 

 

Why is it an issue of national security? And I believe national 

security is not too strong a term when we’re talking about self-

sufficiency in our oil, in our gas production. The type of climate 

that we have that locks us in a wilderness of snow for nine 

months a year demands that we have to have control of our own 

heating and transportation fuels. Our geography demands that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are rarity among nations in the world. We are an anomaly 

of nations in the world, where our nation, the second largest 

nation in this whole sphere, is strung out over a long narrow 

ribbon across North American. We need self-sufficiency in our 

transportation fuels and we cannot be held up to blackmail by 

OPEC. And this is what members of the opposition fail to 

understand through this motion. They are trying desperately to 

make it bipartisan for political motives rather than for the 

goodwill of the people of this province and this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weiman: — As I stated earlier, it is not just a provincial 

issue. Oil is found in Saskatchewan, granted. It is found in 

Alberta. But it is found in the Beaufort; it’s a Maritimes 

situation too — and wherever else oil may be found. And 

wherever oil is found there are jobs as witnesses by our 

laudatory reports over the last three years in oil production, of 

which I know my other colleague who will be standing this 

afternoon will more than praise on my behalf and on behalf of 

the government of this province. But as I stated, I wish to stay 

non-partisan on this issue. 

 

I wonder how quickly, or how slowly, that amendment would 

be withdrawn if this was not happening in the sector of oil, if 

this was happening in the sector of water, where another nation 

could hold Canada ransom for that water that came out of our 

taps. Oil is analogous to water in that it is one of the life-bloods 

of this nation, as I suggested to you earlier in terms of our 

climate, our economics, and our geography. 

How quickly would the members opposite stand and praise the 

actions of the Premier for going down East and saying, we must 

develop, we must safeguard our water supply for the people of 

this province? It is the same issue, Mr. Speaker, exactly the 

same issue. 

 

Now members may say that perhaps the picture that I have 

painted is paranoid, the picture that I have painted is to the 

extreme. I will suggest, Mr. Speaker, that history does repeat 

itself, and that by the actions of the OPEC nations in the mid-

70s and the late ’70s, and what they are doing now, will once 

again manifest itself in that same type of action. 

 

And I will suggest also that the prices of oil will be much more 

burdensome down the future. And I’m not willing to peg a price 

at it but again, looking at history, much higher and much more 

of a burden on the backs of Canadians than it ever was, because 

it does two things. It puts a type of fear and anxiety in the 

market-place. It does that. Number two, it stops those types of 

initiatives that can make us self-sufficient. Witness the upgrader 

in Regina, the upgrader in Lloydminster . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I advise the member his time 

has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, I am shocked that we re standing in this legislature 

today and that members opposite, one after another, are 

standing up in the defence of the oil companies of this province. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government came into 

office on the slogan of big business. Big business was going to 

develop the economy of this province. They say, we’ll have a 

free enterprise economy. And today, member after member of 

the government side are congratulating their Premier for having 

run down to Ottawa to see if he can get some help for the oil 

companies. 

 

Well let’s take a look at what the oil companies have got from 

the members opposite during the last three years, up until now. I 

want to say that this was the most massive hand-out to the oil 

companies that this province has ever seen. We find that there 

has been $300 million annually of royalty holidays. And you 

know what we have for the people of this province? A massive 

debt. And the oil companies receive the forgiveness of taxes 

and royalties. 

 

(1530) 

 

We saw, Mr. Speaker, in the oil industry, that in 1982 the value 

of oil produced was $1.2 billion, and the revenue to the people 

of this province was 700 million. And you know, last year the 

value of the oil produced in this province, the value of the oil, 

was $2.4 billion. And do you know what the people of 

Saskatchewan got for double the production in dollar value of 

oil? Six hundred and fifty million dollars. 

 

So this is the situation that we have now — the members 

opposite coming to this legislature and saying, we have to do 

something for the oil companies. They said that what  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

444 

 

was going to be their show case of economic development was 

open for the big oil companies here in Saskatchewan. That was 

going to be the economic engine in Saskatchewan. And do you 

know what? They also said, wait until we get a federal 

counterpart; wait until we get a Tory government in Ottawa; 

we’ll get rid of all the . . . deregulate all of the oil industry 

across western Canada. And he said, we’ll let those oil 

companies go on the market value of oil and just watch the 

development and the profits those companies will make. 

 

And do you know, less than a month since the — a month and a 

half — that the oil prices started to decelerate across the world 

. . . And do you know what? These same people that have 

handed out millions and millions of dollars to the oil company 

— and the federal counterpart, the Minister of Energy in 

Ottawa, gave to them a $1.3 billion package to the oil industry 

— are now sending their Premier, their leader, down to Ottawa 

to ask Ottawa to help these poor multinational oil companies. 

 

I can’t believe it. Today we are looking at a crisis in agriculture 

the like of which we have never seen since the last Tory 

government back in the ’30s. Today the news is devastating to 

the farmers of this province. And do you know what the Tories, 

the members opposite, are raising to discuss in this legislature? 

They’re discussing the poverty of the multinational oil 

companies to which they have handed millions of dollars during 

the last four years. 

 

I want to say that their economic policy has been a bust — total 

and unequivocally, Mr. Speaker. This province is in disarray. 

This province is in economic ruin. And I say to the members 

opposite, if you have any nerve, go to the people of 

Saskatchewan, give them an opportunity to vote and kick you 

out. 

 

I want to say that panic has set in on the government side as a 

result of the direct consequence of a boom and bust policy, their 

total dependence upon the large multinational corporation and 

the activity they were producing. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

they permitted the boom and they boasted about the boom in 

Saskatchewan. But their performance has been a bust — and a 

bust, I must say, for the treasury and for the people of this 

province. 

 

At a time when oil prices were high, they gave $300 million per 

year to the big oil companies. They gave them subsidies when 

the oil price was high. And now when the oil price is low, they 

send their Premier to Ottawa and said, well, we’ve got to help 

the oil companies again. Now this is some kind of perverse 

thinking. They have to be tied to the oil companies to be able to 

think in that manner. We’ll give them help when the oil price is 

good; give them lots — 300 million a year incentive — but also 

when the oil prices drop we’ve got to go to the federal treasury 

and to the people of Saskatchewan to help these poor oil people. 

 

Well I would think that if they gave them a whole pile of money 

during the three and a half years, that they should be able to ride 

through the ups and downs of the oil industry. But not the oil 

companies, because the oil companies — let’s be fair — the oil 

companies are dictating the policy to the members opposite. 

They aren’t  

writing the policy. The Premier has now been sent by the oil 

companies to eastern Canada and told to come back with a 

package, because they control them. They finance them. 

They’re in their pockets. They’re puppets for the oil companies. 

 

No one would give away $300 million. No one would give 

away the resources of Saskatchewan, if you weren’t controlled 

by the oil companies. That’s exactly what you are. You’re 

puppets for the oil companies. And I want to say that they 

bragged for three and a half years about how great this oil 

policy of theirs was. 

 

Well, let’s take a look at Saskatchewan. There’s a 90 per cent 

increase in the number of unemployed over the past four years, 

from the average unemployment in 1981 of 21,000 to an 

average unemployment in 1985 of over 40,000 — 90 per cent 

increase. And that’s when their economy was booming under 

the give-away to the oil companies. Forty-seven thousand 

people unemployed in Saskatchewan today; 65,000 people on 

welfare. I want to say that if we look at several of the economic 

indicators, we know that their policy of the boom and bust, of 

tying their start to the multinational oil companies, is not 

working here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we look and see what has happened in Saskatchewan. We 

find that the oil company and the economic policies of the 

government opposite is not the answer. We indicated, Mr. 

Speaker, that the population during the last year, of 

Saskatchewan, went down some 6,000. We found in 

Saskatchewan during this so-called boom that these members 

opposite put in place, that retail sale growth in ’85 was the 

lowest in Canada. And over the past four years there has been 

actual decline in the real per capital GNP in Saskatchewan. The 

total level of real investment in Saskatchewan has been less 

since they took office, less every year since 1981 — decline in 

the real levels of investment. In 1985 the average earnings for 

Saskatchewan workers actually declined — a decline in wages. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there is a legacy that the policy 

of the members opposite is going to leave behind. Here in 

Saskatchewan, because of the direct consequences of their oil 

policy, we find that the people of this province are burdened 

with a $2 billion deficit; 2 billion . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to advise the 

member his time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, every time I have the occasion in 

the last while to rise in this House and follow in a debate where 

I happen to follow one of the NDP members, I usually end up 

starting out my speech with amazement at how they continue on 

their same negative path that they’ve always been on. We have 

here, Mr. Speaker, we have first of all the routine proceedings 

which we all in this House know. The motion by, it says, “Mr. 

Birkbeck, to move the following Motion:” This motion under 

rule 16 was moved on Friday. It begins as follows: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the programs and policies it has  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

445 

 

adopted to stimulate our oil industry and create thousands 

of jobs for families in this province . . . 

 

Now we had here in question period, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, 

particularly the Leader of the Opposition, up howling about 

jobs — howls about jobs. Now when we get into this situation 

he takes the stand and he says here that the jobs in the oil patch 

will be lost. But what he’s doing, Mr. Speaker, is assuming that 

he’s going to be the next premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Young: — Now I will tell you that if that short little man is 

the next premier of the province, then I will predict that the jobs 

that he stood up and said will be lost, will be lost. He stood up 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and he said, if I get back into office, 

I’m going to cut the funding. He said, I’m going to cut the 

funding to the St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. Now he says 

that if he gets elected the jobs in the oil patch will be lost. 

 

Now my point, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this, is this motion 

was filed on Friday. I have yesterday’s Star-Phoenix. 

Headlines, first page: “Devine seeks Ottawa action on wheat 

and oil.” 

 

Now certainly the prices of wheat were announced today. The 

only person who was surprised with the drop in wheat prices 

was the NDP agricultural critic. The guy, the former owner of 

Engel construction, who buys himself a giant Lincoln Town Car 

— which I would assume, Mr. Speaker, would buy the largest 

gas guzzler that the Ford Motor Company puts on the market — 

he buys it. He’s pretty sure about the stability of gas prices, or 

he’s got a lot more money than he lets on to have. I would 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that with a car like that he figures that 

we’re going to take care of the gas prices. And reluctantly I 

have to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that probably we will do a very 

good job of looking after the jobs in the oil patch and the price 

of gas. And I think those two can work together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP, in their speeches, tend to suggest that helping by this 

government to save jobs in the oil patch — jobs that certainly I 

acknowledge wouldn’t be there, Mr. Speaker, if they would 

have remained in office . . . And so accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re in a situation, we’re protecting jobs that I can say proudly 

for the most part we created by our policies in oil. And they 

wouldn’t be there to be saved but for the Devine government 

and its policies. 

 

Now under the NDP, they can say, well if we’d have been in 

offices we’d have had no jobs to save. And I must agree with 

them, Mr. Speaker. But certainly I think that I had the occasion, 

for instance, Mr. Speaker, to be in the member for Cut Knife-

Lloydminster’s office on Friday. And I was in his office. He 

was down the hall. A call came in. It was a call from a man in 

Maidstone. I’ll leave the name out in this situation. He called 

from Maidstone trying to reach the member from Cut Knife-

Lloydminster, who, I say, was down the hall while I was in his 

office. I took the call. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it really got to me. I could hear kids crying in the 

background, and it reminded me of calls that people  

must make to my house in Saskatoon and my kids will 

sometimes be in the background. But I am fortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, to have the availability of a number of occupations to 

me. But I assumed, Mr. Speaker, that this man was counting on 

his job in the oil patch. And he related to me the nature of his 

call and he was wondering, Mr. Speaker, if we were going to do 

anything to save jobs in the oil patch. And I assured him that 

the Premier was down in Ottawa seeking assistance on wheat 

and oil, and that with the member that he had, and with the 

government he had, that there was a very good chance that most 

people in the oil patch would be saved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I cannot believe that the member from Shaunavon — who 

I happen to know represents a constituency that has a 

considerable amount of activity in the oil patch — would stand 

up here in this legislature and carry on the way he did this 

afternoon. If he thinks that the jobs of the people who work in 

the Shaunavon area in the oil patch are unimportant, I think that 

he’s going to get the biggest surprise that he can imagine come 

the next election, because those folks will line up in great 

lengths to work to defeat that man if he carries on condemning 

the jobs and the opportunities that we have made available in 

the oil patch, particularly in Shaunavon. There’s certainly other 

constituencies, but I think that he should have stayed glued to 

his seat this afternoon in the House, Mr. Speaker, if that’s what 

his thoughts were about the oil patch, and particularly from his 

constituency. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that what we have done here is taken the 

proper approach. We’ve got a country out there, Mr. Speaker — 

Saudi Arabia. It’s got 25 per cent plus, of the world’s known oil 

reserves. We can all remember as kids, Mr. Speaker, we’d hear 

of Red Adair going out there and putting out an oil fire in Saudi 

Arabia. Well the reason that those things happen is that the stuff 

comes out of the ground without much coaxing. It’s under 

pressure. They presumably — and I have heard this on two 

occasions — that they can make money at 53 cents a barrel the 

way the stuff comes out of the ground. It’s so light and it’s so 

pure that with an additional filter you can run a turbine engine 

right off the oil well. 

 

Now we are competing here in this country, particularly in 

Saskatchewan, with wells that produce 18 barrels a day on 

average in Saskatchewan versus about 80 barrels a day in 

Alberta. Alberta has light crude. We have a lot of oil here that’s 

heavy and is contaminated with sulphur. And we have, despite 

the position that we find ourselves in by virtue of mother 

nature, did very well in this province in developing an oil 

industry under those obviously hampering facts about our oil. 

But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that without the policies that 

we have put in place, we would not be here today. We wouldn’t 

have an oil industry to protect if the NDP had remained in 

power since ’82. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, since Leduc in 1949, 1947, 

whatever it was in Alberta that they discovered Leduc, their 

government and their people in that province have a different 

attitude towards oil than we do here in Saskatchewan. Oil is 

something new that has really found  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

446 

 

its own since the Devine government was elected. But in 

Alberta, as I say, they’ve been doing this since . . . certainly 

1950 at least, it’s been part and parcel of their economy. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the new developments, the drilling 

companies, the service companies and the like that follow the 

oil patch around are something somewhat new to a lot of the 

old-time residents of Saskatchewan, and accordingly we have 

here a situation where the NDP, who are operating their entire 

provincial campaign out of a time bubble . . . I had the occasion 

to be at the teachers’ annual Easter convention at the Sheraton. 

 

And the Leader of the Opposition stood there, amongst all these 

people, and suggested that he would outspend us on education 

— which I suggest is virtually impossible — but he said that he 

was going to put 300 million more dollars in education. He was 

asked by one of the speakers there, he was asked where the 

money would come from. So the little guy comes out with the 

old pat answer. He says, I’ll get it from the oil companies; he’s 

going to get 300 more million. 

 

At the same time, that very same day, I saw a Globe and Mail 

paper, the very same day Alberta who, as I have mentioned, has 

a different attitude towards oil certainly than the NDP in this 

province, that day announced a $400 million relief program to 

save jobs and save their oil industry. At the same time, this little 

guy is down here on Victoria Avenue in Regina, suggesting that 

he’ll milk them for another $300 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that goes to show you the difference 

in attitude between the NDP and a Conservative government 

when it comes to oil and the jobs that it produces. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, as pointed out by the member from Fairview, that we 

really have to be careful not to allow the Saudi Arabians to get 

us under their thumb on oil prices. They say, and if I’m correct, 

if they can produce oil at a profit of 53 cents a barrel, we 

certainly may not have seen the bottom of it yet. What they can 

effectively do, Mr. Speaker, is shut us right down. We’d rust 

right up, at which point they could turn on the screws and 

charge anything they wanted for oil. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that for the benefit of Canadians, in order 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 

member that his time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding, being on 

the same committee as you are, that the rules of rule 16 debate 

is it goes from one side to the other, and the alternating, at least 

on this one, alternate. Because the member was on his feet for 

three times before and he’s on his feet now. My point of order 

is this: I think it’s the  

member from Pelly’s turn. Because they had a speaker; we get a 

speaker. Why do they get two in a row? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The rule states nothing of the 

kind. If the member will read the rule, the opportunity to put 

debate on the Table alternates every second week between the 

government and the opposition. When it’s time to speak, it’s the 

first man on his feet, and the first man on his feet was the 

member for Rosthern. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I was in the House when the 

last speaker was recognized, the member from Saskatoon. At 

that time there were two people on their feet, the member from 

Saskatoon and the member from Pelly. You recognized the 

member from Saskatoon, and I appreciate and agree with your 

decision. I watched closely this time, and I noticed very clearly 

the member from Pelly was on his feet first, and the member 

from Rosthern rose second. You never took the opportunity to 

look . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The first man on 

his feet was the member for Rosthern, and the member for 

Rosthern is recognized. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

glad to enter this debate on an issue that is important to the 

consumers of Saskatchewan. The motion indicates that one of 

the concerns is that OPEC should not be able to hold the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan, to 

blackmail. That’s really what we’re talking about. 

 

If the production of Saskatchewan and Canada were to fall by 

the wayside and rust in the pipes, as was indicated by the 

member earlier, then what would happen, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the citizens of Canada would be held to blackmail by the 

countries of OPEC. We lived through that, Mr. Speaker, in past 

years. We can never let it happen again. 

 

The prices that were crippling our farmers in the costs of their 

tractor fuels and diesel fuels was there because of OPEC, not 

because of Canadian policy. The decision was, we must make 

Canada self-sufficient. We should not be at the blackmail of a 

country, of the OPEC countries. That’s what this motion is 

saying. It is not saying more than we must protect the jobs of 

those in the industry and the people of Canada. 

 

How do you protect Canada and the citizens that use the 

production of the oil fields? By making sure that oil can be 

produced as cheaply as possible and the benefits are passed 

along to the consumers, and yet the industry is allowed to live. 

That’s what it’s all about. It’s not to be that the artificial prices 

and costs of OPEC should be able to strangle our industry, and 

when we are at least able to protect ourselves, because we have 

an inefficient supply, that they can hold us up for ransom. 

 

The member, in moving his motion, indicated his concern for 

the future of the Saskatchewan citizen, and  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

447 

 

that the oil prices should be stable. Many a people today in 

business, who have been on contracts for the next year with in 

mind the cost of fuel for the job that they must do — and that is 

normal — so they must consider what the cost of fuel is. If fuel 

is going up and down like a rocket, they have problems. And 

therefore we do not have a stable and sensible economy. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Moosomin 

stood to his feet and made the motion, he was very clear in 

saying we must protect the consumer. We must protect the jobs 

of those working in the industry. We must not allow OPEC to 

blackmail us. We must have stability in the industry, stability in 

the work-force, stability for our farmers. It is important for the 

farmers to know what their costs will be as much as ahead. It is 

important, Mr. Speaker, that all of us understand that no OPEC 

country or any other should blackmail us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why the members on this side of the House 

are supporting this motion and not supporting the opposition’s 

amendment. That opposition’s amendment is not dealing with 

reality, Mr. Speaker — the reality of stable markets, stable 

energy, and a stable, known future for our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only way that we can protect ourselves is to 

have production in Canada — Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 

elsewhere. But we must try to keep that production at a level 

that is affordable, and so that the citizens using the product can 

use it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t sure how much time I would get in this 

debate when I rose, but I think that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the 

members that the time under rule 16 has elapsed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 3 — Job Creation and the Unemployment 

Rate 

 

Mr. Myers: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a lot of pride to stand 

here today to talk about youth employment in this province. 

We’ve heard a lot of rhetoric from the opposition, and we will 

hear a lot more — but that’s all it is, is rhetoric. 

 

This is the Opportunities ’86 kit which has gone out to the 

employers. And it’s creative . . .‘ 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about jobs, though? What about 

jobs? 

 

Mr. Myers: — Oh, the opposition wants to know about jobs. 

They want to know about jobs — a new story for them. 

 

In 1983 and 1984, Opportunities ’83 and ’84 created 9,200 jobs 

for summer students — 9,200 jobs. And last year, with the co-

operation of a new federal government, we created over 10,500 

student jobs — students who need these jobs to go back to 

university, to further their education, and generally create a 

better society for us. 

And this year, with this application kit which has been sent out 

to the employers, there will be 8,600 student jobs. And that is a 

Saskatchewan program alone, not dovetailing with the federal 

program. So we’re quite proud of this program — 8,500 jobs 

which might not have been there if that group of ragtag 

politicians had been in power. They don’t believe in doing what 

they say; they just believe in saying what they’re not going to 

do. 

 

We’ve just gone through a debate on rule 16, and we’ve heard 

what they’re going to do with the oil industry. Many of the 

people have heard the Premier’s, the member from Estevan’s 

comments when he was in Calgary. Well I was in Calgary with 

the Premier at that time. And we went there and we talked to 

the oilmen. Lo and behold, who sat at the next table to me? 

Tommy Douglas . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He’s on the 

board of directors of Husky Oil. And prior to the dinner I had a 

conversation with Tommy Douglas. And he recognized that the 

NDP party of today is not the CCF party of yesterday . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Not the CCF party. Two different 

faces, two different faces. 

 

The CCF party of the 1930s and 1940s was a party that wanted 

to create jobs. They were a party of the farmers . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . But is the NDP a party of the farmers today? 

It’s a party of the unions, the eastern union bosses, the Bob 

Whites. And lo and behold, Ed Broadbent, leader of the federal 

NDP party, what doe she say on CTV? He says, I would like 

Bob White, leader of an eastern union, to succeed me as leader 

of the NDP party federally. 

 

So who’s speaking? Is it the people of Saskatchewan or the 

eastern union leaders. Lo and behold, it can’t be the people of 

Saskatchewan when you hear comments like that on national 

TV . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m quite proud of the fact 

that we took the initiative in 1983, after becoming government 

in 1982, to develop jobs for students and I have talked to them. 

I had the opportunity last year to visit with some of the students 

in my riding who took advantage of the Opportunities ’85 

program. And I will repeat for the members, 10,500 summer 

jobs for students last year. Now that, that is action. 

 

(1600) 

 

We have heard about the action from the former government. 

They created only 2,000 full-time jobs in the last year they were 

government versus 6,000 part-time jobs. We know that they’re 

not a party of action; rather a party of inaction. As Joe 

Borowski would describe them, the now dead party. 

 

We know that they are against students. They are against 

students having the opportunity to go out and establish their 

own businesses with incentives form small business. They 

never came up with that. They’re against business completely. 

They believe the only place that you can employ people is in a 

bigger government; a bigger government which creates a larger 

tax burden on the taxpayers. 

 

And as the Deputy Premier has said yesterday and today  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

448 

 

in question period, we have 17,000 more people in the work 

place than we had last year at February. That’s the February to 

February stat. We have more people in the work-force. We have 

30,000 more permanent jobs since 1982. And a lot of those 

positions have been filled by persons who were summer 

students, who had the advantage of working and obtaining 

experience, and now have a job, a permanent job, in the work-

force. 

 

Eight per cent of the jobs in this country are created by small 

business, businesses under 100 or under 50 employees — 80 

per cent. But who do they come out against? They come out 

against business. They don’t know the difference between small 

business and big business. They would have you believe that all 

business is bad — totally bad. 

 

When we had . . . Last year, when we were undergoing a very 

difficult period of time for the south-western part of the 

province, we saw them criticize the action. But if we turn the 

calendar back, we look back during the 1970s when there were 

times of drought and we saw nothing, nothing from the former 

government that was put into agriculture. Yet, under 

Opportunities ’85 program, under the Opportunities ’86, those 

small businesses who need assistance — and this is an 

assistance to small businesses — can hire a summer student. 

This program is designed to assist small businesses; assist 

farmers; assist those people who are on the edge of going one 

way or the other. In many cases this program will keep the 

businesses viable. Yet you would hear from the opposition that 

this program is detrimental — detrimental — to the province of 

Saskatchewan. The only thing it’s detrimental to is the re-

election hopes of several MLAs sitting across the floor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to look to the future. We have to build for 

the future. We cannot look back in the past. We cannot be 

negative. We must be positive, positive that we sit down, 

determine the programs for students, for the young, that are 

required to make them part of the work-force. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of 

Labour: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 

Saskatchewan for creating jobs and opportunities for the 

people of Saskatchewan and for maintaining, on average, 

the lowest unemployment in Canada since 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Minister of 

Labour, it gives me great pleasure to rise and speak with respect 

to the creation of jobs and the record of this government in the 

last four years. 

 

And first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve had in the last 

four years in this province is a change in attitude, an attitude 

towards employment rather than an attitude towards hand-outs. 

And the former government’s attitude towards unemployment 

was that the government would hire more and more people, that 

they would raise taxes continuously to pay for the more and 

more people, and that this cycle would never end. And it ended 

in 1982  

with the election that elected our government. That cycle of 

taxation ended, and their cycle of taxation to create jobs has 

ended. 

 

And we have given it a new emphasis, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The emphasis and the motivation of this government is quite 

simple. The motivation is that we allow the people to go about 

their business and the only time that the government interferes 

is to referee when necessary. But ordinarily you let the people 

go about their business, owning their land; owning their 

businesses; running corporations, large and small; running co-

operatives; and creating jobs. The government does not create 

jobs. 

 

The members opposite try to tell me that the government 

creates jobs. How many people are working in your box factory 

and how many people are working in your shoe factory that you 

started years ago, and are now forgotten? How many people are 

employed there? None — absolutely none. Because the 

government does not create wealth; the people create wealth; 

And the wealth of this province in opposition is that you spoiled 

the people and you ruined their attitude, till they became 

dependent on the almighty government to survive, dependent on 

the almighty government that you tried to portray, to create 

wealth and happiness for them. 

 

The situation we have here is that our government has created 

17,000 jobs in the past year. And that, I am pleased to say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is primarily jobs for women, something that 

the members opposite have talked much about but have done 

very little about. Just in the last year our government has 

created 17,000 jobs. About 80 per cent of them are for women. 

This is the fastest growing sector in our society and the greatest 

area of increased employment, and most of them are full-time 

jobs. 

 

And in addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to say that 

the jobs that have been created for women by the people going 

about doing their business, have primarily been jobs in 

management. The increase of women in management in 

business has gone up dramatically, and the number of women 

who are self-employed has increased dramatically under our 

government. 

 

And to encourage women to be self-employed and to start their 

own businesses, we are now starting a Saskatchewan pension 

plan. The Saskatchewan pension plan will help in particular 

women because they have to go in and out of the job market by 

the call and the nature of their situation in life, that women and 

only women can have children, and many of them prefer to 

have children. 

 

So this puts them in a difficult situation where they have to 

leave the job market and requires them to lose out on pension 

benefits. So not only are more women working but we will 

increase the benefits to women and improve their pension 

situation. 

 

In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are more people 

working now in Saskatchewan than there ever have been in the 

history of this province. And the only reason that 

unemployment in the statistics has increased is that more  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

449 

 

and more people want to work. And why do they want to work? 

Because there is hope for them to get a job so they apply for 

jobs. 

 

When there is no hope to get a job, more and more people sit 

back and say, ah well, I won’t even bother applying. But there 

has been hope in the last few years. Because there has been that 

hope, more and more people have applied, and the participation 

rate is now well over 65 per cent. That’s 65 per cent of all 

people between the age of 18 and 65 have applied for and wish 

to work. 

 

So that is a very, very tremendous record on behalf of this 

government in difficult economic times throughout the western 

world. I’m not saying that times are completely difficult, but 

there have been problems in western society. And the problems 

that have developed have all developed from one simple reason, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — a lack of a proper work attitude in the 

western democracies. 

 

And therefore I am pleased to say that no longer in 

Saskatchewan do we have the work attitude that had developed 

in Britain under the socialists. We now have a proper work 

attitude. We do not have the work attitude that developed in 

Sweden under the socialists. We now have a work attitude 

where people say, I will go out and I will do my part, I will do 

my share, and accordingly everyone in society will benefit. 

 

So there has been tremendous improvement in jobs. And not 

only that, in the permanent sphere of jobs and employment, but 

also for youth. Last year under the Opportunities ’85 program 

there were at least 10,000 additional jobs for youth created in 

this province. This was done by the provincial and the federal 

government co-operating. For once we have co-operation and 

we have seen the benefits — of 10,000 youths applying. Youth 

employment has improved so much that this year I find very, 

very few youth in my constituency who cannot find a job. 

 

And I would say that is partly due to attitude. The attitude in my 

constituency is that now there is hope, that now that small 

business has a fair opportunity, that we’ve extended 

employment programs to farms, that everyone in my 

constituency has an improved attitude. And it has very, very 

little to do with the attitude of the people opposite. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition, I want you to consider the 

type of job creation and the attitudes that exist in this province. 

We as a government have concentrated on building this 

province. We have concentrated on building jobs. The members 

opposite have concentrated on whining. And every time we 

build something, the members opposite whine. And when we 

announce a fertilizer plant in Regina with 200 additional 

permanent jobs and 600 jobs in construction, does this ring a 

positive bell with the members opposite? No, it does not. What 

we have from them is whining, continuous whining. 

 

And that kind of attitude is what is breaking this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s the whining attitude of the members 

opposite. And that really is the difference between this 

government and that party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because I 

recall in my younger days — and  

some of us are foolish when we’re young — I was a member of 

that party. And I never saw such a losing attitude in my entire 

life. The attitude was that the world was going to crush us, that 

somebody evil was going to prevent us from doing good. 

 

And you have to have an attitude that we can build this 

province, that the people together can build. Instead they’re 

saying, well the people are oppressed and they need the 

socialists to save them. From what? The people do not need to 

be saved from themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1615) 

 

Therefore, you have our government building jobs in resources. 

Oil — we have promoted the production of oil. The members 

opposite have whined. We have promoted lumber production in 

the pulp mills. The members opposite have whined. We have 

promoted jobs in small business. They don’t like business. They 

don’t like any kind of business, so they have whined that we 

have created jobs in small business. 

 

We have created jobs in co-operatives, something that they tried 

to take over as a political movement. The co-operatives in this 

province are the purest form of capitalism. They are the little 

guys’ corporation. This government is co-operating with the co-

operative to build upgraders, to build oil refineries, to build 

fertilizer plants. 

 

And what do they do over there? Are they happy about the 

jobs? No. It is a continuous whine, a continuous whining, day in 

and day out. You have the NDP wine that has turned to vinegar, 

and it tastes terrible, and the people are sick and tired of 

listening and tasting this wine from the members opposite. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have created jobs in 

agriculture and agriculture processing. And what do we hear 

from them? Whining. And we have created jobs in North 

Battleford in the bacon plant. And we hear from the members 

opposite whining that it’s a gift to someone. There is no gift. 

The opportunity for the member from Shaunavon to dig oil 

wells and drill them and find salt is equal to everyone else. And 

he whines. 

 

Their policy of creating jobs was to pay for dry holes or salt-

water wells. Our policy is that if you find oil, you get an 

incentive. And this has created jobs. 

 

And the former premier, Leader of the Opposition, has a 

comment about Alberta. I would think that this province could 

stand an attitude such as the one in Alberta. There is really a 

change in attitude when you cross the border. Let me tell you 

about my own brother. When he was in Saskatchewan, he was a 

bit of whiner himself, and he believe in the socialist policies. 

And as soon as he moved to Alberta and crossed that border he 

had a change of attitude. And I can tell you right now he is a 

Progressive Conservative. He should have the attitude that the 

people in Alberta have. It’s whenever you listen to the members 

opposite and their attitude of how you create jobs — you create 

jobs about whining, about  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

450 

 

progress; you create jobs according to them — whining about 

building industries and plants. 

 

I tell you, the people of this province are totally sick of this kind 

of whining. They want a positive attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They came here to build this province. Our ancestors came here 

and lived in sod shacks; then they lived in log houses; then they 

lived in brick houses and in frame houses. And now they are 

living in very comfortable circumstances in this province, all 

because they built it. They build this province with a positive 

attitude. They built jobs — the spin-off from people working. 

People whining have never created a job in the entire history of 

this province. 

 

And I encourage the members opposite to adopt our policies of 

positive building in this province — create jobs for the people 

of this province. And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m in 

favour of this motion, this resolution. 

 

This province has consistently maintained the lowest average 

unemployment rate. This province has maintained a priority for 

jobs. The members opposite, their priority is for a few people 

making a lot of money. Our priority is jobs for everyone. And 

once we have jobs, then we will work on the working 

conditions and improve the jobs and improve the working 

conditions of these people. But the very poorest working 

condition that I can think of in this province ins to not have a 

job. That is the worst working condition I can think of. 

 

And they stand there and they talk about jobs. And the member 

for Canora wants to tell me about jobs. I tell you, the member 

for Canora had better apply for a job right now, and it better not 

be in this province because he is well-known. And I doubt very 

much if anyone is going to give him a job, so he had better start 

running in British Columbia, I tell you — that’s where his home 

is. So if the member from Canora wants to give us a lesson in 

jobs, he should get off of his chair, and I will give him the floor 

and he can tell us about jobs, and how many jobs he would 

create with the Western Canada Concept Party, who has no 

concept of a deficit, no concept of taxation, and don’t even talk 

about jobs. And the Western Canada Concept Party . . . It’s 

amazing that we now mention this group in the House. I mean, 

they never speak. They never talk about jobs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invited that member from the Western 

Canada Concept Party to get up and explain how his party 

would create jobs. But what I’m telling you is that it’s the 

members opposite in the NDP who are the true danger to this 

province. I will ignore the Western Canada Concept Party 

because they are a blip in the history of this province — a 

hiccup in the history of Saskatchewan, and we will not concern 

ourselves with. 

 

The true danger to this province and the jobs of our people is 

the New Democratic Party. And I invite the people to make a 

comparison between the New Democratic Party and this 

government. The New Democrats: well they have no new ideas 

to create jobs, none whatsoever that we have ever that we have 

ever seen. And it’s submitted here that this province would be 

better off staying with the government they’ve got, the 

government  

that is building jobs — and I haven’t even got to the entire list 

— building jobs in industry. A Phillips Cable plant in Moose 

Jaw, they whined about that. There isn’t anything positive that 

this government can do that the members opposite don’t 

complain about. And they have the same attitude as the . . . 

 

Recently I received a brief from someone who’s to represent 

workers, the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour. It was a 27-page brief on how jobs could be created in 

this province, or what should be done with respect to jobs. And 

27 pages of that document were negative. And I said to Ms. 

Hunt: isn’t there anything in the 27 pages of this brief, is there 

anything in the 27 pages — can’t you think of one good thing 

that our government has done? And she said, no, really, I can’t. 

That is a negative attitude. 

 

The members opposite, and some people in this province who 

are not in favour of workers but are in favour of their own 

political purposes, try to use jobs as an example of how they 

would help the people. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the best 

example of what are good policies, the best of what a good 

government is doing, is to have people working. And there are 

17,000 more people working right now this very day than there 

were a year ago. And there are thousands and thousands more 

than there were in 1982. 

 

And there is a statistic that said the unemployment rate is up 

slightly, but the employment rate is up to a larger figure than it 

ever has been. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Phenomenally. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Phenomenally, I had it pointed out to 

me. 

 

Now the members opposite have indicated their idea of jobs is 

militant labour. And militant labour doesn’t go on strike any 

more. They go on job actions. And I submit to the members 

opposite, to the people of this province, and to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that my idea of a job action is people working. That is 

what I call a job action. And we have 17,000 more job actions 

today than we had a year ago, and I like that kind of job action, 

and I do not believe that militancy and a whining attitude by the 

members opposite is going to do anything for employment in 

this province. 

 

And therefore I am very pleased to commend this government 

on the action is has taken. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to have the opportunity to enter the debate. 

 

The government . . . If you can believe it, the member is 

congratulating the Government of Saskatchewan for creating 

jobs and opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, that in light of the fact, what hypocrisy! 

 

If we take a look at what is going on in Saskatchewan, if  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

451 

 

we take a look what’s going on across Canada under a federal 

Tory government, if we look at what is happening to the young 

people of this country and in Saskatchewan, it’s a national 

disgrace. There are 16 to 17 per cent unemployed among young 

people of Canada and of Saskatchewan. And do you realize that 

they stand up, one of their departments, and they come forward 

with a document, and do you know what they say? Pretty soon 

it will be socially acceptable that we have high unemployment 

among our youth. And they stand up here and they have the 

audacity to come forward to congratulate themselves on the 

creation of jobs and opportunity to young people. 

 

And if we take a look at the . . . in Saskatchewan, if you go to 

Saskatoon, the city in which the member that moved this 

resolution comes from, you find that the unemployment is over 

12 per cent in the city of Saskatoon. And affected most are the 

young people of Saskatoon, and indeed, the whole entire 

province. 

 

I say, if you take a look at the unemployment here in 

Saskatchewan, just as has been indicated in the conference on 

unemployment across Canada by a Father McGrath from 

Newfoundland, who said that it was a national disgrace that so 

many people do not have full-time jobs, and if you look in 

Saskatchewan here, you find over 100,000 of the employed 

people of Saskatchewan — over 100,000 — are working from 

one to 30 hours a week. They disguise that there’s full 

employment and that there’s opportunities for people in this 

province. 

 

And I say to you that if you look here in Saskatchewan, you 

find that there has been a 90 per cent increase in the number of 

unemployed over the past four years. From an average 

unemployment in 1981 of 21,000, to an average number of 

unemployed in 1985 of over 40,000, that’s a 90 per cent 

increase, Mr. Speaker. And they stand in this legislature and 

they congratulate the effort of making unemployment the 

highest in the history of this province, at over 40,000. And the 

most recent statistics that came forward, last month 

unemployment in this province has now risen to over 47,000 — 

47,000 people unemployed. 

 

And if we take a look at, in addition to that, how they have 

provided opportunities to people of Saskatchewan, you find that 

in the welfare not only has unemployment risen, but welfare has 

risen massively. And do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that over 

65,000 people are dependent on welfare in this province that 

they say there is so much opportunity? Do you realize that the 

opportunity that they have given to thousands of people in this 

province, in 1982 there was about 4,500 unemployed 

employables on welfare. You know what it is today? Almost 

15,000 people, unemployed employables, that should be 

working, Mr. Speaker. This is the Tory opportunity that they’re 

giving to the young people of this province. 

 

And I want to say that if we take a look at the record of job 

creations, how well is the province of Saskatchewan doing in 

creating new jobs? Well, statistics came out in respect to that 

also, and if you look at where they are in creating jobs, there are 

only two provinces in Canada doing worse than Saskatchewan: 

Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. Every other province 

in Canada is  

creating more jobs and giving more opportunities than 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And they talked and they bragged about how the population of 

the province is increasing. And you take a look at the statistics 

in respect to whether population is coming here or leaving 

Saskatchewan, in light of all this opportunity that they talk bout. 

And you know what the statistics indicate? That in 1985, 6,040 

people left this province. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if there’s economic 

buoyancy in this province, you’d have people coming and not 

people leaving. And if you analyse what people are leaving, you 

find that it is young people, aged 20 to 29, leaving the province. 

In the first two months of this year, there were 1,700 a month 

that left this province; about 57 people a day leaving the 

province. No jobs, no opportunities, no future, no hope 

provided by the economic policies of this group — this 

bankrupt group — across the way. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s understandable that the 

circumstances for our young people instead of getting better, is 

going to be worse, because the birds across the way, they put all 

of their eggs in one basket, and that was in the oil company, in 

the multinationals, in their oil policy. That was supposed to give 

economic development in the province. 

 

And you find, Mr. Speaker, that there has been a bust in the oil 

company, and people are being laid off. And you find in the 

steel company people are being laid off. You find even in the 

brewery companies they’re laying them off — not getting jobs, 

no new opportunities. 

 

And I ask anyone, and I ask the people of Saskatchewan, go 

into rural Saskatchewan and ask. Can you find one small 

manufacturing business created in the last four years? I’ll tell 

you, you can’t find very many. You can find some that have 

had to close their doors, like in Humboldt. The manufacturing 

of farm equipment had to close their doors. 

 

But I’ll tell you, during the period of a New Democratic 

government there was opportunities. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, If you go around my constituency — is a 

demonstration of working with small business to create jobs and 

opportunities in centre after centre in Saskatchewan. 

 

Not today. I look at Englefeld and the Schulte Industries. I look 

at Annaheim, and we have the Doepker brothers. I look at St. 

Gregor and Western Industries, Michel’s Tarps. You go into 

Wynyard and you have the Plains Poultry. You look in Lanigan, 

and you have potash and you have other industries — every 

community. And I’ll tell you, every community that we have 

those manufacturing and small business set up, it was during the 

period of the New Democratic tie and during good economic 

times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — But what we are finding across  

  



 

April 8, 1986 

452 

 

Saskatchewan today in rural Saskatchewan: business after 

business closing their door. And I say, times are tough under 

Tories. There are not great opportunities. 

 

I want to tell you of a very, very moving situation that I have 

had experience with. And it’s not a single, isolated situation. 

 

And I had a mother approach me and say, could you do 

something to help my son get a job? He graduated from high 

school. I sent him off to Saskatoon to the tech. I supported him 

during this period of time to finish off his grade 12. He has tried 

to get a job and he is unable to get a job since he has graduated 

despite the fact that he has gone to school. 

 

These are the situations that are happening across 

Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 

cannot fool the people of this province into believing that 

you’re offering opportunities to the young people. Ask young 

people today, or parents of young people, whether they have 

better opportunities today or whether they had better 

opportunities under the New Democratic Party. And I’ll tell 

you, they will overwhelmingly say young people had an 

opportunity to do, work. 

 

I remember there was a lot of young people who in fact used to 

go out and work on the Department of Highways during the 

summer, earn a decent wage, go back and pay their tuition fees 

and go on to education. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can’t do it any more. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Can’t do it. No highways. They don’t build 

them. They get outsiders. They bring them in from Alberta or 

Manitoba. They don’t give them to . . . the opportunities to the 

young people of Saskatchewan. I think you really have a lot of 

nerve to come before the legislature here and to indicate that 

you’re offering opportunities to young people. 

 

And I’ll tell you this, Mr. Deputy Premier, that what the people 

of this province want is not your rhetoric and not your jobs that 

you’re pretending you’re going to create by press releases. 

What they want is indeed solid jobs. They say this government 

is bankrupt. And what the people of Saskatchewan want is an 

opportunity to turf you out of office. The only thing that is 

preventing them from doing that is that you haven’t got the 

nerve to go to the people of Saskatchewan. And you should be 

ashamed of yourselves because four years is up. The people of 

Saskatchewan are phoning our office saying, get rid of this 

outfit. 

 

You know, if you look at some of the key industries here in the 

province and you ask: how can they stand here and say that they 

are creating jobs? Retail sales are down; housing — 5,200 

housing during the past year; investment is down — public and 

private investment; business closures, bankruptcies, and on and 

on it goes. 

 

And, in fact, if you want to look at the businesses closed since 

these members opposite came in, you’ve got Dad’s Cookies, 

closed out. You’ve got Ipsco, closed out. Friggstad, closed. 

Dominion stores, closed. Robinson Stores, closed; MacLeods, 

closed. Pioneer Trust — well  

Pioneer Trust, their friend — closed, gone. They filled their 

suitcase, mind you and took off and went south. Eaton’s, Moose 

Jaw, closed down. Co-op Implements in the South, closed. And 

on and on the list goes. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is another way. There is the 

New Democratic way, providing jobs and opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people; doing it here and building ourselves, not 

depending on multinational corporations or for anyone from 

outside of Saskatchewan — but rather, I say, doing it ourselves. 

 

And we have put together several policies which I think will in 

fact bring about job opportunities to our young people. Can you 

feature that one of the industries that has the best job producing 

record in the province is housing? And they say that thousands 

of people are coming into this province. Oh, they’re just coming 

in, in hordes. They haven’t hardly built a house in four years. I 

wonder where these people are heading out. 

 

But I’ll tell you there is an alternative, and I’ll say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have a housing program that is going to 

provide young people with an opportunity to own a home, and 

it’s going to give an opportunity to our business community, the 

plumbers, the carpenters, the electricians, give them an 

opportunity to work again. 

 

I’ll tell you, come to my community in my constituency and see 

whether or not the plumbers and the electricians and the 

carpenters have the same amount of work as when we were in 

office, and you say you give the opportunity. I’ll tell you that 

they’ll turf you guys out if you ever get the nerve to call the 

election. There is absolutely no doubt. People of Saskatchewan 

know that. You tested the waters. They say you’re finished; call 

the election. 

 

And I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, this is what the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking for. They’re looking for positive 

programs to build and to give people an opportunity to work. 

And we have a housing program here, and I want to say, I 

offered it to the members opposite, and I would recommend that 

they put it into effect. 

 

What we’ve proposed to do here is to provide direct financial 

assistance of $7,000 to first-time buyers of new homes. That 

gives an opportunity, a stimulus — provide security for families 

through 7 per cent home mortgages for the first $70,000 on all 

new and existing homes for seven years; increase construction 

of affordable, decent housing for low-income families and 

seniors. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there have been some winners and 

there have been some losers under the administration of the 

members opposite. There’s no doubt about that. But I tell you, 

the winners have not been the young people of this province. 

Sixteen to 17 per cent unemployed and you’re saying you’re 

giving opportunities to young people? Young people taking 

education and unable to find career opportunities. This is the 

opportunities that the members opposite give. But there have 

been some winners on that side. 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

453 

 

An Hon. Member: — Few. Very few. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes. They have a method of allocating the jobs. 

They have a method of allocating jobs to some particular 

people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How does that work? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you how it works. They send in names 

and they get names of young people that are looking for jobs 

and they have them checked through and they send it in to the 

Public Service Commission with a little blue star. And if it’s a 

little blue star, you can go ahead and hire him because he’s 

likely to be a Tory. Those are the opportunities they give. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are sick 

and tired of listening to the Premier go around this province, 

community after community, with a press release, with no 

substance whatsoever of offering opportunities to these young 

people. 

 

The most recent is the one that he announced here in Regina 

that he was going to set up a fertilizer plant. Well when you go 

through the press release in depth, you find that it’s just a 

memorandum of agreement to take a look into the possible 

feasibility of it. 

 

As I was saying, there are some winners though, Mr. Speaker. 

But I’ll tell you, it hasn’t been the young people of this province 

that were the winners. The winners were the oil companies that 

they handed out $300 million annually. The winners are the oil 

companies who the Premier treks down to Ottawa to get some 

financial assistance for it. That’s what he’s doing. 

 

But I’ll tell you, the Premier hasn’t stood in this legislature and 

asked us to join in a constructive way of building in 

Saskatchewan for our young people who have no opportunity. 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Premier, you may sit there and groan 

away, but if you had the courage, you would in fact call an 

election and let us get on with the business of the province. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have seen that by the indication that 

there have been some winners and there have been some losers. 

And most of all, even though the unemployment rate is 

extremely high — it affects our young people the most — the 

other reality that we have is that, even if this government 

wanted to have a meaningful program for Saskatchewan people, 

they are no longer able to do it. Because they have driven this 

province into debt — $2 billion, maybe more, just on the 

consolidated account. 

 

(1645) 

 

And they say they are giving people an opportunity? I’ll tell 

you, every young people is being burdened with debt. They are. 

Their future is being jeopardized by the extravagance and 

mismanagement of this province by the members opposite. 

 

And so I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that the people opposite . . . 

You’ll notice that in their caucus many of them no longer will 

be running. Thirteen of the original  

caucus, originally in their caucus, have decided to jump ship, 

not to go forward with them, because of the magnitude of the 

mess that has been created here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so what I want to do here, Mr. Speaker, is in fact to move 

an amendment to this here resolution: 

 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following substituted: 

 

Condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for allowing 

unemployment in Saskatchewan to rise to record levels, 

and for the introduction of programs which create only a 

few short-term jobs in order to create the illusion of 

reducing the numbers on welfare while doing nothing 

meaningful to assist the 100,000 Saskatchewan people who 

are unemployed and on welfare. 

 

I move this motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, 

the member from Regina Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — It has always been my understanding that a 

person that seconded the motion had a priority in following the 

speaker, Mr. Speaker. I believe I have priority as a seconder of 

the motion in this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Not as a rule on an amendment, unless you 

were up first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, while the debate was going 

on — and I don’t want to put the Table in a bad position — but 

I checked with them to ask whether or not priority would be 

given to the seconder. They informed me that they would get 

priority. And I wonder where the rule is that you are using that 

is different from the people who advise you? Because I want to 

say clearly that in this House it has been the, if not written, at 

least the tradition, that the seconder get to speak. And I’m 

asking that question very clearly of you, sir on your ruling, 

whether or not you have documents or precedents to back that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the member has a point of 

order and he would like to state the rule that he’s applying it to, 

I will be glad to look at it. But I don’t believe that the member 

will find a rule that states that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the issue at stake here in this 

motion is whether or not . . . 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

454 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The members are shouting at 

the Chair as though the Chair has no right to make a decision. 

The first member on his feet was recognized, and I give the 

member the right to speak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the issue at stake in this 

motion is a very simple one, and it’s whether or not the policies 

of an NDP party, or whether or not the policies of Progressive 

Conservative government, are going to be able to create more 

jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, I note the members opposite, the 

members of the New Democratic Party opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — You asked for some authority. I refer you 

to . . . and it’s been the practice for . . . I’ve been here . . . this is 

my 11th year, and it’s been the practice in the full 11 years. I 

refer, Mr. Speaker, to rule 304: 

 

The member who makes a motion may give the name of 

his seconder who will, if necessary, indicate his consent, 

and the seconder will then be allowed to speak on the 

question. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, if you want authority it’s rule 304 of 

Beauchesne’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. You’re dealing with a motion 

here, and at this point in time we are dealing with amendments. 

However, I can’t wait in the Chair until somebody gets up to 

speak in the seconding position. The first member on his feet 

was on this side of the House this time, and he was the person 

recognized. 

 

Order. Order, please. The first person recognized was the 

person who was on his feet and the member has the right to 

speak. Proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for providing me 

with the right to speak. It’s clear that the NDP opposition would 

want to use procedural wrangling in an attempt to keep the 

people of Saskatchewan from hearing the real story that they 

need to hear — the real story that they need to hear in the next 

few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And I want to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan the story that they haven’t heard. Here’s the story 

they haven’t heard, right here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The New Democratic Party, when you were in power the last 

three years of your government, how many permanent jobs 

were created? How many permanent jobs were created? Four 

thousand permanent jobs in the last three years that you were in 

government? Well I want to compare that, Mr. Speaker, to the 

number of permanent jobs created under the Progressive 

Conservative government. How many: 4,000, 10,000, 15,000 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The House cannot 

operate with that amount of yelling, and I’m going to ask for 

order. 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be shouted down 

by the members opposite, the members of the opposition. They 

don’t want to hear. They don’t want to hear the truth. The truth 

is that under their administration there were only 4,000 

permanent jobs created in the last three years that they were in 

power. Under a Progressive Conservative government, 21,000 

full-time permanent jobs created in a commensurate three-year 

period of time — 21,000 — almost five times as many as were 

created under a New Democratic Party administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that clearly indicates that the policies of the 

Progressive Conservative Party and the policies of a 

Progressive Conservative government under Premier Grant 

Devine create far more opportunity, create far more permanent 

jobs, create a brighter future for the people of this province, 

than would ever be available under a New Democratic Party. 

 

I want to explain, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of things that are 

being done now and in the future in this province to provide 

that kind of opportunity. I don’t have much time, but I do want 

to list these projects because I’m sure the people of 

Saskatchewan would like to hear what is being done today, 

what will be done tomorrow, what will be done in the next three 

months, and six months, and after the next election. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have the new paper mill project in 

Prince Albert, a project that the members opposite in the NDP 

opposition have indicated they oppose. Then we have the new 

Regina oil upgrader, Mr. Speaker — thousands of jobs created 

out in the oil patch. And then we have the announcement 

recently of an ammonia plant which is gong to be attached to 

that particular project. That is going to create jobs and 

opportunity for many people. 

 

But I would bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite would like to close down the oil patch and in so doing 

they would put at risk . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They would put 

at risk, by closing down the oil patch, this massive oil upgrader 

for the city of Regina, for the residents of this city, for the 

residents of this province. 

 

In addition to the oil upgrader we have the new Rafferty and 

Alameda dams and the Shand power project in Estevan. And 

what have the members opposite said about this project which 

will create literally hundreds and hundreds of jobs over the long 

term for the people of our province? Are they in favour of this 

project? No, they would close that one down, as well. 

 

We have the new fertilizing manufacture plant in Regina; we 

have the new technical school in Prince Albert, recently 

completed; we have the new agriculture college complex in 

Saskatoon that was recently announced by the Premier. That 

construction project will create literally hundreds of jobs, many 

opportunities for working people here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have the new irrigation projects which have 

been . . . 

  



 

April 8, 1986 

455 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite would like to delude the public into thinking that 

somehow the oil upgrader project is not going to go ahead. 

Well, I note from the newspaper today: “Another co-op 

upgrader contract awarded” — another co-op upgrader contract 

awarded, a firm indication that in fact the oil upgrader is going 

ahead, just as the P.A. pulp project will go ahead, just as the 

Alameda and Rafferty dams will go ahead, just as the bacon 

project in North Battleford will go ahead, Mr. Speaker. Because 

we believe in creating long-term, permanent jobs for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s your evidence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, the member opposite seems to 

suggest that perhaps the statistics that I quoted may not be 

reliable. I want to indicate to the member opposite the 

following: the last 44 months under an NDP administration, 

October ’78 to May ’82, created 19,000 jobs. Let’s compare 

that to the first 44 months under the Progressive Conservative 

administration. Thirty-five thousand jobs created in comparison 

to 19 under the NDP. 

 

In the last 12 months, Mr. Speaker, the last 12 months, January 

’85 to January ’86, 17,000 more people working in the province 

of Saskatchewan, an increase o 15,000 people in the labour 

force, an increase of 13,000 women in the labour force — most 

of those new jobs going to women. 

 

What about the last 12 months under an NDP administration, 

May ’81 to May ’82? How many permanent jobs were created, 

Mr. Speaker — 5,000, 3,000? Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that 

under that administration, the last 12 months that they were in 

power, there was a loss of 1,000 jobs under the New Democrats 

— a loss of 1,000 jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I carry on. We have the new Mackenzie Art 

Gallery announced recently as a construction project here in 

Regina; the new individual line service for rural Saskatchewan 

which will create hundreds of construction jobs. We have the 

expansion of the rural gas distribution system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have the recently announced power lines in 

northern Saskatchewan. We have the burying of power lines in 

rural Saskatchewan. We have the new cable companies in 

Moose Jaw and Weyburn. We have new health facilities across 

the province — 1,500 new nursing homes being constructed, 

and then, of course, we have the new rehabilitation hospital 

being constructed here in the city of Regina. There are many, 

many more projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t have time to 

enumerate them all. I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned 4:58 p.m. 

 

 


