


















































June 16, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 16, 1986 
  
 
 

2003 
 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure  
Supply and Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 13 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — Mr. Chairman, before we recessed 
for dinner, the member from Shaunavon had indicated that he had 
some concerns about the price that we received for the Navajo 
plane that we sold by public tenders or by bids back in March. Part 
of the history of the events that led to it . . . There was an initial 
call for tenders that closed on February 27. At that time we had 13 
tenders submitted, and the prices ranged from $2,700 to $65,700. 
 
We did not consider those offers to reflect the fair market value of 
the aircraft, and we rejected those bids and gave an opportunity to 
resubmit or to submit new bids by March 6, 1986. As of that date 
we had five bids, and as I indicated before the supper recess, we 
accepted a bid of $72,200 for the aircraft. 
 
I should indicate that the question, I believe, was about appraisal. 
We had no outside appraisal done; we did an internal appraisal, 
and we used the Aircraft Price Digest, which is the national, 
internationally recognized industry standard appraisal manual. 
 
The aircraft is a 1969 model; it's 17 years old; it has 6,300 hours 
on the airframe. One engine was not what you would call 
excellent, and I should indicate that the price that we received is in 
fact higher than the price indicated in the Aircraft Price Digest. 
 
So the member can question obviously whether or not the 
government or the people of the province received full value in the 
sale of that aircraft. We would contend rather strongly that we did 
receive full value, and I believe that the price of $72,200, as I 
indicated, was very reasonable and was in fact above the price that 
shows in the Aircraft Price Digest. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — — The minister indicated that on the second 
advertisement you got five bids. Can you indicate what those bids 
were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — — The five bids started at $6,000; 
$65,700; $66,501; $68,700; and of course the successful bid of 
$72,200. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — — And can you give me again the company 
that bought it? I thought you said a company out of Estevan, but I 
missed the name. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The winning bid was from Prairie Air 
in Estevan. Prairie Air is owned by a gentleman named Brian 
Hutton, Estevan, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — How long was that engine not working 
when you were using it for executive aircraft? 

Were you using it for ambulance service while that engine wasn't 
working, or when did the engine quit on you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I didn't intend to 
leave the impression with the member that the one engine was not 
working. One engine had had considerable more hours than the 
other and was possibly not in quite as good a shape as one would 
like. And I think that the people who bid on the aircraft were fully 
aware that there would be some work to do on that engine. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Was there a . . . Who did the servicing of 
that engine that gave you the information that it wasn't in very 
good shape? Who gave you that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, for the benefit of the 
member, there were 100 hours left on that engine prior to major 
overhaul. Major overhaul is approximately a $20,000 cost to the 
Department of Transport standard, and the work that had been 
done on the engine was the senior maintenance people who 
inspect aircraft — our folks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that he would be 
sending me a list of the automobiles that were purchased by the 
department during the year from 19 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, I'm leaving the aircraft issue because obviously one engine 
was gone while you were flying it. The member from 
Souris-Cannington maybe flew it a couple of times and burned the 
engine out. I don't know. But I would just indicate that when 
you're getting 70,000 for a Navajo aircraft of 1969 vintage it 
shows you something about the booming economy of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Because I'll tell you, I'll tell you that when 
you can sell a twin-engine aircraft — a twin-engine aircraft . . . 
(inaudible interjection) Well, I'll tell you what they're worth in 
Texas where the economy there, under a right-wing government, 
is collapsed as well. They probably aren't worth a lot more. 
 
But if the economy were in any kind of a mood for excitement and 
vitality, that it will be after the next election with a newly elected 
New Democratic government, aircraft like that will be selling for 
two or three times what you got for it, the same as they were — 
the same as they were back in the 1970s. 
 
And I mean, this is obviously happening right across the piece, 
Mr. Chairman. You know that for 40 million worth of highway 
equipment they got 5 million for it, to show you how bad the 
economy is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Less than 5 — my 
colleague corrects me. 
 
So they're selling off the assets of the government, getting nothing 
for it because the economy has collapsed. 
 
And, I think that clearly indicates, when you can get more for a 
172 or 182 single-engine Cessna than you can for a twin-engine 
executive aircraft, the kind of business  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2004 
 
 

people we have running the province and why we're $2 billion in 
the hold. That's what's happening. 
 
And not only are we $2 billion in the hole, but we're selling off 
assets here and there and everywhere. Sell off an executive 
aircraft; we've sold off coal-mines; we've sold of the potash 
equipment; we've sold off a drag-line; we've sold off many, many 
acres of land. And of all this, as well as increasing taxes, and still 
we have a $2 billion deficit. That's the point that I was making. 
 
And I want to tell you that obviously we're in a great deal of 
financial difficulty in this province because of the bad 
administration led by Premier Devine and his cohorts. 
 
As we roll along here, it becomes worse and worse. I mean we 
thought we got a bad deal for the coal-mine at Coronach. We 
thought we got a bad deal. But I'll tell you, it was nothing like this 
Navajo being sold for 72,000 — an aircraft that's worth a quarter 
of a million dollars fire-sale-pricing at 70,000. 
 
And then we say, why are you getting such a small amount for it? 
They don't explain that the economy has collapsed and none of the 
small companies are buying aircraft. They say one engine was 
gone. And then you say, well, was the engine gone or not? No, it 
wasn't really gone, but it had to have some repairs done to it. Well 
these are standard repairs done to any aircraft. Every so many 
hours you have to rip the engine apart. And your first implication, 
that the engine was gone, was certainly inaccurate. I just think that 
it clearly indicates the plight of the economy of the province under 
Premier Devine and his cohorts opposite. That's what it shows . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
Well I could tell you that we won't be doing what Sterling Lyon's 
government in Manitoba did — buy a brand-new executive jet a 
month before the election. And what we have to be watching here 
as we approach this election is whether or not there is an executive 
aircraft, a jet, on order by these people across the way. Because 
that's what happened in Manitoba; that's what happened in 
Manitoba. Believe it or not, when the Pawley government was 
elected in 1981, sitting on the tarmac was a brand-new jet — had 
never been flown — purchased by the Sterling Lyon government. 
So we'll be watching closely whether this sale of this Navajo is 
sort of the down payment, the down payment on a brand-new jet 
that they may have sitting on the tarmac for after the election, the 
way that Sterling Lyon did in Manitoba. That's what happened out 
there. And I think this may be just a little phoney sell-off of an 
aircraft, but really what they're up to is buying a new jet similar to 
what was done in Manitoba shortly before the last election out 
there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — False, false. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, it's not false. You can check the record. 
It certainly is as accurate as can be. And it was an expensive jet, as 
well. The member from Souris-Cannington will be well aware . . . 
I don't know the name, but he would know what model and make 
it was. He may even have rode in it to test it out when Sterling 
Lyon was buying it. 
 

But I want to ask you a few questions about the process of getting 
consulting firms in your department. Now we have questioned you 
about consulting firms that you have hired in the past, and I have 
one here which we raised in question period, namely a company 
which is run by Ron Ryan, who set up an InfoCentre Network for 
$85,000. Can you get me a list of all the consulting that was done 
in the department since January 1st of 1985 up to May 1st of '86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I won't get into a 
lengthy debate on whether in fact the price of airplanes is any real 
indication of the health of anyone's economy. I will indicate that 
I'll mention to Prairie Air that you have a standing offer of about 
$200,000 that you've prepared to pay for that plane that they 
bought. I am sure they'd be interested to hear that. 
 
I should indicate, just to update the member's information, that in 
fact the Pawley government purchased an executive jet just prior 
to the last election. So I think that he should be aware that that has 
happened. 
 
I can give him assurance that there's no intention on this side of the 
House to be purchasing any jet aircraft. We fell that the fleet we 
have is extremely adequate, that the calibre of plane, the 
Cheyenne, do an excellent job of getting into the centres where we 
have to go as we travel across the province. We will admit a great 
deal to trying to continue to consult and talk with the people of the 
province about the things that we think are real issues, and in all 
honesty the price of that aircraft has not been one of them. 
 
I will send you over, though, a list of the consulting services that 
we have contracted for. The list doesn't fit the dates that you asked 
for. It's the fiscal year '85 to '86, so it starts April 1st, but I think it's 
what you want. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The one particular contract that I'm 
interested in is the InfoCentre Network, which was given to a 
company owned by Ron Ryan. Can you tell me again: — was that 
tendered, and if so, how many people bid on it, and whether or not 
this was the low bid which got the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — My colleague from Saskatoon makes a 
good point. Possibly Pawley bought that jet to go to Expo to visit 
the Saskatchewan pavilion since Manitoba doesn't have one there. 
 
However, as I indicated in question period, there were two bids on 
the InfoCentre process. The one that we accepted was in fact the 
lesser one because they are unmanned info stations and the other 
proposal called for manned stations which would have obviously 
driven the price considerably higher. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that the bidding 
process that took place involved two bids. Will you give me the 
numbers on those two? I missed them in the noise that is going on 
here in the Assembly. 
 
And maybe, Mr. Chairman, we could get some order from some 
of your colleagues on this side who are shouting and hollering, if 
you could. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2005 
 
 

(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I didn't offer at that time those numbers 
and I don't propose to give them. They were confidential bids on a 
proposal basis. As I indicated, one called for manned stations. We 
didn't feel that was necessary. Obviously that's considerably more 
expensive than the one we chose. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, what are you indicating here — that 
there were two of them? I'm having a difficult time hearing what 
you're saying. Are you saying that you chose the low bid, and if 
so, what was the difference in the two numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I am saying, 
I think, is rather clear. We called for proposals to provide the 
information to the public, as we have mentioned in question period 
responses, and in fact in my last response. 
 
We got two proposals. One was a proposal for info centres that 
were in fact manned on a regular basis; obviously more expensive. 
The second proposal was for unmanned information centres, and 
consequently we chose that one. To indicate that there were two 
distinct bids on the same thing would be less than accurate. I'm 
saying there were two proposals. One was more expensive than 
the other. We took the least expensive. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has sent across a list of all the 
consulting that was done for the year as indicated. And I will take 
some time to check it over and I may have some questions coming 
back to that. 
 
But I want to deal now with the property management corporation 
which was established by your government. I wonder who are the 
officers. Can you indicate to the committee who are the officers of 
this corporations? Do you have that list with you? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, please. I would like to bring to 
the attention of the minister and to the questioner that there will be 
a separate vote on the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, so perhaps you could just hold back that question 
until we get to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I have no problem 
dealing with that under item 1, if that's satisfactory to the Chair. 
WE can get into it here. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at the present time the deputy minister, Mr. Cutts, 
is serving as the acting president of the corporation. Miss Raab is 
serving as the treasurer; I serve as the chairman of the board and 
the Minister of Finance is the vice-chairman. The Minister of 
Advanced Education and the Minister of Health also serve on the 
board. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This nice, neat little group that we have 
running this corporation, I'll tell you . . . Could you tell me 
whether or not Mr. Cutts gets any extra remuneration for his 
involvement, other than maybe extra for attending meetings? 
What would the deal be with members of the board, including the 
ministers who 

are involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Cutts nor Miss Raab receive any 
additional compensation for the responsibilities they've taken on 
there, and of course the board of directors receive no 
compensation for those duties, other than their normal cabinet 
remuneration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that there is no 
involvement or no extra pay given to the deputy minister, Mr. 
Cutts, for his involvement, or to the cabinet ministers. Can you tell 
me whether or not staff is now in place to work, and how many 
people have been hired in that corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — At the present time, Mr. Chairman, we 
have no staff with the corporation. We have two people on 
contract. We may in fact be hiring staff in the very near future. But 
as of now that's the situation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, can you indicate the two 
individuals on contract, who they are and what the arrangement in 
terms of fees that you will have with them, and the terms of the 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, for the member, the two 
people we have on contract are Scott Adams at 3,000 a month and 
Paul McIntyre at 2,940. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what is the duration of the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Adams' contract is 
a month-by-month contract. Mr. McIntyre has been contracted for 
two years. And I'm not sure if you heard that; the member from 
Quill Lakes may have interrupted. I'll just give it to you once 
more. Mr. Adams is on a month-by-month contract and Mr. 
McIntyre a two-year contract. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What staffing component is planned for the 
corporation? You must have some idea now. You may not have 
names attached to it before the election, but you must have a group 
of people or a number of people who you will have in the 
corporation — a structure, that sort of thing. How many people do 
you envisage having on staff once it's up and running? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — It's very difficult, Mr. Chairman, to 
give you an adequate answer. We are studying the other models 
that exist in the country; particularly we have done some work 
with B.C. We are designing the corporation. At this time we don't 
have any numbers approved by the board, so I think it would be in 
large part supposition for me to provide any definite information. 
But as soon as we have that, that'll certainly be public. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, in the area of security on 
buildings, and particularly the Legislative Building, I wonder if 
you could give a run-down of the changes that you have put into 
motion and put in place here in the legislature, first in terms of the 
changes in security for ministers' offices, security at the door, and 
the cost of renovating the offices downstairs and putting things 
into place. Can you give us a little breakdown on how that all  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2006 
 
 

fit together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the security of the 
Legislative Building is now under the Board of Internal Economy. 
And I think that that question, for a meaningful response, should 
be directed to either the Clerk or the Speaker of the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What about ministers' offices? As I 
understand it, that would be part of Supply and Services, but 
maybe not. Can you tell me on, for example, your own office, if 
you had any remodelling done or that sort of thing, where would 
that money come out of at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again 
responsibility rests with the Board of Internal Economy. We will 
be paying for those improvements. They're in the process of being 
made. I think nothing has really changed since 1982. We've 
simply updated the response system. And the bills are not in and 
the system has not been activated, to our knowledge, at this 
moment. 
 
Again, the activation of the system and seeing that it was up and 
running would be the responsibility of the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to get clear . . . To date the 
renovations for the security changes that the Board of Internal 
Economy recommends or has passed — the bills haven't come in 
and they haven't been paid for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think the situation is that it's been 
installed. The system has been redone, updated; it's in place; has 
not been activated. And the bills are not complete; we don't have a 
cost. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you give me a 
list of the advertising that your department has done from January 
1 of '85 to present time. Would you be able to get me a list. And 
that would be the print and any TV or radio advertising that you 
might have done, as well as the production and placement costs 
for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I have a sheet. To the 
member, it's a xerox of a computer sheet. I apologize for the 
quality of the print. If there's some problem with it, we'll try to 
improve it for you; but I think it's okay. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister was good enough to bring this 
list across to us. I wonder whether or not you can tell us what 
companies did the advertising. Can you indicate the firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think this sheet, in concert with the 
one you have, should indicate where that has gone. I would 
indicate . . . I'm not sure what date you asked for, but again we're 
dealing with the fiscal year '85-6. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to spend some time on 
the nursing home construction that is, I guess ongoing in 
Saskatoon at the present time, the level 4 facility. And what I want 
to do here is get you to explain whether there was a tendering 
process. Or was it a proposal call? And if it was proposal, how 
many people  

put in proposals, and which company was chosen, and on what 
basis? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — It was a lease-purchase proposal call, 
Mr. Chairman, that was used. In the initial stage there were eight 
proposals submitted. That was short-listed to four in the stage 2 
process and the Wolfe Group of Saskatoon were the successful 
competitors in that proposal process. The facility is moving along 
extremely well. Anyone in Saskatoon who wishes to see it could 
drive by the site, or I should indicate that there is a model of the 
facility in the Sturdy Stone Building where people can view the 
extremely innovative home, long needed in Saskatoon, that is now 
nearing completion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister indicate which four firms 
were in the final proposal competition. You indicated the Wolfe 
Group was the successful proposal, but can you give me the other 
three who were involved. And also, was the Wolfe Group the low 
proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The other three companies in the stage 
2 process were Boychuk Construction Ltd. of Saskatoon, 
Normandale Holdings Ltd. of Saskatoon and Remai construction 
of Saskatoon. And yes, in fact, the Wolfe Group was low. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter:: — Can you indicate what those proposals 
were — the numbers. Because there will be those who will have a 
difficult time agreeing with you that that was the low proposal. 
Can you indicate what those proposals were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, no, we're not going to 
release the numbers on that. 
 
What I will do, though, is send the member from Shaunavon the 
executive summary regarding the proposal call for the special care 
facility in Saskatoon that was written up by the independent 
committee that did the evaluations. And I think if he goes through 
that, most of his questions will probably be answered. And I will 
send that across. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, on the issue of proposal calls 
— and I guess this is but the tip of the iceberg, the one that got a 
lot of attention in Saskatoon — but have you done any studies or 
any reviews of that system of giving out projects? Because I know 
it had caused a great deal of concern by a good number of people 
in the industry who saw it as a mechanism being used by the 
government and the department to hand over contracts to friends 
of the Conservative Party. 
 
I'm not, of course, making that accusation, but there were many 
people, many people in the industry who were saying that. And 
there may be legitimacy to what they were saying and there may 
not be. But the special care facility in Saskatoon got a lot of those 
comments. 
 
And I'm wondering: — have you done a study or a review of that 
situation, and have you changed from proposal calls back to a 
tendering process? 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2007 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I'm very glad to hear that the member 
from Shaunavon has stoutly been defending the government and 
its process. 
 
The proposal call was a system that was put in place that had some 
very real benefits. There was some misconception amongst the 
industry. 
 
We had a study commissioned — the IKOY study. The study 
pointed out that, in large part, it was misconception that was 
leading to a lot of the problems that we were experiencing. 
However, because that was the case and the industry seemed to 
feel more comfortable with the more traditional assigning of an 
architect and the basic tendering process, we have reverted to the 
other process in the department, except for office space, which is 
still done on a proposal basis. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have only a couple of questions. I want to touch on 
a rumour regarding water bombers — sale of the water bombers 
— and I will then finish my questioning that I did with the 
Minister of Health regarding a contract for renovations to the 
Buffalo Narrows hospital, which the Minister indicated was 
handled by your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to start with the Canso water bombers. It's 
been rumoured that the department is negotiating a sale of the 
water bombers. I just want to say, and I've said this when I went 
through Parks and Renewable Resources estimates, that I was 
totally opposed, and I think you'll find most individuals in the 
Department of Parks and Renewable Resources are also opposed 
to any sale of the Canso water bombers. 
 
You talked about selling off a Navajo aircraft for 
70-some-thousand dollars. Let me tell you, I know and I think you 
know and everybody else knows that any aircraft that's owned by 
this government has been well taken care of and well maintained, 
and you're buying a good aircraft. 
 
For the Canso water bombers, those aircrafts have been 
completely rebuilt. And I would sincerely hope that there is no 
negotiations to see the Canso water bombers. But if there is, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you could just indicate so. And when do you 
plan to put them up for tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, just to provide a little 
background — I'm sure the member has most of it — the 
government has determined to purchase four CL215's. We are 
actually purchasing two, and two are being provided by the federal 
government. One of those will arrive this fall, one will arrive next 
spring, and the other two next fall. That will obviously be a 
significant increase in our capacity to deal with the forest fire 
threat, particularly in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Because of the increased activity that is anticipated in the forest 
area, there are no negotiations under way to sell any of the existing 
fleet. The rumour is just that, and in fact we are planning on 
maintaining the fleet and in fact increasing it by the four CL215's, 
as I indicated. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I  

want to now turn to the question of the renovations to the hospital 
in Buffalo Narrows. I wonder if you could indicate who got the 
contract, and if that was tendered out and how much of it was 
contract work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals:; Mr. Chairman, there were basically three 
portions to the work that was undertaken at the hospital at Buffalo 
Narrows. Two of the three were in fact tendered. The reshingling 
of the roof was tendered and awarded to Doug Pederson of 
Buffalo Narrows. The insulating of the attic was tendered, was 
awarded to Master Rock Pickers of Leoville. And the third 
element, which was the removal of the insulation, this part of the 
project was let to Baker's Airvac of Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The removal of the insulation, Mr. Minister 
— could you indicate how many hours was put in for that removal 
and how much per hour was paid to Baker's construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, in that particular portion 
of the renovations at Buffalo Narrows hospital, I don't have the 
exact detail you want. The cost was under $1,000. It was a 
piece-work job and I think fairly reasonable. It was felt that the 
company that got the award was the only one in the area capable 
of undertaking it, and so it was let to them. I hope that's 
satisfactory. I don't have details on per hour, and so on. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Removal of the insulation from the hospital 
— you indicate that it was for less than $1,000. That could be 
$999. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — If the member wants to be specific, it 
was $900. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Was that contract tendered out, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — As I indicated in the first part of my 
answer, that part was awarded; the other two portions were 
tendered out. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — How would one award a job like that? Who 
would be in charge of hiring the individual to do such work? 
Would it be done from the La Ronge office, or some individual 
locally? How would they end up hiring an individual like this, and 
setting the price at $900? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The awarding of the contract was 
carried out by a project co-ordinator initially housed in Regina, but 
who would have been in Buffalo Narrows, I'm sure, to make the 
arrangements. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, a year or two ago, it might have 
been two years ago, I asked some questions to . . . I put some 
questions to the then minister, the member from Maple Creek, 
with respect to a jail in Saskatoon, which I understand was being 
leased. It was at least a correctional facility. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister: — has the facility been completed? If so, could you give 
me the cost per square yard or per square foot. It doesn't matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, possibly I could ask the 
member to be a little more specific. We seem to be at a loss as to 
exactly what the topic is here. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2008 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — It was a correctional facility in Saskatoon that 
the minister indicated she was having built, and had intended to 
enter into a lease of the facility, somewhat along the same lines as 
the court-house. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think we have it, Mr. Chairman, 
there's some general information. I think that the question relates 
to an urban camp which was leased in 1982. I believe it consists of 
12 Atco trailers. The lease, I believe, is for five years. So it's still in 
and it's in conjunction with the correctional centre in Saskatoon. 
And I'm not sure exactly what details the members wishes. But I 
think we're going to have to undertake to provide anything in more 
detail than that to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wanted the cost to the department in square 
metre or square foot, or however you want to state it, of the 
facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think there's a long 
standing tradition that in fact cost per square foot of leased space 
are not provided during estimates. Certain information is available. 
We're prepared to discuss the name of the landlord, the amount of 
are, and the duration of the lease. But information on rental rates is 
not disclosed because it could have an impact on market 
conditions and could invite non-expert evaluation of the rates. And 
we make that clear to the people when in fact they submit rates, 
that this information will not be released. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, am I correct in my 
remembrance of this item, that there was no particular tendering 
system? There are no competitors who might have taken 
advantage of this information, because there were none around. As 
I recall it, this was a — There were not competitive bids for the 
building of this facility, if I recall correctly. Am I wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'm at a bit of a 
disadvantage — obviously considerably before my time. We don't 
want to stand by this information. We think that the fact is that 
there were three proposals submitted, and we chose the best one. 
But obviously we haven't carried that with us as general 
information, since it occurred four years ago. But the 
understanding of the officials is, in fact, that there were three 
proposals and that the Atco one was in fact the lowest. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well would you confirm that in writing, Mr. 
Minister, if you're not sure about it? And I gather you're not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — We'll commit to that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the aircraft — I 
wasn't in the Legislative Assembly and I apologize for that — 
could you tell me where the plan was advertised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the aircraft was 
advertised in the leading daily papers in the province and  

in all the major trade journals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Did you give my colleague the number of 
hours on the airframe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The plane itself was a 1969 model — 
17 years old — with 6,300 hours of airframe time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter:: — Mr. Minister, I wonder on that same topic, 
if you would give me the list of all the charters that the 
government would have taken from the year January 1, 1985 to 
present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Everything's on a fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if you'd get it for me, then on that 
basis. Have you got that list handy there, of all of the flights that 
would have been chartered with the various companies here in 
Saskatchewan and elsewhere? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, what we will provide 
. . . What I have is the CVA charter costs by minister and then 
totalled. I'll send that across. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much did I spend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — The Deputy Premier spent $2,046.88. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, as well, I wonder if you 
would give me your personal travel expenses in province and out 
of province — how many trips you took and where you went; who 
went with you; and at what cost to the taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, since assuming the 
duties, responsibilities for Supply and Services, I have not been 
out of the province at the expense of this department. So there's 
nothing there. I have been to Saskatoon five times on exec air. 
However, they were all charged to other departments since the 
primary reason had to do with other departments. So all that shows 
in the expenses is $140. There's air total of $158.75. It may not be 
what you want, but it again falls into the problems associated with 
multiple responsibilities and where the costs are charged. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 13 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure  
Supply and Services 

Capital Expenditure — Nil Vote 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 168 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 168 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2009 
 
 

Special Projects Fund Budgetary Expenditure  
Supply and Services 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 14 agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank the 
members of the opposition, for the most part, for the brief, concise 
questions. I hope the information we provide has been adequate, 
and the things that we have committed to, we will get to you 
within the next few days. I'd also like to thank the members of the 
department. They did an excellent piece of work putting all this 
together and preparing it — the people who are around me at the 
back and in the galleries. And my sincere thanks for a job well 
done. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We would just like to reiterate what the 
minister has said and look forward to getting the information that 
you have committed to us. The one other item that I would want, if 
I don't have it in my office, is the list of the rental contracts and 
space for your department. You have indicated that you have sent 
it to me. I looked again over supper; I don't see it. But I'll be in 
touch with you if I don't locate it. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Ken MacKay is with 
us, acting deputy minister; Terry Thompson, acting assistant 
deputy minister and he's also the director of corrections. John 
Hylton behind me, executive director of management services; 
and Jim Benning, executive director of justice services; Mike 
deRosenroll, executive director of legal services. And there are 
others that we may require from time to time. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 
preliminary questions, Mr. Minister, and I hope you can send 
those over. First of all, your personal staff attached to your 
department — if you could forward that over with the information 
as to whether or not their salaries and whether or not there has 
been any increases during the currency of the year, and the amount 
of the increase, if you would. Would you send that over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I'll supply that, if you wish to go on 
to your next question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what I'd like to know also is: — can you give 
me a list of your executive officers in your department and their 
salaries, and whether or not there has been any increases in respect 
to their particular salaries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, we can give you a list of those. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Will you be getting those over here this  

evening or how soon will you be providing them? I mean, if it's as 
fast as what we get motions for return, then it's not much use of 
taking that commitment — because the House Leader has been 
consistently indicating to us that he is so prompt with information. 
But most of the ministers have that information available, and I 
was wondering whether you're prepared to send that over at the 
present time, because it's information that we'd like to have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well you wanted it quickly; you're going 
to get it tonight. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That's all I wanted to know. And similarly, can 
you set out . . . In respect to travel for the department, I'd like the 
total amount of travel for the department in province and out of 
province, and I would also like a record of the minister's travel in 
province and out of province, the total cost of that. And if you 
could break it down into the various headings of hotels, 
accommodation, the miscellaneous, gratuities, taxis, we would 
appreciate that. I know the minister should not have any difficulty 
in disclosing that information to the general public. Could you 
provide that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We'll supply you with the customary 
information in terms of trips out of the province and costs and the 
number of people that accompanied me. The number of trips I 
could almost count on one hand. They're to Ottawa, Toronto, and 
one trip to Vancouver on Justice conferences and conferences on 
the constitution. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Then you'll send that over; I take it the same 
commitment you said yes. 
 
I'm rather surprised. We start off with these questions in every 
department, and the information isn't being sent over as we ask the 
questions. Because there are certainly some comments which we'd 
like to make, and certainly relative to the amount that is being paid 
to executive assistants and staff. 
 
The other question that I want to ask you: — whether or not again 
you can provide me, in respect to the prosecutions, the list of all 
the law firms and/ or members of law firms that the department 
employed during the course of the year for public prosecutions. 
 
This information was previously provided to me by the former 
minister of Justice, and the amounts that was paid to each of the 
individual firms and/or individual members of the firm. Can you 
provide that information, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. In keeping with tradition, you'll 
receive that as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. I'm going to have quite a stack here. I don't 
know when I'm going to get it yet, but certainly a lot of 
commitments here from this boy. 
 
I was wondering whether you can also indicate . . . Can  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2010 
 
 

you make up a list of all the legal actions in which the Department 
of Justice is involved in, either defending on behalf of the . . . This 
information was provided to me also by the former minister of 
Justice — the legal actions which the Department of Justice is 
involved in either on behalf of the government and/or other 
corporations. We had a list of those in previously. And can you 
provide that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — How soon will you provide this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, I just sent several pieces of 
information over to the member. He has it in front of him now, 
and I'm holding more information. And as long as my officials can 
get this information out of their materials, I'll keep sending it over. 
I don't think the member has had difficulty with my office 
previously, and we'll continue to operate that way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I wouldn't be presumptuous that I haven't 
had difficulty with your office previously. But I think you should 
let me speak for myself in respect to that. 
 
But I'd like that information, and also what I would like you to 
provide is in respect to PURC (Public Utilities Review 
Commission). The previous minister was able to provide a 
significant amount of information in respect to the Public Utilities 
Review Commission, and the expenditures related to it. And I 
have the number of PURC hearings from the period April 1, 1984 
to March 31, '85. What I would like is the follow-up from April 
1st, '85 to March 31st of '86. And what I want is the number of 
hearings. 
 
And if you could break it down as was done previously in respect 
to SGI, SPC, SaskTel. And also I’d ask you if you would provide 
the cost breakdown of the Public Utilities Review Commission 
hearings for the period which I mention. And that information was 
also provided relative to SaskPower SaskTel, SGI, and the total. 
And also the commissioners’ per diem expenses for the period 
April 1st of ’85 to March 31st of ’86. I have for the previous year; 
I want to make a comparison in respect to the cost. 
 
And also I would ask for the total amount paid for consulting or 
professional fees for the period April 1, 1985 to March 31, 1986. 
This is the basic information. You'll see the format that the 
department provided to me in the previous, and I'd ask the minister 
if he would in fact undertake to provide that information as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — You're unfortunately asking the wrong 
minister. PURC is under the Minister of Finance, the member 
from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. We aren't responsible for PURC. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I apologize. I notice that it was under the Minister 
of Justice that I got it before. It has since been transferred. I didn't 
realize that. But that's fine; we can get that from the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
I want to generally turn to a few of the aspects in the  

department, Mr. Minister, which I think really represent some 
concern in respect to your department. There's a couple of areas I 
want to raise with you and to have your reaction in respect to 
them. 
 
And I think the first is really in respect to what some call the 
"watch-dog" agencies, and generally the actions of the government 
in respect to the financing of the so-called watch-dog agencies. I 
turn particularly, Mr. Minister, in respect to your department. And 
we see in respect to the Human Rights Commission . . . And you'll 
find that in respect to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission, that the number of staff has been decreased, and that 
the total expenditure has also been decreased. 
 
Now I draw this to your attention, Mr. Minister, because there is 
concern that some of these bodies which help to protect 
individuals both against governments and other actions within 
society have not been supported fully by your government. 
 
Other areas I might mention which sort of signifies what is 
happening is in respect to the Ombudsman. A similar action is 
happening there. And you take the auditors — there's a decrease in 
the funding of the auditor's office and a cut-back in staff. Crimes 
compensation — there's a decrease in the funding of that — which 
is assistance to those in need. So this apparently seems to be a 
trend which is developing in your department. 
 
And I wonder if the minister can generally indicate a justification 
why those watch-dog agencies, and particularly here, the Human 
Rights Commission, and also the crimes compensation, which is 
really protecting the citizens too, having a decrease in funding. I'd 
like your explanation, if you would in respect to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well in a general sense, I'm not sure what 
type of a trend the member is referring to. However, the trend of 
financial responsibility of government towards watch-dog 
agencies is similar to the trend of governments toward all other 
agencies of government. We basically are cognizant of the value 
of taxpayers' dollars. And in terms of government, I suppose we're 
the watch-dogs of the taxpayers' dollars. In that respect, we are 
sensitive to the way that the dollars are spent. 
 
Specifically crimes compensation expenditures reflects the 
awards. So there would be no cut-back on the part of government, 
because we simply pay what is awarded by the board. In relation 
to the Human Rights Commission, we have a fairly large budget 
for a Human Rights Commission dealing with a population of a 
million people. The budget is around $1 million. The decrease in 
the budget for this year was $30,000, roughly. That puts us a fair 
degree ahead of Manitoba, for example, in terms of per capita 
spending. It also puts us almost 100 per cent ahead of Alberta in 
terms of per capita spending, in terms of the Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
In terms of my responsibility, I tend to view the human rights area 
and determine whether the commission is operating adequately 
and whether the public has full access to the services offered. And 
that should really be the test, rather than how much of an increase 
we provide  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2011 
 
 

or whether we hold the line or decrease slightly. What we've seen 
is a slight decrease due to budgetary issues and due to our review 
of the expenditures of the commission, as well as other agencies of 
government. 
 
However if the member has something specific that may indicate a 
defect or a gap or vacuum in the system leading to the loss of 
human rights, well I'd like that to be brought to my attention. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to refer you to some concerned 
citizens, and I think important individuals, in respect to the 
cut-backs. And you may not think they're significant, but I have 
here the "Watch- dog agency ill-treated in budget," and it's an 
article by Mr. Ken Norman — the viewpoint of the writer, a law 
professor and former chairman of the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission. And that may not be important and 
representative to you, but I'm going to point out some of the 
concerns that he has expressed in respect to the major cut-backs. 
 
In this article, he says: 
 

Between the covers of the Estimates is to be found a rather 
unsettling message in proposed financial treatment of certain 
watch-dog agencies. I refer to the offices of the Ombudsman, 
the Human Rights Commission, and the Provincial Auditor. 
Each has had money and positions taken away from it at a 
time of increasing work-load. 

 
An Hon. Member: — The Ombudsman isn't under him. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I know it isn't. I'm talking about the general 
perception of what's happening in the government. And I don't 
need the Deputy Premier, who hardly ever comes into the House, 
to start instructing me how to carry out estimates. Because he 
never is here often enough; he probably has forgotten the 
procedure. 
 
I want to anyway, Mr. Minister, indicate, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Human Rights Commission is certainly a very significant 
watch-dog agency, and there is a trend in government, in your 
government, for the cut-back in significant areas. It goes on to say 
that: 
 
The Human Rights Commission faces a year in which it is going 
to have to live with $30,000 less than it had to manage last year. 
The commission's annual report of 1985 shows that the complaints 
to the three offices of the commission increased by 19 per cent in 
the past year. 
 
And it goes on, this article, to analyse in respect to the trend of this 
government. And I want to say, it's consistent. Because when you 
people were in opposition, one of the things that you were saying 
is that the public should be protected, that information should be 
provided to the public. And the reverse is true once you have 
assumed office. 
 
I say that in several aspects. The freedom of information Bill — 
that was preached time and time again by members when you 
were in opposition, and now it's four, almost four and a half years 
and we haven't had a  

freedom of information Bill. Another aspect which you were 
constantly indicating is that Crown corporations should be 
televised, that the public would be able to hear what is happening. 
That has been shelved. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister that there is considerable concern 
with the way in which this government is approaching the 
protection of its citizens, indeed the funding of these watch-dog 
agencies. 
 
I have a release here from CUPE Local 1871 which also verifies 
its concern: 
 

The union representing workers of the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission is concerned with the cut-backs at the 
commission announced in last week's provincial budget. (It 
goes on to say:) For the past four years there have been no 
staff increases at the commission. 

 
Now, instead of rewarding a job well done, the Minister of 
Finance has chosen to cut back the protection offered to the 
victims of discrimination. And it says, "it is a slap in the face," and 
it goes on to indicate the nature of the cut. 
 
I ask you: — in view of the fact that the amount of work-load is 
increasing, how can you justify quite a significant decrease — and 
according to your estimates, a decrease in the staffing — if, in fact, 
you're indicating your support to a very important agency for the 
protection of some of the rights of the citizens in the society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, I suppose the member and I can 
agree to disagree. Clearly, there's a philosophical difference 
between the NDP and this government. 
 
You indicate that the Law Reform Commission had to live with 
less. Well it's quite apparent that taxpayers have had to live with 
less on occasion, and when we find that, when we find the need to 
finance on a deficit basis, surely we can't expect to keep increasing 
agencies that are already funded higher than either neighbouring 
province on a per capita basis. 
 
I haven't heard you complain about what Manitoba has done. We 
finance higher on a per capita basis than the province of Manitoba, 
and unless you would assume that Saskatchewan has more — a 
greater number of human rights infractions than Manitoba — then 
we finance almost double what Alberta does on a per capita basis 
in terms of the Human Rights Commission. Over the last three 
years, in Saskatchewan, we've spent 20 per cent more than 
Manitoba. 
 
Now clearly we have to put this thing in balance. It's easy for you 
to quote Mr. Norman, who obviously has his personal interests, his 
views. However, Mr. Norman isn't elected by the general 
population to be cognizant of the value of taxpayers' dollars and to 
consider priorities of government, whether it be in nursing home 
construction, construction of hospitals, and so on. So we've had 
many demands upon us and many priorities by us. 
 
Increasing the Human Rights Commission has not been one of 
those priorities. We find that the Human Rights Commission has 
been operating quite well. We find that  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2012 
 
 

there are some internal adjustments that may be made, perhaps, in 
the Human Rights Commission. I have a meeting with the 
chairman shortly to discuss the future, to discuss possible 
restructuring. It's up to every government-funded agency to do the 
best with the dollars that are available to it rather than simply 
having the government produce increases every year, and we don't 
intend to do so. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to further indicate another article, the 
Leader-Post writes, "Commission claims staff overworked". 
 

"Despite 400 per cent increase in human rights complaints to 
the agency, since 1981 the number of its employees has 
stayed the same," said the chairman, Ron Kruzeniski. 

 
The organization annual report released last week says it will 
be increasingly difficult for it to do its job. Mr. Justice 
Minister Sid Dutchak said in the interview he has seen no 
evidence the organization can't operate well on its present 
budget. 

 
And that's the position that you're taking tonight. All I can say, Mr. 
Minister, it's rather, I think, insulting that you would stand up here 
in the House and start preaching a restraint of the taxpayers' dollar 
in light of the actions of your government during the course of 
your four, almost four and a half years. I say that in light of the 
massive, massive amount that you have been spending in 
advertising. 
 
You have no hesitation whatsoever when it comes to advertising 
for self-promoting of the Tory party, but when it comes to 
defending and protecting the rights of the citizens, then you start 
talking about restraint. And it's no use going into another province 
and try justifying it. The fact remains, Mr. Minister, is that what 
you have done, in spite of the fact of the increased work-load in 
the Human Rights Commission, that you have cut back the 
amount of funding, you've cut back the amount of staff. 
 
(2030) 
 
And I want to say that it's certainly not justified. And I'd say, more 
than not being justified, I would say to you that in fact it should be 
increased because you find that, during these difficult economic 
times, Mr. Minister, of ten people are requiring more and more 
assistance using these various types of agencies. I say that, and I 
think it's fully proven because during the touch economic times — 
the Tory tough economic times — which is . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Tory times are tough times. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And as the member from Moosomin says, Tory 
times are tough time, and that's true. And certainly individuals, 
you will find that as you check in respect to the number of 
offences that takes place, there are many more. There are less 
availability of the general public to being able to pay for the 
services of lawyers to protect themselves, and these agencies 
become very, very important. 
 

I think in the past in Saskatchewan we have had a record of 
certainly funding these to a full extent and properly staffing them, 
and when you have the chairman himself indicating that the 
work-load has increased very significantly and that the staff has 
never been increased, that I think it's clearly very clear that this 
government has a determined effort to reduce these watch-dog 
agencies for the public. 
 
I'll say to you that you have no problem when it comes to 
spending money for yourselves, and I take a look just at the 
number of executive assistants that you have. One minister has 
1,2,3,4,5 executive assistants. I'll tell you, if you scrap one of those 
and applied the amount that you're paying to one of your executive 
assistants over to the Human Rights Commission, I'll tell you, they 
wouldn't have to be cut by $30,000. 
 
So what I'm saying to you here is that don't start standing up here 
telling us that you're concerned about protecting the rights of the 
public because you aren't. What this government has demonstrated 
is that it wants to protect its life in politics, and during the course 
of the last year, have spent in excess of $20 million advertising 
self-serving advertising. When it comes to human rights, you have 
abrogated your responsibility and you've cut back on the amount 
of funding and you have decreased the staffing. I think it's totally 
unjustified. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware and do you agree with the statement 
by the chairman of the Human Rights Commission that despite 40 
per cent increase in human rights complaints to the agency since 
1981, the number of its employees have stayed the same? Would 
you agree with the statement of the chairman, and do you think 
that they have sufficient staff in order to meet all the complaints? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I think the NDP sometimes fail to 
realize that my responsibility extends beyond people who are 
personally interested in the Human Rights Commission and the 
extent of the public in general to people who may want to utilize 
the services of the Human Rights Commission and for those who 
pay the bills to operate the Human Rights Commission. I think 
some of the member's comments are a bit unfair. 
 
For instance, he indicates that we haven't had an increase in staff. 
Well one small item which I might mention to the member is that 
under the former administration when the union contract was 
negotiated, the deal was made whereby some of the workers in 
scope happened to work a 32-hour work week in the Human 
Rights Commission. 
 
Now I find it very, very difficult for you to stand on your feet and 
quote other union leaders, and yourself giving me an opinion that 
these people are over-worked and require more money. Now I will 
be interested in looking at the Human Rights Commission to see 
whether services are going to be jeopardized or whether alterations 
can be made in the internal structure. However, I don't intend to 
operate like you did to simply provide increases every year when 
the taxpayers are asking for explanations, and they have been. 
 
I believe that we are in a position to monitor the situation  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2013 
 
 

and to find out whether the Human Rights Commission can 
operate on a budget which in a per capita sense is double Alberta 
and, in fact, over 20 per cent higher than Manitoba. Now you say I 
shouldn't compare with other provinces. Well I would rather do 
that than compare with your opinion or the opinion of the union 
leader that you quoted. 
 
For example, this year our decrease is 2.8 per cent; Manitoba's 
decrease in budget for the Human Rights Commission was 4.4 per 
cent. Now that's an NDP province, understanding that they must 
reflect the wishes and the financial situation of their taxpayers and 
have to look at the function of the Human Rights Commission to 
determine whether increased expenditures are necessary. That's 
how I intend to operate. I don't intend to simply provide more 
money with total disregard to the taxpayers and disregard to 
whether, in fact, the commission requires more money to function. 
 
Now I want to also correct the member. In this House he seems to 
have the habit of attacking people who aren't in the legislature, 
namely the people who work for government. When you indicated 
that I had five ministerial assistants, I'll indicate to you on the list 
of five, and second, third and fourth are secretarial staff. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked you to send over for our information the 
personal staff, and you send them over as ministerial assistant 2 
and ministerial assistance ACDC, and I'm not sure if I can read 
your mind. That's what you send them over as. Whether they're 
secretary or otherwise, that's not what you put them down as, so 
don't be offended. 
 
You're overstaffed in every office, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that. It's been a disgrace the amount of waste 
that you've perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan. But I want 
to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will be the judge as to whether or not you have 
properly funded the Human Rights Commission. 
 
I want to ask you whether or you could provide the amount of 
remuneration for each member of the commission. If you don't 
have that, can't send that over, as long as you're prepared to send 
that over. I want to make a comparison in respect to the 
expenditures you're providing versus previously when Mr. 
Norman, in fact was the chairman of the commission. 
 
And so I ask the Minister to send that over, the amount of 
remuneration for the members of the commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We have information for the chairman 
and the commissioners. Is that what you wanted? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'll send it over. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the enforcement procedures, it 
indicates that if a settlement cannot be affected by the Human 
Rights Commission, the Human Rights Commission may direct 
that the Attorney-General  

appoint an independent board of inquiry composed of one or more 
persons to her and decide the matter. 
 
I'm just wondering whether there were any settlements that were 
referred to the Attorney General to appoint an independent board 
relative to any of the work of the Human Rights Commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'll get the list for you. There may have 
been several that were referred. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. Send that over then. 
 
The next area, I think, of some concern has been in respect to the 
overcrowding of our correctional institutions, the increased 
amount of incarceration. And I think that is of concern to all of the 
people of this province, and certainly we would like to get some 
details from you in respect to that. 
 
In the previous year I received from the Attorney General a chart 
indicating Saskatchewan's prison population for the year 1980-81 
to 1984-85. And I want to indicate to you, in respect to the prison 
population, that it reached in April of 1981 an all-time . . . well a 
low of somewhere around 730 prisoners, and under your 
administration, that has now risen to almost 1,300, in March of 
1985, the latest statistic that we have. So I think one thing is 
perfectly clear is that during your administration, Mr. Minister, 
there has been a significant number of people that have been 
incarcerated. Our jails have been certainly overcrowded. 
 
I have the statistics in respect of up to, as I say, March of 1985, I 
guess. And I was wondering if you can indicate what the situation 
is at present because obviously there is a major amount of concern 
expressed by the guards. They had asked to met with you, and you 
had refused, apparently. You indicated you were not prepared to 
intervene. And so I'm wondering if you can provide us with the 
details as to the '85-86, the general number of people that were, the 
Saskatchewan prison population. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the member received a chart from us 
last year, and I'll send an updated chart. The chart indicates that 
this year's prison population is down compared to last year. If you 
have any further questions, in terms of the numbers, I'd be pleased 
to respond. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well relative to the statistics, can you indicate . . . 
The last that we had was Saskatchewan prison population '84-85, 
as I said, of March, and we have here over 1,280, and apparently 
March of '86 it was at 1,160. Now that is some decrease, but 
certainly the conditions in our correctional institutions are in a 
very overcrowded condition. I think you will accept that. 
 
Also I notice that in respect to the province's situation in respect to 
crime that the province's crime rate was up 5.1 per cent during the 
past year. So I would ask the minister, in respect to the very 
crowded situation in the jails, in respect to the actions taken by the 
guards, are there any matters which you are proceeding with to 
help to alleviate this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well in terms of a process, we have  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2014 
 
 

an ongoing process whereby the management in our institutions 
deals with the union in terms of issues such as overcrowding, 
working conditions, and so on, and those are continuing. I believe 
some progress is made in that regard. The member may also be 
aware of our new agreement with the federal government which 
will result in additional prison beds, and additional staff to be 
added to existing institutions in Saskatchewan. 
 
However, having said that, I think I want to bring it to your 
attention that I have also indicated publicly that we don't feel we 
want to expend millions of dollars of taxpayers' dollars in terms of 
a perception of overcrowding on the part of certain union leaders, 
and I've taken that position publicly. We are always monitoring 
the situation to be sure that we have maximum safety for the 
guards and the public at large, and will continue to do so. 
 
(2045) 
 
We also monitor other parts of Canada to determine where the 
provinces are going in terms of facilities. As you may know, 
Alberta also signed a joint federal-provincial agreement which is 
creative in terms of new institutional developments. 
 
You mentioned the growth in crime. In Saskatchewan there has 
been a slight growth, although again, I think if the member is 
trying to indicate that somehow the government is responsible for 
the crime rate, you would be stretching a long bow. And again, 
because the only way I can bring it to your attention — or bring 
the irresponsible nature of your comment to your attention — is by 
again comparing us with Manitoba, which has grown drastically in 
terms of the crime rate compared to Saskatchewan. However, I 
would never say that that's because the Manitoba government 
happens to be responsible, because I don't think that's correct. 
 
Crimes are caused by various things which afflict society, and it's 
something we have to be cognizant of, and it's an ongoing 
challenge in terms of rehabilitation, in terms our legal system. And 
that is why we have management that have been creative enough 
to explore new ways of handling prisoners and yet by maximizing 
the protection of the public while doing so. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What factors, Mr. Minister, would you indicate, 
or have you analysed, would be the contributing factors to increase 
in crime rates, and the very dramatic increase of number of people 
that are in the jails in Saskatchewan compared to the time when 
you assumed office? What are the factors that you have analysed 
are basically responsible for the huge number of people that are 
filling the jails at the present time in comparison to when the 
previous government was in office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I want to advise the NDP member 
that there are a number of factors, and I don't think any one of us 
have a total answer for the reason why crime fluctuates and in fact 
has increased in the last few years. Some of it has to do with the 
age of the population, the increased mobility of the population 
moving from province to province, and so on. As well we have to 
look at the types of crimes that are being committed. 
 

If I read the member's question correctly, I think he's trying to 
indicate that because the Conservative government is in the 
position to govern, we're somehow responsible for the increased 
crime rate because of the economy. I think that's what the member 
is suggesting. However if you look at the types of crimes that are 
being committed, you'll find that the crimes involving property 
such as theft, and so on, which would be indicative of a poor 
economy, has actually dropped. As well, impaired driving 
offences have dropped. However crimes against the person have 
increased. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The statistics here indicate that the number of 
property crimes across the country edged up during 1985, not 
down. And I don't think there's any doubt. 
 
And obviously, Mr. Minister, you should be embarrassed that 
rather than giving people jobs, what you have found is that under 
the policies of your government what we have is our jails bursting 
at its seams. That's what we have. We have over 1,180 people in 
our correctional institutions. And I want to say back in April of 
'81, there were 740 — almost double the amount under the 
previous government. 
 
I want to say to you that certainly you can draw some conclusions, 
conclusions that at the present time that many of our young people 
and many of our underprivileged people in society have less 
opportunities during the past four and one-half years — no jobs, 
high unemployment, high welfare dependency. And I would 
submit to you that there is a correlation between this. And 
obviously the minister is embarrassed by that fact. 
 
We have the fact of the overcrowding to the extent that guards are 
finding it unsafe. They have drawn that to your attention, Mr. 
Minister. And your only response even when we asked you in the 
House, was to indicate that you're not prepared to look into it; you 
leave it to the normal process, the natural process, so to speak. 
 
And I think that the general public again will formulate the cause 
of why our jails are bursting at its seams; why we are having to 
build more jails rather than provide meaningful employment to 
our young people. And this is exactly what has happened here, and 
you haven't been able to address it in a meaningful way. And of 
course you are embarrassed by the fact that the jail population has 
almost doubled during your tenure in office. That's a great legacy 
of your party — great legacy. 
 
And the member from Moosomin is chirping again, thinks it's very 
funny; and the member over here from Eastview who isn't running 
again, and the other guy that's not running, are doing all the 
chirping. But let there be no mistake that many of the young 
people of this province haven't had opportunities under this 
government. There is no doubt that unemployment has increased 
almost double. 
 
You know what has happened in respect to welfare — it has 
certainly increased. And don't stand here and say that there isn't a 
correlation of a lack of opportunity and economic opportunity and 
the number of people that you find here in the jails. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2015 
 
 

I want to draw to your attention again, Mr. Minister, that in April 
of 1981, 740 was the total average daily count in April of 1981. 
And in March of 1985 there was almost 1,300 — 1.300 citizens of 
Saskatchewan filling our jails, overcrowding our jails, and that 
situation essentially continues. 
 
And you may want to argue that it's not a result of your economic, 
policies of no opportunities, but I think the young people and the 
interested members in society will draw their conclusion. Your 
priorities is not helping those people who have no opportunity for 
jobs. Yours is priorities of spending with announcements, large 
amount of expenditure in public relations and advertising. 
 
And so I say to you that this is a deplorable state. I think it's a 
disgrace that during your term of office the number of people 
incarcerated have in fact almost doubled. 
 
But I want to ask you: — in an analysis of the population, the 
daily population, I wonder if the minister has done any analysis of 
whether or not in fact it represents . . . For instance, to what extent 
are our native people representative of the population of 
incarcerated people? On a per capita basis, are there more native 
people incarcerated than there are non-native? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the NDP member a few minutes ago 
quoted from a press story relating to percentage of crime increases 
or decreases, and by some luck I happen to have the same press 
story before me. And it appears that the member has neglected to 
give the House some information. Perhaps he read it differently. In 
relation to property crimes, the property crimes have actually 
dropped, and that's indicated in the same press statement that he 
was quoting from. 
 
Also I wonder, you know, I don't think it's responsible to indicate 
that a government is responsible for the crime rate. And again, 
Manitoba, for example, reported the largest percentage of 
increases in violent crimes. Now do you expect me as a 
Progressive Conservative to stand here and say that the Manitoba 
NDP government is responsible for that? That would be 
ridiculous, and I won't say that. I think the member has got to do a 
bit of research on his own to clarify his problem, obviously. 
 
The question relating to native and non-native incarcerated people, 
the percentage of native people incarcerated is 64 per cent, and 36 
non-native. 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to take 
you back for a moment to the Human Rights Commission that was 
brought up earlier by the member for Quill Lakes, and in 
particular, their annual report which is a 1985 annual report. I 
happened to be reading it when it was distributed to the House. I 
assume it's distributed throughout Saskatchewan, and that in part, 
Mr. Minister, is the basis for my concerns with respect to this 
annual report. 
 
On page 12 of this report, Mr. Minister, under the headings 
"Boards of Inquiry", subheading "Complaints Awaiting 
Appointment of Boards", paragraph number three, Mr. Minister, 
reads in italics, Elizabeth somebody and Barbara somebody versus 
Gus somebody and such  

and such a restaurant. I won't put in the names of the parties or the 
name of the restaurant because that's what I'm complaining about, 
effectively, Mr. Minister. The paragraph underneath reads: 
 

In this instance the Commission has asked that a Board of 
Inquiry be appointed in relation to the complaints filed by 
Elizabeth (somebody) and Barbara (somebody) and Mrs. 
(someone else) and Mrs. (someone else) are alleging that they 
were subjected to sexual harassment by the respondent, Gus 
(somebody). The decision to direct a Board was made on 
December 12 1985 and the Commission is awaiting the 
appointment of a Board. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, in my opinion the owner of the restaurant and 
the person involved has already to some extent been damaged 
publicly by virtue of the Human Rights Commission themselves in 
taking upon themselves to print his name and his restaurant's name 
in their annual report, which is 31 pages long and provides 
interesting reading, to say the least, under the sexual harassment 
sections. 
 
And I think if the inquiries are conducted, you know, in camera, 
certainly that the people's names involved shouldn't be printed in 
the Human Rights Commission's annual report until there is some 
find of guilt. And I think that it is a little much printing this 
particular person's name and his restaurant's name in the annual 
report until there is some finding of fault on his behalf. 
 
I don't think any member of this House or anyone in business 
would want their name in the annual report of the Human Rights 
Commission under the heading of sexual harassment unless 
something more than a complaint had been filed with the 
commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I believe the member has a good 
point. As you know, from listening to the NDP member earlier, 
this is a "watch-dog" agency which has a great deal of autonomy 
by legislation which was formulated under the former 
administration. And it may be in due course, as we go through a 
restructuring or possible internal changes, that those types of 
issues should be brought forth and dealt with because we certainly 
don't have this happening in our criminal justice system where 
such a wide distribution of information does take place. However, 
I've never had that matter raised to me personally, and I certainly 
will undertake to look into it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You gave the breakdown in respect to the average 
daily count, provincial correctional facilities, indicating 64 per 
cent native, 36 per cent non-native. I wonder also, Mr. Minister if 
you could also give a breakdown in respect to those that are 
incarcerated, a breakdown in respect to age. What I want there is 
various age breakdown, you know, from 16 to 20, or 20 to 25, 
whatever breakdown you have. But I want to get the general 
population and a breakdown in respect to age of the individual. 
 
(2100) 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2016 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'll send that over as soon as we locate it. 
Perhaps you can go onto your next question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It's very difficult in asking any questions, 
co-ordinating it, because what you're going to do is keep sending it 
over. And if I had some information I would be able to ask some 
questions relative to the information. Do you or do you not have 
the particular breakdown? Certainly you should have an analysis 
of the people who are incarcerated. My feeling is that a large 
percentage of the people that make up the prison or the jail 
population are young people. And I don't know if you have . . . I 
wonder if you could send that over because I want to provide you 
with some further questions relative to it. 
 
But let's go on to the next area then, and that's the area in respect, 
Mr. Minister, the freedom of information legislation. And you 
have been indicating that certainly you would be providing 
freedom of information legislation. And I wonder if the minister 
could indicate at what stage that preparation is, and are we likely 
to have that brought forward during this session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — In relation to freedom of information, as 
the member knows, the Progressive Conservative Party in general 
has been the prime advocate of information, access of information 
by the public, and a movement towards a more open form of 
governing. And evidence of that can be seen at the national level 
with the national legislation brought in. As well, we have been 
working on provincial legislation. As you recall, when the 
Conservatives were in opposition of Saskatchewan, they asked for 
the commencement of that process for years. 
 
And in fact your administration refused to get started in terms of 
structuring legislation for that result. And we're in the process, the 
final stages now, of formulating legislation. We are dealing with 
the federal government in terms of informational issues, and issues 
which go directly to the concerns raised by the public in relation to 
information from government. And we're expecting further 
meetings with the federal government in the month of June, as a 
matter of fact. 
 
We're also reviewing the success areas — and perhaps failure 
areas — in the federal legislation. In other words, I don't want to 
put forth legislation that isn't well drafted, and isn't well intended. 
However, we've made a great deal of progress, and I believe that 
you'll see the results of that progress shortly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I guess I asked you a specific question: — are you 
likely to be able to bring in legislation during this session? 
Previously when you were interviewed, you indicated that you 
were working on it, and there again you indicated that we would 
see progress. And what I'm asking you is: — are you likely to 
have it introduced during this session? That's what the people are 
asking. 
 
You know, you've been around for four and a half years and 
they're asking why haven't . . . It seems a lot longer than four and a 
half years. I guess the specific question then is: — are you likely 
to be introducing it during this session? Are you along the way in 
drafting it and can you give a commitment? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — My officials advise that their work 
regarding the legislation should be complete this year. So I expect 
you'll be seeing the results of the work we've undertaken. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you. My concerns tonight are about the 
Human Rights Commission and the power of the Human Rights 
Code. Generally speaking, the people are concerned that the 
Human Rights Commission and the Human Rights Code have 
powers that contravene the idea that people are innocent till 
proven guilty, and I think the member from Eastview brought up 
one very small but good example. And more and more people are 
finding that once charged under the Human Rights Commission, 
that they have to prove their innocence rather than they're deemed 
innocent till proven guilty. And the fact is that the Human Rights 
Commission is investigating . . . It will cost them a great deal of 
money, will cost them a great deal of bad publicity, and when they 
go against the Human Rights Commission they are going against 
lawyers who seem to have a great deal of money for research and 
for legal effort that the private citizen doesn't have. 
 
So they're defending themselves against the taxpayer money; 
taxpayer which you say, well that's what a Human Rights 
Commission is for. But it's at the same time while the government 
is trying to defend human rights. I think it's very important that we 
don't attack human rights, and the issue, I think, is becoming a 
national issue as to the power of Human Rights Commission. I 
have some other questions. Perhaps you'd like to make a comment 
on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — It's clear there are a number of aspects of 
the Human Rights Code that requires review, and likely in due 
course it will be necessary to acquire public input into the process. 
And we're always cognizant of the fact that often certain interest 
groups are listened to by certain governments more than the public 
in general. And in terms of future reviews of the Human Rights 
Code, it's going to be . . . It's my hope that we'll be able to invite a 
wide cross-section of opinion, unlike the process sometimes 
followed by the former administration. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Do you personally fund the Saskatchewan 
Association on Human Rights through your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, we have minor funding that goes to 
them; however, the bulk of their funding is from the federal 
government, the Secretary of State. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Can you tell me exactly how much they get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I believe it's approximately $17,000. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Yes. Well concerning the SAHR, many of us 
have felt that as . . . Well some of us are critical of advocacy 
groups being funded at all. But many of us have felt that particular 
group has a very — what does one say? — a selective view of 
human rights, meaning to say  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2017 
 
 

human rights for, you know, in a certain ideology and philosophy 
that does not include what would be considered broad-based views 
on human rights. And so I would just like to register my concern 
of taxpayer money going to a group which I consider extremely 
partisan and one-sided. And perhaps you may or may not want to 
comment on that, but I just want to publicly register that. 
 
Another thing, in terms of some of us have been discussing if the 
Human Rights Commission would be . . . a check could be that we 
could agree on some basic principles on which these decisions are 
made. It's clear that sometimes, while we worry about the rights of 
one group, we may be excluding the rights of another group. And 
by concentrating on the rights of a visible minority, for example, 
we may be attacking the rights of a majority; or by concentrating 
on "women's rights" we may in fact be attacking men's rights, just 
as some example. 
 
But to have a basis that . . . Diefenbaker's Bill of rights was 
predicated by a principle that we think gave it some balance and 
was a good direction. And some of us have wondered if the 
Human Rights Code could be amended by putting his predication 
as part of our Act. 
 
And I'd just like to read it: 
 

The commission shall found its decisions on principles 
acknowledging the supremacy of God, the dignity and worth 
of the human person and the position of the family in a 
society of free men and free institutions. 

 
And I would like to register that I would certainly like to see that 
in the Human Rights Code or at least certainly to be discussed as a 
possibility. Because when we have human rights it seems like 
often while we're concentrating on the individual perhaps we're 
attacking the institution of the family; or when we want to be 
vigilant of other people's rights but perhaps we're attacking the 
basics of some of our fundamental justice that people are innocent 
until proven guilty. 
 
Perhaps you'd like to make some comments about some of those 
concerns. Perhaps I've given too much at once. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I really don't have anything further to add. 
Obviously your opinion, as well as opinions shared by others in 
communities, should be heard by governments and by people who 
formulate legislation or the code itself. It's always difficult for 
government, I suppose, to understand that there are others to listen 
to besides pressure or interest groups. So I'm certainly cognizant 
of the approach and the fact that government has to listen to a 
wide scope of the public to properly formulate policy and 
legislation. So I understand your point. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to 
turn to the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan and their 
report. In their 1985 annual report, we will find on page 9 the final 
report to the minister of Justice in 1985. Part of it deals there with 
the recommended changes or proposals relating to the matrimonial 
property legislation. Again, Mr. Minister, you have clearly 
indicated, when interviewed previously,  

that in fact you would be bringing about a final decision and 
would be introducing it probably in the spring. 
 
In January 18, 1986, you indicated: 
 

. . . a final decision on what changes will be made to The 
Matrimonial Property Act will be made in the spring, Minister 
of Justice Sid Dutchak said Friday. 

 
And he went on to say: 
 

In the last few weeks I have been concerned with the process 
of getting men's and women's groups together and not 
arguing the 1978 arguments. Dutchak said, I think by this 
spring we should have finalized the basic restructuring of the 
Act. 

 
You have more recently indicated that the Act does need some 
fine tuning — I think the words that you indicated. 
 
I want to just deal with the basic provisions set out by the Law 
Reform Commission and ask the minister if he would outline the 
essential changes to The Matrimonial Property Act that have been 
set out by the Law Reform Commission; if you would outline 
briefly your interpretation of some of the major changes that they 
are recommending. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I'm not totally clear on what the 
member wants but perhaps I can indicate some follow-up 
information to the press story that you're quoting from. 
 
Since that time, we have continued our consultation with various 
interest groups and the public at large relating to that particular 
piece of legislation. And we have reached consensus amongst all 
the people involved, including the representatives of the interest 
groups that, in fact, fine tuning is necessary at this time. 
 
So after reaching consensus, we've gone over a list of 
recommended changes, and that list has gone out to the various 
groups, a little more than a month ago now. We still haven't heard 
all the responses back. When those responses come back, we'll be 
in a position to formulate our legislation based on the responses 
and on what we feel reaches a fair result from the consultation 
process. 
 
I want to remind the member that it was the former attorney 
general, Mr. Romanow, that actually submitted this particular Act 
to the Law Reform Commission for review, because it was a new 
Act at that time, and the intent was to see how it would work. 
 
AS far as the public is concerned, as far as the courts are 
concerned, that review took place and the Law Reform 
Commission report which you're dealing with does not 
automatically mean that that becomes legislation. That is a report 
which is intended to assist government in formulating legislation. 
So we took that report and we also went into a consultation 
process beginning at the beginning of this year, and we're nearly 
complete with that particular process. 
 
(2115) 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2018 
 
 

Now there are many, many areas of the Act that are affected by 
some of the recommended changes, and I suppose we can go into 
that if you want to. However, if you want to be more specific on 
the highlights that you would like to expand upon, I'll attempt to 
address them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well obviously, again what we see here is exactly 
the same as with the freedom of information. This is an 
amendment to The Matrimonial Property Act. The government is 
taking the same stance. It's not a government that is governing, it's 
a government that is governing to try to attempt to get re-elected. 
It's not dealing with the basic issues. 
 
You know that this is a very sensitive area. You have turned it 
over to . . . The work and research had been done and an interim 
report was given to you, Mr. Minister, or to your predecessor, by 
the Law Reform Commission — an interim report. At that time 
the minister of Justice said that there was going to be more 
hearings and more consultation. And he provided me with a list of 
all the groups that the Law Reform Commission went back with 
their proposal in order to consult further. 
 
What you are saying now again is that this is a very delicate 
matter. It's very difficult and what we want to do is to put it on the 
shelf until after the next election. But more . . . Being specific, I 
want to ask you: — one of the exemptions that was included here 
is that any increase in the value of property brought into the 
marriage that is not the result of an improvement to the property 
should ordinarily be exempt from division, except in the case of a 
long marriage where both spouses have made a contribution to the 
maintenance, preservation, and management of the property. Says 
the courts should have a discretion to increase or decrease the 
exemption in corporate cases. 
 
Are you in general agreement, or have you reviewed that? You 
said there's some consensus that have been arrived at during your 
consultation. What are some of the areas in respect to that 
particular recommendation? Have you got a position? And 
through your process of consultation, what is the position that your 
government is taking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The particular recommendation that you 
cite has not been accepted and we didn't reach a consensus to 
accept that particular item. But let me go back a step, because I 
think either you are misinformed or you're then attempting to 
misinform this House. 
 
If I simply accepted the Law Reform Commission report, it would 
result in legislation which you would be shouting about now. so 
what I did is take a consultative process after that point. and I don't 
know why you're being critical of that. I don't know why you feel I 
shouldn't be consulting with the Action Committee on the Status 
of Women or the matrimonial property coalition. That's what I've 
been doing, and I intend to operate that way. I don't think there's 
any sin in government consulting before we bring in legislation. 
And that's the process I'm following whether you like it or not. 
 
The whole Act should be based on fairness. And what we're 
attempting to do is reach consensus in the areas that  

provide the public with a general sense of predictability. 
 
It's very difficult to get people to provide input into this type of 
legislation unless they themselves have been through a history of 
problems regarding the Act. As a result we have to be very 
cognizant of the fact that we are drafting legislation which affects 
people who perhaps will have problems later, and not now, and 
that's why we have to be very careful. As a result, we're trying to 
fine tune the Act to provide certain levels of discretion to the 
judges so that when you find the unusual situations, the unusual 
cases which the media appear to talk about on occasion, those 
would then be dealt with with fairness and predictability by both 
the public and the courts. 
 
That's what we've reached consensus on. As a result, I make no 
apologies for consulting before changing this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well can you indicate in respect to the 
recommendation again, of the Law Reform Commission in respect 
to gifts and inheritances during marriage, is there any consensus 
reached in respect to that particular recommendation? 
 
Here they are indicating, gifts or inheritances received by a spouse 
during a marriage should be presumed to be exempt from division. 
Has there been any consensus reached in respect to that, either the 
adoption or the rejection, again, of the Law Reform Commission's 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The consensus reached indicates that the 
Act should be specific and clear enough to provide the discretion 
for the court to deal with issues such as the one you mentioned 
rather than simply bringing in a clause with the wording which 
you mentioned, which basically ties the hands of the court. And 
that was the consensus reached by the groups which we consulted 
with. 
 
So you can see that there's been a great deal of involvement by the 
groups, and in fact the face wording of the Law Reform 
Commission report has not been accepted in totality, and will not 
be. However, there was a good deal of work put into the report. 
We found it very fruitful, thought-provoking, and it really assisted 
us in the process that we're going through now, which will very 
soon result in new legislation which I'm sure the public will accept 
and certainly those involved in the courts will accept, including the 
courts themselves. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well what is the process that you intend to follow 
from here on in? You say that you have been discussing the 
recommendations of the Law Reform Commission with various 
groups. I'm not objecting to that. What I'm asking you is: — can 
you outline what the process will be from here on in? this is pretty 
important, and a lot of people have a lot of feelings in respect as to 
what particular changes, if any, should be made. So I'm asking 
you: — are you proposing to introduce it, the legislation, in the 
form of a white paper so that the public can properly take a look at 
it? 
 
I was wondering if . . . certainly you did that in respect to the 
proposed Act for the chartered accountants, and this  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2019 
 
 

affects many people of course, and is very important legislation. 
So I was wondering whether you have any proposed method of 
maximizing then the opportunity of interested people of reviewing 
the proposed legislation and examining the particular impact that 
proposed amendments may have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm favourable to tabling the legislation 
and then inviting any discussion that may result therefrom. 
However, before that happens, what we're doing is awaiting the 
feedback from the various groups that we have consulted with, as 
well as The Canadian Bar Association, that has been involved as 
well. We asked for their views since they are the practitioners who 
deal with this issue on a daily basis. And after that's over we'll be 
drafting what we feel to be the changes reached from consensus, 
tabling; and at that point any other people that require input will 
have the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is there any possibility of indicating a sort of a 
timetable that you have? Are you likely to be able to, as you 
indicated earlier, the possibility of getting legislation during this 
session, or is that likely to not proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, I don't think I'll be in a position to do 
it in this session. I don't feel I want to rush the people that are 
doing extensive studies on our proposals at this point. We've had 
some indication from the groups that I personally met with that 
they needed some time on it. We have existing legislation that's in 
place now so we' don't have a situation where people are not being 
dealt with through the courts. However, I believe our consultative 
process will be finished by late summer, likely, and I would expect 
that the bar association will have their recommendations in to us 
by this fall as well. So it won't take us very long after that point to 
draft the final changes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just turning to a couple of other matters that I 
want to deal with here, and it deals with the particular — the 
judicial system in Saskatchewan and the strain that is placed upon 
it, as has been indicated by in fact some of the provincial justices 
going public indicating that their work-load is exceedingly heavy. 
And we have also had some representation in respect to that. I was 
wondering in . . . Provisions were made for early retirement of 
some of the provincial justices, and by your predecessor, and he 
indicated at that time up to nine could take early retirement. I'm 
wondering whether you have been able in any way to meet their 
complaint of being overloaded, so to speak, in the administration 
of justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well our provincial court is comprised of 
45 judges, and we have thus far, I believe, had one early 
retirement, and I believe there are more that are coming shortly. 
And as well, as you may know, we've recently appointed a new 
judge in Saskatoon. We have been addressing some of the 
shortcomings in the system that has developed over the last 10 
years or so, and I believe we are making some good progress 
there. And I'm not sure particularly what representations were 
made to the members opposite. I would find that surprising if the 
judges actually have consulted with the NDP. 
 
However, if that did happen, I haven't received any  

formal indication from the NDP as to what these representations 
were. And I find that a bit unusual; I find that a little unusual. 
 
However, if you have any specifics, I'd be pleased to receive that 
because I would be concerned if in fact a provincial court judge 
would have talked to the opposition. 
 
In relation to a news story out of Saskatoon, as I recall, one judge 
was quoted, and the name wasn't provided, and I just want to 
correct the member because you made it sound like there was 
more than one. And other than that, I'm not aware of any other 
story or any other issue that has been raised except the issues that 
I've been dealing with in the provincial court with the provincial 
court judges themselves. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think it's another indication here that the 
minister setting his . . . trying to appear that there are no problems. 
 
And here you have in fact a provincial court judge who shouldn't 
have to go public, but obviously, I would suspect, was in contact 
with the justice department. And the headline here is "Too much 
work, salary low, judge says." And that's the situation. 
 
A defence lawyer also was interviewed during that particular 
interview, and he indicates that we see longer backlogs and they 
are already an unreasonable burden on the judges. There are going 
to be real problems at the provincial court with Tucker, King, and 
MacKay all gone. 
 
And what I'm asking the minister: — have you in fact done an 
analysis of the work-load? Are you saying that the utterances of 
the judge is not factual; that they are not overworked; that there is 
not a backlog in the provincial courts; and that their salaries are 
low relative to the federal judges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well there's a number of issues which the 
member raises, and I'm not sure what you are suggesting on behalf 
of the New Democratic Party. 
 
Again, the only way I can bring reality to your attention is by 
comparing with other provinces. And I hope you're not suggesting 
that because we have a Progressive Conservative government that 
somehow one judge decided to say something to the media, 
because if you're talking about work-load, let's compare. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have one judge for every 22,360 people. In 
Manitoba, NDP Manitoba, we have one judge for every 34,564 
people. And in Tory Alberta, we have 20,971 people to one judge. 
As a result, I'm not sure if your argument is valid. What is valid I 
believe is the necessity of reviewing work-loads on a consistent 
basis, and we're presently dealing with the court to find ways that 
we can be more sensitive to perhaps a need to transfer certain 
judges to take the higher work-loads and recognize some of the 
shortcomings, because we have case-loads that are large in certain 
areas of the province. However, that doesn't apply across the 
province. 
 
(2130) 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2020 
 
 

And if the member is asking whether we intend to appoint a bunch 
of judges, the answer is no. As far as filling vacant positions, we 
will always look for the very highly qualified people that we have 
been able to attract. 
 
In terms of being underpaid, that's also something which is always 
under review by our department. The provincial court judges make 
over $70,000 per annum. And perhaps before the estimates are 
over, the NDP may want to indicate to me what level of salary you 
thing the judges should be at. That may be helpful as you are an 
opposition member and should be suggesting that. 
 
However, we believe that we've had some increases and we're 
looking at future increases. However, we also have to realize the 
provincial economy, the salaries earned by other people in the 
province who also provide essential services, valuable services, to 
our public. So perhaps the member could leave us with a word of 
advice, if he wishes, on the salary level that he would like to see. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All I'm asking you — it's your estimates, Mr. 
Minister, and what I'm asking you is whether you have in fact 
done an analysis of the case-load in respect to it, and whether you 
have discussed it with the representatives of the provincial judges, 
and whether or not you are prepared to take any actions. That was 
the question, and you failed to respond to that particular question. 
 
I can indicate that we have received correspondence. And I'll read 
just a paragraph in respect to this letter. 
 

Because we had no confidence that the judicial 
compensation committee was an effective avenue to an 
executive arm of government in that we do not know what 
recommendations have been made to government as regards 
to judicial concerns, we thought it appropriate that another 
avenue be developed. 

 
And this is a recommendation by the provincial court judges. And 
it has been submitted to you and to the opposition. And I'm asking 
you whether or not you have received any recommendations to 
replace the judicial compensation committee. And it has been 
recommended by the provincial court judges. They indicate in 
their view a bi-partisan legislative committee would be more able 
to hear and respond to the legitimate needs of the judiciary in a far 
more objective and open fashion than that which is closed in the 
judicial compensation committee which is, as they say, an arm of 
the government. So a recommendation has gone to you, I suspect. 
And I'm wondering whether you have reviewed it, and whether 
you have responded to the complaints of the justices who have 
made this recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I'll indicate again that we're aware of 
certain opinions by some judges across the province, and we have 
been addressing that process. In fact I personally have been 
dealing with a number of issues with the provincial court. And I 
think we've been making a good deal of progress in that regard. 
And you'll be able to see evidence of that in due course, I suppose. 
 

However, it's unfortunate that we have the NDP — we have the 
NDP standing here and complaining that the judges again are not 
compensated adequately for their services and yet offer no 
position as to whether you think judges should earn more money 
or not. 'm telling you that we have a process that's working well, 
and if you have a complaint on the salary level, well let's hear it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I'm going to ask you: — have you met with 
representatives of the provincial judge recently to discuss a 
mechanism for them addressing their concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When did you meet and who did you meet with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Earlier this year I met with the president 
of the judges' association, as well as other judges. I've had several 
meetings with judges specifically, and I've also met with the 
annual meeting of the judges, which was held within the last three 
to four weeks in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Did they express any concerns, and what were 
they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, the concerns that were expressed 
were wide-ranging — everything from judicial compensation to 
education to transfers of judges from various points in 
Saskatchewan. There were a wide array of issues and I believe the 
issues aren't unusual. They're issues which must be addressed, and 
I am in the process of addressing the issues. 
 
This is a professional group, a group that provides a valuable 
service to the public, and obviously I'm in touch with them and I 
believe they have been satisfied with the dialogue they've been 
able to achieve with me as Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You indicated that you're in the process of 
addressing their concerns. Would you outline the specific concerns 
which you are in the process of addressing, and what is the 
timetable that you have for addressing them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, you know, it's unfortunate that the 
member, and the NDP in general, don't simply phone me on 
occasion and ask me for a list of the concerns, because I would 
have provided you with a detailed list. 
 
There are a good number of concerns. One of them is an ability to 
transfer judges from centres after a number of years. For example, 
certain judges in smaller centres wish to be transferred to a large 
centre for a different type of judicial experience, and that's been a 
big issue. As a result, I am going to address that issue, and I have 
indicated that to the judges. 
 
As well, the issue of judicial independence has been raised; the 
issue of monetary compensation has been raised; the issues of 
education; the ability of judges on the bench to have access to 
education to improve knowledge and their opinion, and I'm 
favourable to that. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2021 
 
 

There's a number of times that we're dealing with on an ongoing 
basis. In fact, we have meetings on this every couple of weeks 
now, because we are addressing a number of concerns. I would 
prefer not to get involved in the personalities that we are dealing 
with in this forum, but I think I am prepared to say at this point 
that the process is to the satisfaction of the provincial court in my 
view. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think in respect to that, the minister as 
usual vacillates and doesn't specify any particular action, but he 
may think it's very smart in not directly addressing the answers to 
the questions, but that's fair enough. There'll be those who will see 
the position and have dealt with this minister, and I'm sure that we 
are not the only ones that have a particular impression in respect to 
this minister. 
 
I want to ask you, in respect to the recommendation of the 
abolition of the Q.C. title, I understand that the law society has 
given you a recommendation, vis-a-vis the Q.C. title, and there has 
been a recommendation that since so many . . . it's awarded to so 
many without perhaps the criteria that it was initially supposed to 
attach to, that is, individuals high in standing in the bar, and has 
somewhat used as a political recognition. 
 
I'm wondering what is your position in respect to the Q.C. title. 
Have you taken it upon yourself to grant you that, grant yourself 
one, because the former minister, one of the first acts that he did 
was to grant himself a Q.C.? Could you indicate . . . I understand 
that the law society here, the bar society here in Saskatchewan 
made some recommendations to you. What is your position, and 
what is the recommendations that the bar of Saskatchewan is 
making in respect to the Q.C. titles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, it was my understanding that Roy 
Romanow did award himself a Q.C., but I'm not sure you should 
hold that against him. I did not award myself one. 
 
In terms of the Q.C. designation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
wonder if the member would allow me to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Order. The minister's 
having some difficulty answering the question. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — In terms of the Q.C. designation, I've 
always had a great deal of respect for that designation as a 
practitioner in Saskatchewan, and I think the law society in 
general in Saskatchewan has that same high respect for the 
designation. I would suggest to the member opposite, that the fact 
that the Liberal-NDP coalition in Ontario did away with the 
designation should not reflect upon our position in Saskatchewan. 
 
Historically, the designation of Q.C. under every form of 
government including this one — this government presently — 
has always held a high regard for the quality of the people 
appointed, and I hope the member wasn't suggesting he advocates 
the abolition, because the Law Society of Saskatchewan certainly 
doesn't advocate that position. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well the law society made recommendations to 
you in respect to recommendations in so far as the awarding of 
them, and I'm wondering whether you're reviewing it, and what 
are the proposed recommendations to be used in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The law society provided a list of ideas. 
I've spoken to the president of the law society, personally, and 
asked for his input as well, and we've received input. We're 
considering the future of the designation. 
 
The issue unfortunately came to a head this year because of the 
actions in Ontario, which I think the Ontario government in due 
course will regret, because there's some problem in Ontario now 
regarding the retroactive dealing of Q.C.s regarding lawyers that 
received Q.C.s over the years. However, I don't believe we have 
that situation in Saskatchewan, and I believe we'll carry on with 
our tradition which is respected by the bar in general. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to the changes that you made in the 
elimination of the court reports, I also note that the bar association, 
the Prince Albert section, have made a recommendation to 
reinstate court reports rather than the mechanical recording and 
then the transcription of it. 
 
Certainly the other factor with the elimination of the court reports 
and the payment as was previously the situation, what has 
happened here by changing from the court reports as we 
previously had is a very substantial increase in the cost for 
examinations for discovery, to be paid by the client. And this has 
been echoed by the members of the bar, that there has been very, 
very substantial increase. And since the bar, from which you were 
a member, has indicated that they made a recommendation to the 
minister to reconsider the reinstatement of court reports, I'm 
wondering whether you're satisfied with the removal of court 
reporters and the adoption of the system that you have adopted, 
and whether you have received any complaints in respect to the 
elimination of the court reporters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the member indicated a number of 
points, and he may want to clarify his question more specifically 
after I speak. 
 
In relation to civil cases, I suppose it's a question of who pays for 
the cost of the examination for discovery. The public at large can 
pay for the individual cases, or the lawyers and clients involved in 
the cases can bear the greater amount of the cost, and that's what 
we've gone to. 
 
(2145) 
 
I believe it's working. We've had mixed feedback on it. I've had 
people indicate that they acquire a better degree of service at this 
time. I haven't been personally involved with this issue for some 
time, and if the member has some specific indication that the 
system is not working better than before, perhaps he may want to 
be more specific. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well this is the representation of the  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2022 
 
 

lawyers in Prince Albert that passed a resolution which they 
forwarded to you, and I'm wondering whether you're aware of this 
resolution and whether you have discussed the matter with the 
local members of the bar at Prince Albert who are concerned. 
 
Obviously, in respect to the cost, there is a concern because it 
increases very significantly the cost of civil actions for 
examinations for discovery. And here again it hits those with the 
least amount of money to be able to proceed and may in fact 
exclude the access to justice to those without financial resources. 
 
So I'm asking you whether or not you have been receiving any 
complaints, and whether there's been any particular problems 
drawn to your attention, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I met with the Prince Albert bar 
recently, and that wasn't one of the issues that was brought to my 
attention. I believe you could be talking about a letter that went out 
some time ago. In a general sense the turn-around time has been 
reduced by roughly 30 per cent in terms of transcripts, and I think 
that's been a favourable accomplishment. Again, if there is 
something more recent, perhaps you could bring it to my attention. 
However, I believe that the Prince Albert bar, who are generally 
acquainted with me, would have brought it to my attention if there 
still was a problem in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I'm reporting here to you from The Law 
Society of Saskatchewan, Practitioners' Journal, of May of 1986, 
page 6: 
 

The Prince Albert bar association has indicated their strong 
disapproval of the use of tape-recorded court proceedings 
transcribed by secretaries. They prefer court reporting 
services by court reporters. 

 
That's the reference that I'm making, and I would have thought 
that you would have essentially addressed that. 
 
I go on to an item that is of interest I guess to all of Canada, and 
it's in the federal field, Mr. Minister, and that is the recently 
introduced tough law proposed on pornography and child sex. 
There has been a fair amount of comment in respect to the 
Minister of Justice in Ottawa, the introduction of regulation of 
pornography. And certainly, as I think everyone will agree in 
respect as it relates to children, there's complete unanimity in so 
far as the direction taken by the Minister of Justice. 
 
There has been some expression of concern in the general 
wideness of the definition used by the Minister of Justice in 
Ottawa. And what I'm asking the minister, whether he was 
contacted and had an opportunity for input in the proposal that was 
put forward by the Minister of Justice, Mr. Crosby; whether 
indeed there was a prior consultation; and whether or not the 
resulting legislation that has been brought down, whether you're 
essentially in agreement, or are there some concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I'm pleased to advise the House that 
we've had a very good degree of co-operation between Mr. 
Crosby's department and himself and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. We've had justice  

conferences, and one as late as this year in Vancouver, where we 
dealt with a number of the recommended changes that were on the 
horizon involving the evidence of children, which in my view was 
long overdue, and I took the position that changes were required. 
 
In my time as a private lawyer, I dealt with criminal cases and 
never could understand why there wasn't greater protection in 
relation to children through the evidentiary process in court. That 
change, I'm pleased to see, has now been made. 
 
As well, the stiffer penalties and redefinitions of the area of child 
abuse was important to the Government of Saskatchewan. We 
dealt in that area as well and are in general agreement to what Mr. 
Crosby is proposing. 
 
There are some areas, though, that do not reflect totally what our 
understanding was of the changes that would be coming down. 
One of the areas is the one that has been carried in the media more 
than anything else, which is unfortunate in a sense. However, that 
area is in relation to the definition of pornography, and it's our 
view that more work has to be done on that provision an perhaps 
to narrow the scope so that there is predictability so that the public 
understands what is illegal and what isn't. And I'm not totally 
satisfied that the wording is clear enough to meet that test. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I take it from what you have said, that there 
will be further discussions in respect to this by the Justice 
ministers from the various provinces along with the Attorney 
General. Or is the Bill that he has introduced now going to the 
finalized product from your discussion? 
 
Certainly I noticed in the editorials that pornography controls go 
too far and they indicate in respect to the wideness of the 
definition. And it says, "Rather than the Crown having to prove 
undue exploitation, an artist will have to demonstrate a work as 
artistic merit or educational value," and it goes on. 
 
And similarly with Dalton Camp, who many of you may know, 
also indicates the intentions of the pornography code in doubt, and 
he indicates that certainly all can agree in respect to the control of 
pornography as relates to children, but the extension and the extent 
of the definition in his view, went further than it was necessary or 
advisable. 
 
And so I indicate to the minister, I expect that you will be able to 
report back to us subsequent discussions with the minister. Are 
there any particular meetings scheduled to review this, or will it 
first go through the parliament? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Our officials have already been in touch 
with the federal department to indicate some of our views. Our 
understanding is that the process will involve consultation. In fact, 
my understanding is that the federal minister has already indicated 
publicly that the amendment, or the changes, are subject to further 
change and fine tuning to reflect some of the wishes. 
 
However, in the final analysis, we probably will never be at a 
stage where we get the approval of all groups, and that's going to 
have to be a decision by the federal  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2023 
 
 

minister. There are always groups that believe in greater 
permissiveness, and it may be that we don't satisfy all groups. 
However, our primary concern from Saskatchewan's point of view 
is the protection of young people, the protection of our population, 
and that's what will guide us in our deliberations. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to ask the minister, in respect to the 
RCMP, can you indicate what the contractual relationship for the 
cost of providing RCMP services to the province? I know there's a 
formula of federal and provincial, and I'd ask you if you could 
indicate what is the percentage that each has to pay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — This year we're at 62 per cent. That's up 2 
per cent pursuant to the 10-year contract which ends in 1990-91, 
that particular year, and it goes up 2 per cent each year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I note that you indicated to the Delisle residents 
that you're likely to add a detachment to Delisle. Is that within 
your jurisdiction, or . . . This is what I read in the Star-Phoenix, 
that you had made some indication that you may add a detachment 
to Delisle, I believe it was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The Delisle example you use is a 
redeployment from Saskatoon to Delisle. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is that going ahead, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. It has been approved and announced. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in item 1, I want to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
decrease in the number of person-years from 83.9 to 80.2. And I'd 
like to ask the minister what positions are being deleted there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm not sure, precisely, what the member 
requires. Dealing with man-years is very complex and there is a 
number of transfers, movements, deletions, additions, and I could 
. . . The net result is a reduction and I'm not sure what specific 
information, other than that, you require. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well what positions are being deleted from 83.9 
down to 80.2? There must be some positions that were previously 
filled that are being deleted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'll give you some examples. One 
individual was taken from the service to a contractual position. 
Two were transferred to the Public Service Commission because 
of their work requirement there, and one was transferred to the 
jobs agency because of his requirement there. He was formerly 
over on the Justice side. And these are the type of changes that 
we've experienced. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you any personal services contracts in the 
department? Any persons with personal services contracts other 
than appointed on the public service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Other than an employment service, no. 
We've got obviously a number of law firms that provide services 
to us, and I've sent the list to you.  

That's about it. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2200) 
 
Item 29 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, you're running a little fast. On 29, 
the grants to justice organizations for justice related activities, I 
was wondering if the minister could provide us a list of the grants 
that are provided — a list of the agencies, and the amount of the 
grants, under item 29. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I'm sending it over. Excuse me. I 
want to make sure you receive it all. Perhaps I’ll get them put on 
one sheet and send the information over to you. 
 
Item 29 agreed to. 
 
Items 30 and 31 agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 
Items 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
  
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I certainly want to thank the officials for 
their attendance and help tonight, as well as the questions from the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well yes, I want to join with the minister to thank 
all of the officials, and to thank him for providing the information 
as requested. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Northern Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 48 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I will call on the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — With me tonight I have Walter Keyes, the 
secretary of the secretariat, Darcy Mitchell, who is behind me, the 
assistant secretary to the secretariat, and Brian Goffin from the La 
Ronge office of the secretariat. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I'd like to start 
questioning the Northern Affairs estimates by asking the minister 
what the mandate of the department is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the mandate of the secretariat, as 
outlined in my estimates last year, was to and is to co-ordinate the 
activities of government, to  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2024 
 
 

increase the sensitivity of various government agencies and 
departments to the needs and aspirations of Northerners in 
northern Saskatchewan. We've had quite a wide sweeping 
mandate actually, and the member may be aware of some of the 
things we've been working on, and it ranges from the social 
services side of services in the North to the economic issues which 
face Northerners. We have been involved in everything from 
deliberations and negotiations on surface rights arrangements with 
gold companies, to working to enhance employment opportunities 
in uranium mines by Northerners. So there has been a very wide 
mandate that we've been entrusted with, and I have to say that 
although we have much work ahead of us, we have a good number 
of accomplishments which I believe the staff of the secretariat can 
be proud of. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms of evaluation of that agency, I 
would like to ask you: — what criteria do you use, and how 
regularly do you evaluate the performance and the success or 
failures of the Northern Affairs agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I always believe that a responsible 
government evaluates on a constant ongoing basis. I personally 
attend communities in northern Saskatchewan with people from 
the secretariat. The secretariat people are constantly working with 
departments and government agencies on specifics. 
 
Possibly the best mode of handling your questions, specifically, is 
for you to mention one of the areas that you, perhaps, are 
interested in, and I can give you an update. 
 
I'll take one as an example. The negotiations before the Star Lake 
mine went into construction involved the secretariat people. We 
were concerned and were interested in increasing northern 
participation in work involving the mining in northern 
Saskatchewan. As well, in terms of dealing with training issues, 
for example, in Amok or Key Lake, the secretariat has been 
involved with the Department of Advanced Education and 
Manpower; involved in training opportunities for Northerners to 
increase the content of northern participation in the uranium 
operations, as the member knows. And I believe the member is 
one of the few members on the NDP side that are in favour of 
continued mining operations in uranium. 
 
So you will agree with me, likely, that it's important that we 
continue training mechanisms to increase those percentages of 
Northerners working in the uranium operations. And I'm pleased 
to say that we have had good success in increasing the numbers at 
the mine sites. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, with regards to the 
purpose and objectives and functions of each of the divisions 
within your agency, the criteria that you apply to evaluate 
performance. And I look at your report, your annual report, the 
first one published, I believe, the 1984-85 report. And I see on 
page 11 yourself being the minister responsible for this agency 
and under your secretariat, and under your administration branch; 
and then the northern economic development, NEDSA; the 
information statistics data base; planning research and 
development; and the advisory services. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if 
you can provide me with a report of each  

department or agency that evaluates and co-ordinates 
socioeconomic activities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm trying to ascertain exactly what type 
of report the member is asking for. I would have no general report 
to provide as you've asked, unless I didn't understand your 
question. There is no general report covering all agencies that I 
could provide to you. However, if you have any specific question 
on any particular item that we could focus on, I'd be pleased to 
supply that to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well a little more specifically, Mr. Minister, I was of 
the understanding that that agency was to co-ordinate all 
government programs and departments so that the social and 
economic issues confronting Northerners could be addressed. And 
I am of the understanding that that agency ought to have a full 
report based on the issues confronting Northerners, and on that 
report there ought to be recommendations to resolve the issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Okay. Perhaps I'll explain to the member 
precisely that we don't do a report. We're not an agency such an 
the Ombudsman, for example, to provide a critique on all the 
agencies and departments of the government in the past year. I 
suppose if we did that we'd be spending all of our time reporting 
— providing written reports to the legislature. The work that the 
secretariat has been carrying on is much more valuable than that, 
and the work entails working with all departments to co-ordinate 
and attempt to have departmental activities governed by 
aspirations of the northern people. 
 
I'll give you an example. This secretariat is responsible for 
formulating the Northern Development Advisory Council concept 
which has now been officially appointed, and the council is acting 
in northern Saskatchewan. It's an 11-body member chosen through 
public nomination process. That was an idea which was 
formulated by the secretariat and is working very well. The 
particular group has held meetings across northern Saskatchewan 
priorizing issues for government, and then my job is to accept the 
recommendations from the northern advisory council and submit 
those recommendations to various departments. And it ranges 
again, everything from a new road in some community to perhaps 
a deficiency in certain housing programs in another community. 
So we've had very good public input from various communities, 
and obviously we're dealing with a large area of Saskatchewan, 
half of the province occupied by just over 30,000 people. So there 
are many diversities in the North that must be recognized, and the 
secretariat has spent a great deal of time acquiring that public input 
process. 
 
As you will recall, the DNS (Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan) was there before, and one of the complaints we 
had is that it was a bureaucracy which was superimposed on 
northern Saskatchewan in a colonial atmosphere, rather than 
operating as a government agency should. And I believe even your 
side of the House wouldn't disagree with that. So we're trying to 
improve by providing access from individuals to specific 
departments. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2025 
 
 

In terms of employment, that's been a key feature — economic 
development and employment. In the mining industry, for 
example, we've spent some time attempting to increase investment 
in northern Saskatchewan, increase new production, new 
exploration. And we've been dealing with SMDC, the 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, as well as 
other agencies that are in the business of creating new jobs, and 
we've spent some time with that as well. 
 
However, I can go over a whole list of general items. You may 
want to be more specific, and I could then indicate to you what 
we've done in a particular area. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well seeing as how we've now turned to the 
sounding board that you appointed, Mr. Minister, I want to ask 
you: — can you please explain your decision to appoint that 
northern advisory committee when you have access to locally 
elected officials? 
 
(2215) 
 
We have access . . . The government knows full well that in all of 
our northern communities we have locally elected people that are 
responsible for their communities, responsible to issues 
confronting them and their electorate. If anything goes wrong in 
La Ronge or Stanley Mission or Pelican Narrows, the elected 
official — the mayor or the councillor or the reeve, whatever 
name tag you want to put on that person — that elected official 
gets bounced off by the people in terms of issues. 
 
You know, when people are confronted with the high welfare 
dependency rates, high unemployment rates, problems at the 
community level, anything related to that particular area, the local 
elected official is the one that gets the flak. He carries the burden, 
so to speak, with regards to problems associated with any 
particular community or region. 
 
And I myself conclude, Mr. Minister, that the northern advisory 
committee that you established is nothing more than 
window-dressing. It's an alliance to yourself, propaganda, or a 
sounding-board, whatever phrase you want to us. 
 
What I would suggest, Mr. Minister, is that you listen to the 
locally elected officials. We have various organizations in the 
North that are elected to do the job, like yourself, like many of our 
colleagues in this legislature. You and I have a job to do. If 
anything goes wrong provincially, we get the flak, we get our 
electorate after us, and we have to do something about that 
problem. 
 
But what I see you doing in terms of that northern advisory 
committee, that you appointed, is that you're bypassing locally 
elected officials. You're bypassing them. Instead of going directly 
to the elected official in the North, you're going to an advisory 
sounding-board and taking recommendations by them when 
they're not actually responsible to any electorate except for 
yourself. 
 
That's a contention I have, Mr. Minister, and I would suggest 
strongly that you, in your capacity as Minister for Northern Affairs 
— which we are discussing under  

estimates — ought to make yourself more responsive to locally 
elected officials. I can name a dozen of them: — the 
Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments; the 
urban municipalities, the town of La Ronge or Creighton or 
Buffalo. You know, we have communities that have a lot of issues 
confronting them, and it's the locally elected official that gets the 
burden of having the responsibility to try to resolve those issues. 
 
But when a sounding-board is set up by yourself, by this 
government, it's bypassing the locally elected officials that ought 
to be met by yourself and your senior officials to try to resolve 
those issues that confront many of our people in the North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well in this area, as well, Mr. Member, 
we're going to have to agree to disagree. We have a difference in 
philosophy there. 
 
Let me just mention two points. The first point is that I don't 
believe a specific elected member level of administration in the 
North should speak for all Northerners on all issues. It just would 
be as if we suggested that a reeve in a particular rural municipality 
in a southern community speaks for the people on all issues, 
including health, social services, economic development. It simply 
doesn't happen that way, and the North should be no different. I 
believe that it's important for a wide cross-section of Northerners 
to have an equal voice. In fact, some of the elected members that 
you're referring to have appeared before the northern council to 
submit their ideas. And I think it's been working favourably. 
 
In terms of some of the questions that were raised initially, it'll 
take time for Northerners to get comfortable with the new body 
because they've been through years and years and years of 
governments appointing various commissions and bodies in 
northern Saskatchewan, which unfortunately didn't result in a lot. 
 
And we have used a rule of thumb to attempt to get a good 
cross-section of people on this committee, and I believe they're 
making some interesting and worthwhile progress. 
 
And in terms of a report which you asked about, very soon the 
northern council will be publicizing their first public report, 
because they are new. And I guess I'd ask you to judge them at 
that time, and judge them by the results that they bring to various 
communities because we're finding that the communities have 
been pleased with the fact that the council has listened and has 
communicated to government on a whole range of issues. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I guess we'll have to agree to disagree again,. Mr. 
Minister, because I see headlines here that says, "Northern groups 
reject advisory committee." There's quite a dozen of them — 
there's quite a few of them, Mr. Minister. I won't go through the 
whole newspaper headlines. 
 
But definitely, you know, there was a lot of discontent by the 
people, you know, when the appointment of this advisory 
committee was set up. More specifically, Mr. Minister, you know, 
that advisory committee, when it comes right down to it, what 
terms of reference does it  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2026 
 
 

have, and in terms of reference, while speaking about terms of 
reference, what authority does it have in terms of legislative 
authority to resolve those issues? 
 
I concur with you that many of our elected officials in the North 
have met with that group. In fact, I've met with them a couple of 
times, listened to the grievances and presentations submitted by 
the Northerners, but to this point in time, Mr. Minister, how many 
issues have they resolved? That is the big question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I suppose where I differ in opinion 
with yourself is that I've asked the committee to structure it in such 
a way that we expect performance; we expect results on job 
creation, on economic development, on social planning. And 
because of the wide cross-section of people on the committee and 
their expertise, the wealth of knowledge we have in those 11 
people, I think they can be very helpful to people in northern 
Saskatchewan by reaching into the communities and getting out 
some of the valuable ideas that we've already acquired. 
 
An example of that is the numbers of northern employees in the 
Key Lake mine, for example. Under the former administration it 
was very common to legislate quotas, affirmative action. You 
have to have this per cent, or you can't dig in the ground. Well that 
was ridiculous, and many companies never ever reached the 
percentage that was legislated or regulated. What we've done 
instead is work co-operatively, and I think Key Lake is a prime 
example of successfully approaching a problem, working together 
— not in a confrontation mode — and reaching some results. 
 
The Star Lake development is another example of a development 
where, by consulting with people, we've satisfied the trappers' 
association locally, the various people that live by Star Lake. 
Everyone now sees the Star Lake areas as a potential job creator, a 
real positive development; no threat to the environment and no 
threat to anyone' security. That's what you get from co-operation 
as opposed to legislation. 
 
I think in due course you'll see more of that type of progress. I 
think the potential in the North, as well as some of the severe 
problems in the North, are too well recognized by government to 
simply play politics on some of these issues. And in a sense, the 
fact that the northern council are not elected members may be a 
plus because perhaps too much power has been provided to 
elected people to deal with some very severe problems. As a 
result, I take the recommendations from the council very seriously, 
although they're not elected, because I believe they have a sincere 
intent in solving of some of the challenges ahead. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I have to disagree again there, Mr. Minister. I don't 
think that the elected officials have too much power at all because 
the fact today is there's no economic base. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Northern Local Governments, along with the other 
municipalities, along with the major centres like La Ronge and 
Creighton and Uranium City, have continuously asked for a fair 
share of revenues generated from our resources in the North. But 
to this point in time, can you tell me if Pelican Narrows or  

Wollaston Lake or Sturgeon Landing have an economic base? I 
doubt it very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
You mentioned a moment ago a comparison of the number of 
people employed at Key Lake and Star Lake. I wonder if you can 
give me figures, statistical information, Mr. Minister, the 
percentage of people of native ancestry employed in those mines 
back when we had the surface lease agreement as compared to 
today. I'm referring to Key Lake and Cluff Lake. Star Lake is a 
new project; that was not part of the surface lease agreements. But 
I'd like to get information about the other two mines, Key Lake 
and Cluff Lake. If you can give me that information, I'd appreciate 
it. 
 
And while we're on the subject of the northern advisory 
committee, could you also provide me with all their 
recommendations, Mr. Minister, in terms of issues and resolutions 
that have been submitted to yourself? Mr. Minister, if you could 
provide that information in writing, I'd appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well let me give you some information 
you asked for, and you'll have to clarify your last request for me. 
Roughly, I think you're aware that Cluff Lake has always had a 
fairly good record of percentage; in fact, it's near 50 per cent in 
terms of northern content. Key Lake is the one where we've been 
spending some time on, and in fact you recall the estimates last 
year where I was questioned on the percentage. At that time I 
indicated that around 25 to 27 per cent were Northerners — and 
native Northerners, according to the definition under that 
particular agreement. 
 
We took the April employment status, and it appears that we've 
increased the northern resident content by almost 20 per cent at 
that particular mine. So there's been a substantial increase because 
of some of the programs — and I'll give you an example of one. 
On August 2, '85, I attended a graduation of 20 young Northerners 
in Buffalo Narrows, and it was a very fulfilling experience. It was 
a graduation from a NEDSA industry-sponsored training program. 
It was unique in Canada. 
 
Each student was called upon to be presented with a certificate of 
graduation by an instructor. But, Mr. Chairman, that wasn't all 
they got, because standing next to the person giving the certificate 
was someone handing out job offers, and in fact each student that 
day received a job offer. That's the type of planning for northern 
Saskatchewan that has been overdue for years. And that's 
something I think we all can be proud of, because we have to see 
more of that type of training for specific tasks. As a result, it has 
achieved some remarkable numbers at the mines sites in northern 
Saskatchewan. And rather than forcing by mandatory quotas under 
legislation, we're working in co-operation, and it's certainly 
proving itself. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might provide that 
information in writing for my reference, as well as for reference to 
my colleagues back in my constituency. 
 
(2230) 
 
The other question I had raised, and the one that you  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2027 
 
 

wanted specifics on, was the one related to the northern advisory 
committee. It has gone throughout the North, meeting with various 
interest groups, Mr. Minister, and surely they've received a good 
number of briefs, resolutions, recommendations, etc. That's the list 
I'm asking you about. If I could get that in writing, I'd appreciate 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — What we will supply to you is a summary 
of the submissions because those are readily available. I don't have 
them with me, but we'll get them over to you within the next week 
or two. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well if you could provide them tomorrow, Mr. 
Minister, I'd appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the reports are in La Ronge. In fact 
you can have someone pick them up at the La Ronge office in the 
morning — tomorrow, if you wish. The council, as you know, is a 
body that travels around the North, and they get many submissions 
at each meeting. However, we will compile the various summaries 
of recommendations, and I believe you have an office or spend 
some time in your constituency which La Ronge is in. If it's easier 
for you to pick it up at La Ronge, we'll have it available for you, 
otherwise it will be here as quickly as we can get it here. But it has 
to come in from La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I'd appreciate getting that information 
and I concur that — I believe that you are prepared to give it to 
me. What I'm hesitant to . . . you know sometimes the bureaucracy 
. . . I don't know what the bureaucracy is like in your department, 
but I would sooner prefer to have your secretariat phone La Ronge 
and have them deliver it to the designated person and I can receive 
it via the mail or whatever. You can either mail them to me or I 
can have someone . . . If Mr. Keyes or Mr. Goffin could phone 
someone up there and advise them that we need this information, I 
could probably advise either one of your officials of whom I could 
send down to pick up the information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well the information is certainly available 
to you. In fact, you're the first one that has requested it, and that 
information is public. So we will supply it to you in whatever 
manner you wish. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Can the minister advise me what remuneration is 
paid to the members of the northern advisory committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We chose a middle range of commission 
and boards, and the individuals receive $100 for their attendance; 
that's per day, and the chairman receives slightly more, $125. And 
obviously you know the chairman, Bill Klassen, who was 
formerly the deputy minister, with a wealth of experience in 
northern Saskatchewan. He is the chairman. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, could you also provide me with a list 
of your staff, their salaries, wage increases and bonuses paid to 
your staff during the course of the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. I'll send it over to you immediately. 
 

Mr. Yew: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. In terms of NEDSA, Mr. 
Minister, the Northern Economic Development Subsidiary 
Agreement — the federal/provincial agreement which was signed 
in August of 1984 and was to be operational by 1985 and '86 with 
funding from a variety of provincial departments and agencies as 
well as by the federal government. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, 
whether this program is cost-shared on an equal basis between the 
province and the feds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — It varies somewhat. Some are paid for 
almost entirely by the federal government. In a general sense, 
you're looking at 50 per cent funding from each level of 
government. 
 
I might mention that as provincial administrators for NEDSA, 
secretariat staff attempt to co-ordinate provincial and federal 
development projects in general. And by the end of '85-86 about 
8.5 million in commitments are made under the agreement in areas 
directly related to economic development, job creation, and 
technical, and professional training, which is really the key in 
terms to the solution to some of the extreme difficulties that have 
been faced by Northerners over the last several years on the 
unemployment side. So it's been a good process for the North, and 
we see some interesting economic development projects. 
 
I think if you look in the last four years and look at the strengths in 
northern Saskatchewan, you see mining possibilities, and that's 
being developed. You see the wild rice industry, and I don't think 
anyone from that side would doubt that our government is 
primarily responsible for getting the wild rice industry on its feet 
and being one of the best advocates of that particular industry. 
And I don't think you'll find many wild rice people that would 
disagree with that, and if they do I'd certainly like to hear of it 
because we've had some interesting developments in that industry, 
although there was a bit of a crop failure last year, since it is a 
crop, and the indications are that there is going to be a good crop 
this year. And it's a big industry. It has great potential for the 
future of the North. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms of the $8.5 million fund that 
you're talking about, is that the provincial share, or is that the 
federal government's share? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, that's the total amount spent in the 
North. 
 
Mr. Yew: — What was the provincial government's share, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Approximately half of that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, what is the 
approval process with regards to this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — There's a federal-provincial management 
committee, in terms of developmental proposals and so on, that 
come to it, and then certain officials carry more of the burden on 
the day to day work side of the process. And it works very well. 
We've seen some good progress on the economic development 
side in northern Saskatchewan, and I think there is much more  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2028 
 
 

opportunity on the horizon. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I look at the report that you have. On 
page 9 it says that the northern — well NEDSA, for short, 
(Northern Economic Development Subsidiary Agreement) 
program was officially agreed to in August, as I mentioned before. 
And this program is a five-year, 36 million, cost-shared agreement 
aimed at enhancing long-term employment prospects for northern 
residents and stimulating northern business initiatives. The 
agreement is regional in its approach and is intended to 
supplement other programs and sources of financial support 
available for northern development. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister . . . You know what, I believe strongly in 
local participation, local decision-making, local autonomy. Just 
what process have you got in place to include the local people in 
northern Saskatchewan in terms of the whole process of 
evaluating and receiving applications, etc.? 
 
I recall we had an economic development program in the North 
whereby we involved local community residents — elected — and 
members of various interest groups recommended at the local 
level and appointed by government. There were local loans 
committees and district loans committees, etc. Then we had local 
participation and local involvement. And consultation was there. 
But now I see all of a sudden a transfer of a program which is 
controlled by the bureaucracy, by bureaucrats rather than by 
people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, I'm not sure if there's any reality to 
this specific complaint that the member seems to be putting forth. 
I'll give you some examples, the NEDSA agreement has now 
funded an economic development plan for La Ronge, for example, 
which affects all the community of La Ronge, because the 
community of La Ronge wanted to do that for their future 
enhancement of their opportunities. 
 
The community development planning for an Indian reservation, 
for example, falls within that mandate. I guess one thing that we 
do not do under that particular agreement is fund political groups 
for various activities, and perhaps that's what you're referring to. 
There is a good deal of community input in the process. In fact 
people from the community are benefiting under an application 
process for various developments that are taking place in the 
North. So when I talk to Northerners, they indicate to me that they 
want an opportunity to develop on their own without government 
bureaucracies. And again they use the example of the DNS, which 
didn't create anything of any lasting value. 
 
So it's one or the other, and we choose one. and that's dealing with 
specific projects in mind for the benefit of individuals in 
communities. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of that . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. In 
terms of that program, Mr. Minister, could you provide me with 
the policy in terms of reference of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, we will. 
 
Mr. Yew: — A couple more questions, Mr. Minister, then  

we can get into the specifics of the estimates before us. I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister, in terms of the fresh food and transportation 
subsidy, can you tell me, Mr. Minister, can you advise me what 
input your agency had to the Department of Health regarding the 
cancellation of the fresh food subsidy for Northerners? And also 
what studies have your staff and your advisory council conducted 
into the impact of the cancellation of this fresh food subsidy 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The northern advisory council will be 
visiting Stony Rapids in July, and they will be dealing with the 
issue, amongst many other issues. We've been attempting to 
determine the difficulty that's being faced by several of the 
communities. It doesn't involve many communities; however, 
some are adversely affected. 
 
As a matter of interest, on June 2nd I had my staff do a bit of 
research to find out the variance in food prices. And it is for Stony 
Rapids, as an example, where it is extremely high compared to 
other centres. Interestingly enough, we find that the La Ronge 
food prices were less than Regina on that date, in terms of the 
items that we analysed. 
 
So you see some discrepancy across the province, and it's 
something that we have to look at. And presently I'm dealing with 
the Minister of Social Services in terms of difficulties that are 
faced by people who can't afford to buy the necessary sustenance; 
and if that is the case, we will deal with it. However, the 
community availability of services must be considered as well, 
and that's one of the reasons why the council is going into the area 
this summer. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Getting to the estimates before us, Mr. Minister, I 
note that your 1984 budget — 1984-85 budget was underspent by 
over $135,000. I wonder if you can tell me, Mr. Minister, about 
your spending activities during that fiscal year. 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, I never thought I'd hear anyone 
complain about a department underspending, but in that year that 
you refer to, we did not have a full year of operation in terms of 
the activities, and that's the reason for the shortfall in expenditures. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I also note now, Mr. Minister, that the budget for 
this agency has increased by $150,000, and probably that is 
welcome news, for what it's worth. But do you really believe that 
this is enough to solve the social and economic problems 
confronting Northerners, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'd like to advise the NDP member that 
we've never taken the position in the North that government would 
solve all the problems. That's why we're working with industry 
and real economic development. That's the reason why we 
negotiated the Weyerhaeuser paper-mill deal, is to allow the 
forestry industry to grow in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And all of those economic development projects and our activities 
will result in increased employment, increased participation like 
we see at Key Lake, and that is our  
  



 
June 16, 1986 

 
 

2029 
 
 

motive behaviour in government at this time. We just don't believe 
that government unilaterally can solve the problems, because the 
DNS proved that government couldn't. 
 
Mr. Yew: — One final question, Mr. Minister. The agency that 
we're referring to here, does it have any meetings and 
co-ordination with the western northlands agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The questions relating to NEDSA that you 
asked me refer to the same thing. It's a different name but it's 
involving the same program. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 48 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Northern Affairs Secretariat 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 48 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 48 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'd like to thank my officials and the 
opposition for their questions. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I, too, Mr. Speaker, would like to join the minister 
for northern affairs and his officials for their co-operation, and I 
look forward to getting the information that I requested. Thank 
you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:50 p.m. 


