


















































June 20, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 20, 1986 
 
 
 

2175 
 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on 
Tuesday next, I will move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s deal with Weyerhaeuser, which does not 
require Weyerhaeuser to pay any down payment for 
purchases of the pulp-mill, permits Weyerhaeuser to write 
off operating losses against the principal of the loan, 
provides no guarantee of the protection of existing jobs, 
entails the real possibility of wage cuts imposed on existing 
employees, and provides no guarantee for the continued 
operations of the Big River Sawmill. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you, and through you to members of the Assembly, 
a group of 17 students from Medstead Central School in the 
Turtleford constituency. They’re seated up here in the Speaker’s 
gallery, sir. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Rita 
Adamache, Mrs. Janzen, Mrs. Anderson, Mrs. Olson, Mr. 
Werstroh, Mr. Harms, and Mr. Boyd. I’ll be meeting with you 
right after question period at 10:30. I’d ask all members to give 
them a warm welcome to the Assembly. We wish you a pleasant 
stay and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
to you, and through you, a small group of students from Moose 
Jaw. They’re in Moose Jaw North constituency, and I’m doing this 
on behalf of the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
They number six students, and they are a computer education class 
from Vanier Collegiate. I’ll be meeting with them at 10:30 to 
discuss things with them and have pictures with them. And I ask 
all members of the Assembly to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
through you, and to the House, seated in the east gallery, some 66 
grade 4 and 5 students from the Lanigan Elementary School. And 
I see they’re on their way in. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Miss Debbie Randall, Mr. Harvy Nugent, Mr. Dennis 
Huebert; chaperons, Mrs. Smale, Mrs. Boivin, Mrs. Mueller, Mr. 
Novecosky, and bus driver, Mr. Forsyth and Mr. McMeans. I want 
to take this opportunity to welcome the students here. I hope they 
enjoy their visit to Regina and have a safe journey home. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I’d like to introduce 
and welcome to the Assembly 63 grade 5 students from the 
Lakeview Elementary School. Mr. Speaker, that school is located 
in the Lakeview area of Saskatoon, which is one of the four 
communities in my constituency. It’s near and dear to my heart in 
some sense, Mr. Speaker, in the last winter I was a guest reader at 
their reading week, and a couple of months ago my wife attended 
the Lakeview School and gave an address on hot air ballooning to 
the students. I think some of the students involved here were in 
that group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students today are accompanied by their teacher, 
Ellen McLane, Tris Thurgood, and chaperons, Pat Katrusiak, 
Daryl Slind, Cheryl Dyck, Sandra Alldred, Leny Hill. And I’d like 
to advise the students, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be meeting with them 
after question period at 10:30 for pictures and refreshments and to 
answer any questions they may have with respect to the 
proceedings in the gallery. I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming my students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Terms of Agreement for Sale of PAPCO 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it deals with the disclosure in the Assembly 
yesterday of some of the terms of the agreement between your 
government and the Weyerhaeuser Corporation for the sale of 
PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) and its assets. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, can you confirm that the Weyerhaeuser 
Corporation is purchasing the Prince Albert Pulp Company, and 
all related assets, for zero money down, with no firm obligation to 
repay the so-called purchase price of $248 million? 
 
Can you, for example, confirm that if the Weyerhaeuser 
Corporation operates the pulp-mill in the years prior to the 
construction of the paper-mill at a substantial loss, the entire 
amount of that loss is deducted from the so-called sale price, with 
the result that the more that Weyerhaeuser loses, the more the 
purchase price is reduced. Are those correct terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . I can confirm, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are putting together a brand-new paper operation 
in northern Saskatchewan — a brand-new paper-mill in 
co-operation with an integrated pulp and paper operation in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that where the company had lost 
$45 million over the last few years, on top of the previous 
administration paying $168 million — and they didn’t have to — 
that you’re looking at something like $213 million of losses that 
didn’t even have to occur. We’re talking about a $250 million, 
brand-new paper-mill, integrated with a complete pulp and paper  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2176 
 
 
 

operation, integrated into a whole northern institute of technology 
designed for forestry, and the opposite is against it. 
 
I can confirm that, because they’ve stood here and say, no, we’d 
rather lose $213 million on an on-going losing operation, pay 168 
million for 60 per cent of it which they didn’t have, and lose 45 
million — and they don’t want to build a new one. And then they 
say, well, for Heaven sakes, you’re going to have to pay for it out 
of losses, not profits. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say I would like to see a company build a 
brand-new paper-mill and pay for it out of profits, than I would 
see us lose $45 million in 4, 5, or 6 years, spend $168 million and 
get absolutely zero for it. Every single job last year in the pulp 
company cost us $60,000 in subsidy — $60,000 a job under the 
current administration, or the way we’re sitting there now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll confirm that we are going to build a 
brand-new paper-mill, integrated with a pulp-mill, and it’s going 
to cost something like $500 million, and it’s going to be paid for 
out of profits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
Premier confirm that, notwithstanding that he says it’s going to be 
paid for out of profits, once this paper-mill is built, Weyerhaeuser 
can make profits of 12 per cent a year for 30 years and the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t get a dime. Can you confirm that as part of 
your deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is typical in its 
attitude. It believes every business cheats and lies and steals. 
That’s what they believe. Every time a business comes in here . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please, order. Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think I got the attention of the opposition. 
What I said was this: the NDP believes that every business cheats 
and lies and steals and cannot be trusted. That’s what I said. And 
every time we started a new operation, you have said something 
about either a new bacon processing plant, or a new project, or a 
new upgrader, or a new Weyerhaeuser project. You say you can’t 
trust business. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. This House 
cannot operate with the amount of noise that we’re having, and 
I’m going to call order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — There’s clearly a difference in philosophy. 
It’s evident right now. Absolutely. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve just asked for order. 
Members are still shouting. We cannot operate that way, and I’m 
asking now for order and I’m going to enforce it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll just go back a couple of years. The 
opposition, when they were in government, had a chance to sell 60 
per cent, or let be sold 60 per cent of the pulp-mill; they chose not 
to. They had it for sale in the private sector, but they chose to pay 
$168 million for it because they believe in that. Fair enough. They 
believe in  

it because they don’t trust the private sector. After that deal they 
lost $45 million in that pulp operation; now we’re putting together 
a brand-new, integrated paper and pulp operation, and they 
question the integrity of the business that’s coming in — 
Weyerhaeuser. They say they may cook the books, or they may 
not average it out, or they may do this or they maybe do that, and 
they’re been saying that for some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’m going to ask the member for Quill 
Lakes and the member for Regina North West and the member for 
Shaunavon to apologize to this Assembly for not obeying the 
rulings of this Chair — and each one. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will just make the point that this 
government on this side of the House . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member for Cumberland and the member 
for Athabasca continue to holler right through the whole process 
here, and I’m going to ask them to apologize as well — both 
members. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I apologize, sir. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make the point: 
the previous administration — and I don’t blame them for their 
philosophy — like to have corporations in government, Crown 
corporations, whether it’s in potash or whether it’s in pulp-mills or 
other things. We would rather have them in the private sector, and 
there’s a clear difference, and we would rather see a private 
paper-mill integrated with a pulp-mill. We’d rather see a private 
bacon plant — we turned over Intercontinental Packers back to the 
private family. We believe in that, and they don’t. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I see we’ve been losing a lot of money in a 
public company. And what we want to do is move those losses 
into a profitable situation with $500 million of a brand-new 
corporation. That’s what we’d like to do. So there’s a clear 
difference in philosophy. They can have that philosophy; I don’t 
share it. I’d rather see it in the private sector running at a profit 
than in the public sector running at a loss. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. The 
question I asked was this: does your deal permit Weyerhaeuser to 
make 12 per cent profits over 30 years without paying a dime to 
the people of Saskatchewan? And I ask you, does your deal permit 
that without any cheating, without any lying, without any stealing 
on the part of Weyerhaeuser, without any cooking of the books, 
but following to the letter the deal you negotiated with 
Weyerhaeuser? Isn’t it true that you are allowing  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2177 
 
 
 

Weyerhaeuser to make 12 per cent before we get a nickel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what the deal includes, it 
includes hundreds of millions of dollars of new money coming 
into the province to build a new paper-mill and integrate it with 
the pulp-mill. Now that’s quite different than us having to borrow 
$600 million to pay New York bankers for a potash industry — a 
completely different philosophy. What it includes is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member for Shaunavon is continuing 
to holler. I’m going to ask him to apologize to the Assembly or 
leave the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — All right. And I ask you now to maintain your 
quiet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I wanted to say is simply 
this. The deal . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member for Regina North 
West is continuing to holler as well. I’m going to ask you to 
apologize to the Assembly again. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — And this is the last time. If you do the same 
thing again, you’ll have to leave the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just make the point, in response to the hon. 
member’s question: the deal includes hundreds of millions of 
dollars, new money, outside money, coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan to build a new paper-mill, and it includes the 
integrated forestry industry, paper and pulp. When they spend 
hundreds of millions of dollars on the new paper-mill, I expect that 
they will be pretty interested in making a profit — making a profit 
— in that industry. And if it’s integrated into the pulp business, it’s 
a wholly integrated unit. 
 
So if they do operate the pulp company well and they operate the 
paper company well, which is they are going to put hundreds of 
millions of their money into it, I suspect they’ll have some interest 
in doing that — doing better than the past which the public has put 
$168 million . . . We’ve lost $45 million . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, I asked you a relatively 
simple question. It’s big money we’re talking about. I want to ask 
you straight out: is it possible for Weyerhaeuser to operate the 
combined operation for 30 years, make a profit of 12 per cent each 
year, and not pay a dime of the $248 million? Is that part of the 
deal you have negotiated? And could you offer an answer to that 
question without getting into potash in New York or whatever 
other diversionary tactic you have indulged in this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I have said is  

when the company brings several hundred million dollars into 
Saskatchewan, their money, to build a brand-new paper-mill — 
brand-new, it’s not here — and to integrate that with the pulp-mill, 
that there’s a relatively large incentive on their part to make profits 
by spending $100 million on a new paper-mill, integrating it with 
pulp. It would seem to me they would like to make money and 
some profit. It’s here they will build it. We are watching it. 
 
We have complete, obviously, control over the entire operation in 
terms of anything else that goes on in the province, in terms of 
taxation, in terms of . . . I mean for Heaven sakes, they are coming 
in here. Can you imagine this, Mr. Speaker, they are coming in 
here under the threat that someday an NDP administration might 
nationalize it? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I cautioned the member from 
Shaunavon before. I’m going to ask the member for Shaunavon 
now to withdraw from the Chamber. 

 
Inaccurate Home Pak Policies Sent Out 

 
Mr. Myers: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask a question 
of the minister responsible for SGI. In the House yesterday and on 
the news there were reports that it cost SGI $100,000 to correct a 
clerical error in some of the policies. It also stated that these 
policies were spread across the breadth of Saskatchewan. I’d like 
to ask the minister what the true facts regarding SGI in this 
particular case are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House I was 
asked by the member for Regina Centre, I believe, to confirm that 
the costs of this error in the SGI policy would be in the 
neighbourhood of $100,000. Mr. Speaker, in checking with the 
officials at Saskatchewan Government Insurance, I find that in fact 
there are not over 16,000 policies, but rather 13,499 policies 
involved. 
 
The average cost per policy holder to go through this exercise 
which we outlined yesterday is $1.10 per customer, therefore 
bringing the total cost of this error in the policy to $14,848.90, 
certainly a far cry from the $100,000 that was brought in by the 
NDP member for Regina Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, are you telling this House that those 13,000 policy 
holders can be contacted and all arrangement made with them for 
an average of $1.15 — was that your figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — The figure, Mr. Speaker, was $1.10 per policy 
holder. And as I outlined yesterday, what we’re doing is that there 
is a direct letter going out to each and every policy holder, 
explaining the error and having a consent form on it that they can 
send it back. They have until June 30th to do so. And then for the 
two weeks after that every agent involved will once again contact 
those people to give them the chance to put in the thing — to 
renew their policy on those terms. 
 
If you want me to break down the costs further, I can break it 
down as such: 10 cents per envelope; 68 cents for 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2178 
 
 
 

stamps because we’re enclosing a self-stamped envelope; 15 cents 
for computer time, paper, and printing; and 17 cents for staff — 
$1.10 per policy holder, a total cost of under $15,000, which quick 
math tells me it’s $85,000 less than what was alleged by the 
member for Regina Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The division bells having rung from 10:25 a.m. until 12:28 p.m.: 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 9 
 
Blakeney Tchorzewski 
Engel Lingenfelter 
Koskie Lusney 
Yew Sveinson 
Hampton  

Nays — 29 
 

Devine Tusa 
Birkbeck McLeod 
Andrew Taylor 
Duncan Katzman 
Folk Myers 
Dutchak Dirks 
Sandberg Currie 
Martens Maxwell 
Smith (Moose Jaw) Hodgins 
Morin McLaren 
Johnson Young 
Hopfner Rybchuk 
Caswell Muller 
Glauser Sauder 
Zazelenchuk  
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to please introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the officials 
are: Dan Gagnier as deputy minister; Michael Crosthwaite 
assistant deputy minister of trade development division; Bob Volk, 
Elaine McCall, and Marg Morgan McQuinn. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a few 
preliminary questions that we traditionally ask.  

Could you send over the names, the salaries of any of your 
executive assistants, and indicate whether they have, in fact, 
received any increase, and the amount of the percentage of 
increase if you could? Can you send that over now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advance that to you. The ministerial 
assistants are: Debbie Farnel, who’s an assistant secretary; here 
salary is $2,018; Diane Tremblay is secretary; her salary is 2,445, 
and that is the top of the list. She’s been a secretary in government 
in cabinet ministers’ offices for about 10, 15 years, so she has no 
salary increase. I think Debbie Farnel — we’ll check this out for 
you — I think it was a 3 per cent salary increase. Coryna Kulba is 
ministerial assistant at $2,200 a month, no salary increase. And I 
also have Ian Angell, who is a ministerial assistant, is paid through 
Sedco. I’ll find that for you; I think we have to do Sedco later on. 
I’ll get that information for you. And Gerry Labas, who also works 
in my office and works for Mr. Berntson as well; he’s paid 
through SPC. I don’t have that information here. I’ll get that for 
you as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Those are the complete number of EAs and 
personal staff then, and including Sedco, right? Okay, provide me 
with that information as to the salaries of those that you . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll provide that stuff to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, and any percentage increase that they may 
have had. I ask you: are there any senior staff in your department 
that are covered by employer contract other than the normal OC 
appointment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll get the information; I’ll give it to you a 
group at a time. On the trade side there’s Art Wakabayashi, who is 
the trade secretariat. Mr. Wakabayashi’s contract was exactly the 
same amount that he was receiving from the federal government. 
He’s a long-time civil servant with the federal government. And 
that comes to 7,733 a month — and that was just absorbing part of 
it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s the only one then, I take it, Mr. Minister in 
respect to a personal contract. Could you also provide then similar 
with the senior officials — who your senior officials are and the 
amount that they are paid and any percentage of increase in salary 
during the course of the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You want that as to the top level of people 
— what salary ranges? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Do you want the salary level on last year? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, what I want and what we’ve been getting 
before, Mr. Minister, is just your senior executive staff and the 
amount that they’re paid, and an indication of whether there’s any 
increase during the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I undertake to get that for you and  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2179 
 
 
 

send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That would be fine, sure. Also I would like to ask 
you if you could provide us with the total expenditure in respect to 
any travel by the minister in the portfolio — part will be your 
predecessor, and yourself — during the past year, that is, ’85-86. 
The total amount in-province and total amount out-of-province in 
respect to ministerial travel: can you provide that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The in-province travel, I understand, was 
provided to your group through the Department of Supply and 
Services with regard to airplane travel. I think that’s what you’re 
asking for there. 
 
Out of . . . travel, and this deals with my particular travel since the 
16th of December through to the 17th of March: Ottawa, January 
15th to the 17th, airfare 675, total of others is 305; Edmonton, 
accompanied by Hepworth — that was on executive air — 
Hepworth, Bob Reid, Doug Emsley, and Gary Cooper; February 
2nd and 3rd in Toronto to attend a trade ministers’ meeting with 
Labas and Norman Riddell from Executive Council; March 4th 
and 5th to London, Ontario, to speak to the Association of 
Universities and Colleges of Canada, accompanied by Don Wright 
— that was a speaking engagement that I’d been invited to. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I wanted the total expenditure. You gave me 
from December 16th to March 17th. What I was really looking for 
is ministerial travel outside the province for the total year, that is 
for 1985-86 — April 1, ’85 to March 31, ’86. And can you 
provide me with the total cost, where the trips were, people that 
accompanied the minister, and the details of the costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Can I get it clear — what you want is the 
trips that I have made since I took over this portfolio? That’s all. 
Or do you want also when I was in Finance? Okay. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m dealing with the estimates of Economic 
Development and Trade. And so what I really want is, during the 
course of the year ’85-86, part of the time you were there, and so 
you’re giving me that information, and part of the time another 
minister was. And so what I want is the total travel cost for the 
ministers in that department during . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay. I’ll give you the ones then for Mr. 
Berntson, and that would be prior to . . . that’s from April ’85 to 
December of ’85. Okay, and that’s when I took over that 
department. 
 
On May 9th to 29th was a trip to China, total cost $3,000; June 
11th and 13th, to Montreal to attend investment seminar hosted by 
Economic Development and Trade, $884; June 16th, Grand Forks 
n North Dakota, to receive a Canadian friendship award, $1,790; 
July 7th, Edson, Alberta, toured Pelican mills plant with Mr. Mell 
Brough, from the department, and Labas, $491. July 27th to 30th, 
St. Johns, Newfoundland, for Economic Development  

and Trade ministers’ meeting, $1,936.48. August 1st and 2nd in 
Vancouver, a meeting with Senator Sam Gibbons on the U.S. 
sub-committee on lumber exports, $560. And September 8th to 
14th to Japan, accompanied by Mr. Dedman and Mr. 
Schumiatcher; negotiations with regard to the Toyota plant that 
was coming to one province in Canada. There were two of those 
trips — September 8th to 14th, and October 4th to 20th, costs of 
$5,670, and $3,685. November 7th to Edmonton to Canola 
Crushers of Western Canada meeting. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I have some students in the gallery which I 
would like to take an opportunity to introduce before they leave 
the galleries. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m sorry to 
interrupt the proceedings of the day, but I’m advised that there’s a 
group of students in the west gallery from Russell, Manitoba. That 
particular part of the country happens to border my riding, which 
is the Moosomin constituency; it also borders the riding of 
Saltcoats. And for the students in the gallery, the member for 
Saltcoats just happens to be sitting in the gallery behind you. He 
should be down here, but be that as it may, he’s up there visiting a 
friend. 
 
You people may want to take the opportunity to meet with the 
member for Saltcoats. He’ll be glad, I’m sure, to go out in the 
rotunda area and answer any questions that you may have. I 
understand that you’ve had a tour of the building. I trust you’ve 
enjoyed yourself. We’re glad to have you here in Saskatchewan 
visiting our legislature. We sure want to wish you a good trip 
home and a good visit while you’re here in our good province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 
group of students, 40 in number, from Russell, Manitoba. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The response: the last trip by Mr. Berntson 
was November 7th to the 12th, and that was to attend a Canola 
Crushers of Western Canada meeting in Edmonton. And the total 
costs of that five days, I guess, was 1,322.21. 
 
Now since March 31st the only other trips that I have taken have 
been to Vancouver, which was last Friday to attend a meeting of 
trade ministers, along with various other federal officials in 
Vancouver, and I haven’t got that totally finalized; and then to 
Winnipeg just this week to  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2180 
 
 
 

deal with trade ministers’ conference in Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what were the amounts spent on those trips? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The last two I don’t know because they 
were just done this week and the last part of last week, so I don’t 
have that finalized yet. But I’ll undertake to provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right, I would appreciate that. I wonder if the 
minister can also provide me with the information as to the total 
amount of money that was spent on advertising in the department 
during the past fiscal year, ’85-86. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Total amount expended was $653,049.85. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And who was the advertising placed with? Was 
that with Dome Advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — $531,536.09 was with Dome Media 
Buying Services Ltd., and the remaining $121,513.76 with Dome 
Advertising Ltd. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And relative to this year’s budget, has there been 
an increase in the budgeting for advertising, over and above the 
$653,049? What is the projected amount that is budgeted for 
expenditure this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that it’s slightly lower, not a 
great deal. We’ll get that exact figure for you, but about the same 
amount, a little bit less. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn briefly to the economic conditions 
of the province. And certainly we have some concerns with the 
indicators that we see in respect to the development of the 
economy here in Saskatchewan, recognizing, as we must, some of 
the basic problems — agriculture has had its ups and downs — but 
certainly I think that we have to be concerned generally with the 
economic state of the economy. 
 
And if we look at some of the indicators — and I can go into a 
very detailed analysis of where the economy is — but certainly we 
see during the past year the retail sales down, the lowest in 
Canada, other than P.E.I., but worse than every other province in 
Canada. We find that in respect to housing has not kept pace, that 
Saskatchewan is last in the growth of housing starts in 1985, was 
worse than every other province. 
 
We take a look at new investment, and the province’s economy 
seems to be declining. New investment has in fact declined in real 
terms from 5.1 billion in 1981 to 4.2 billion in 1985. In real terms, 
the Saskatchewan economy has basically declined since 1982, and 
we find with manufacturing shipments has declined by some 15 
per cent since 1981. 
 
And I can go on into other areas; and the other area of concern is 
employment, and that’s in particular with young people. I’ll tell 
you that there has been a  

tremendous disappointment with the performance of your 
government in the commitment to young people in this province. I 
can tell you that youth employment is down, if you want to get 
into it . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Either the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster can get into the debate or I have the floor, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m going to give statistics as long as I feel that we’re 
in the estimates on Economic Development, and I’m going to, and 
I intend to — and I intend not to be interrupted either. 
 
Let’s take a look at the rate of job creation. New job creation is 
one of the lowest in Canada. Youth employment is down. There 
were 7,000 fewer young people working in 1985 than in 1981. 
Unemployment among our young people was exceedingly high, as 
it is in many of the other provinces in Canada. And I’ll tell you if 
we can . . . in 1981 the province had the lowest unemployment 
rate in Canada, and from January 1982 to January ’86 the 
able-bodied, fully employable case-load for Saskatchewan 
assistance plan increased by 10,000 people — over 20 per cent. 
 
These are not very comforting statistics, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister. You have all the other types of indicators that one can 
turn to. And certainly one can look at the financial picture of the 
province and you can see that there’s a massive debt that has been 
accumulated, and you can find that in Saskatchewan the headlines 
now indicating, “Saskatchewan debt nears the 9 billion mark.” 
And it goes on to say that every many, woman and child, the 
amount is about $85 per person in Saskatchewan. 
 
So these are difficult statistics for people of Saskatchewan to be 
confronted with because you have promised so much and have 
done so very, very little. Obviously there are some winners in this, 
while your government in the last three or four years. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I believe the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena would like to introduce some students. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the member from Quill Lakes for relinquishing his speech 
here to me so that I may introduce some guests from Kelvington. 
 
We’ve got 38 students from the Robert Melrose Elementary 
School in Kelvington, Saskatchewan. They’re grade 5s. I’m glad 
to see you here today. I see you have your teacher Mary Wdowach 
with you; chaperons Mr. Glen Nordmarten and several other 
people. I could go through a whole list here. 
 
I hope that you find the proceedings here informative and 
instructive. You missed the bell-ringing which is a phenomena 
which occurs in the Chamber very seldom. It would have been 
something for you to see and hear. After a while you can actually 
see the noise. 
 
I certainly hope that we’ll have time for a few questions after you 
get through with your tours. I believe we have  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2181 
 
 
 

pictures at 1:15. I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. Glad to see you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As I was saying, Mr. Minister, the province is 
going deeper and deeper in debt, and this is of concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I want to say that we find other 
indications and other headlines: “Population growth rates slowing 
down,” and one can read it, “Bankruptcies increase,” “Students 
seeking jobs will find tight market,” an analysis of the situation for 
young people. I don’t want to take the time of the House to read 
the contents of these, but indicators of the economy and the real 
basic mess that the province finds itself in is evidenced again — 
Crown Investments Corporation records net loss in ’85. And we 
find in the business community, in the small-business community, 
headlines, “In Receivership — Ward Johnston Electric,” “Saskana 
Sausage Closes,” “Saskoil Staff Cuts.” And we can go on, Mr. 
Minister, “Farmer’s Income Drops,” “Province’s Growth Rate 
Seems to be Declining.” One headline that I think is indicative of 
the economy, and one group that hasn’t suffered, is the headline 
— “Royal Bank Profits Rise $2.27 a Share.” 
 
But these are the areas of major concern. And I just want to walk 
through these indicators — “Construction Down From Last Year,” 
and I’ve mentioned that. And worst of all we find in the 
counterparts in Ottawa pretty well duplicating the direction of this 
government in many ways, with the massive increase of taxes that 
has been put upon many of the ordinary people of Saskatchewan 
and indeed in Canada. 
 
I say to you that these are the concerns that we have. There are 
some circumstances which I acknowledge that made some 
difficulty in the Saskatchewan economy. But the thing is that what 
you’ve done, Mr. Minister, and your government, is set priorities. 
And I say they were priorities that were not fair. You set priorities 
that you, at any cost, would get the oil industry going, and you 
handed out $300 million annually to the oil companies. And what 
you did to the ordinary Saskatchewan people was to increase 
massively the taxes that you levied on them. 
 
I say that one can compare with other provinces, and I can say 
that, in respect to Manitoba, it says that Manitoba expects 9,500 
beginnings of small businesses. If you look at the economic 
projections, the economic projections for Manitoba is that it will 
outstrip the rest of western Canada. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, these are the cold facts of the economy 
here in Saskatchewan; I may say only a very small portion of the 
statistics that could be mounted to demonstrate exactly to what 
extent this government has failed in an economic way. 
 

Certainly when you first were elected, and you were not the 
minister at that time, but one of the first things you did is to put on 
a showcase of the open for business conference, and you spent 
close . . . over a quarter of a million dollars — $300,000 I believe 
it was. A lot of announcements, a lot of propaganda, but little 
results. 
 
And only when you were into your fourth year and scheduled for 
the . . . to going to the polls, did the announcements start. But I’ll 
tell you, the concrete evidence of your economic policies are not 
evident to the people of Saskatchewan. I mean, we’ll get into some 
of the projects, and you can give us more details and perhaps 
clarify that. 
 
But I’ll tell you, we can look at the Weyerhaeuser deal, that 
purports to be a deal, in Prince Albert. But that, so far, is an 
announcement. You haven’t been able, and you won’t table the 
agreement, your government. And I think that if you were proud 
of that transaction, that you’d be willing to table that agreement 
and allow the people of Saskatchewan to have a look at it. 
 
Why are you hiding it? That’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
are phoning and asking us. If it’s so good, why won’t they disclose 
it? That’s the question that’s being asked. So we can get into a full 
debate on this and I willingly can prepare to do it. 
 
But let us not be deceived into thinking that there was no 
economic growth before you people got into office. I’ve used this 
before, and I’m going to use it again, and it’s your document, “The 
Saskatchewan Promise”. And what makes it so difficult to deal 
with you people is that you won’t deal in facts. 
 
(1300) 
 
And the Premier will come into this legislature and, when a 
question is asked in respect to exodus of population, says there is 
no growth in population during the time that we were in office. 
And then he puts out a book which covers our years in office, and 
indicates that there was an average 10 per cent increase of 
population every year, when he puts out a book which indicates 
that the economic growth during ’72 to ’82 outstripped all of 
Canada, and he comes in and says, you socialists, you had nothing 
going for you, when you have turned this province into a heavy 
debt-laden province in the book that you look and put out by your 
party. And I’ll tell you, I’d like you to put an addition to this — 
the four years under the Tories. That’s what I’d like added to this 
book in comparison. 
 
You know, just a few of the comments in respect to the growth, 
and on page 4 of “The Saskatchewan Promise” it says: “Growth 
— we outperform.” And they’re sending this all out of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll read just a bit: 
 

The Gross Domestic Product rose strongly from $3.4 billion 
in real terms in 1972 to $5.2 billion in 1982. 

 
And here we’re dealing from 1972 to ’82. It seems to me that the 
New Democratic Party had something to do  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2182 
 
 
 

during those years. We happened to be the government. So that 
was the growth. 
 
The population jumped by almost 10 per cent in eight years to just 
under one million people by 1982. And the Premier says there was 
no growth, but he publishes it and sends it out of the province, that 
there was a substantial growth in the population. You know what 
it says? 
 

Wealth in renewable and non-renewable resources, 
expanding markets, strong technology capability and an 
international outlook — combined with the pro-business 
government and one of the lowest per capita debt burdens in 
the country . . . 

 
That’s the legacy that the New Democrats gave to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They gave them the lowest per capita debt in 
Canada, they gave them — and working with the people of 
Saskatchewan — the fastest growth in Canada, outstripping every 
province in Canada. That’s what we have. 
 
“Years of steady growth,” it says in this Tory manual that they 
send out of the province — years of steady growth. 
 
How the key economic indicators grew from 1972 to 1982: total 
investment up 10.9 per cent; retail sales, 9.5 per cent; mineral 
shipments, 12.6; manufacturing shipments, 12.3. And then they 
have another little chart. This is the Tory pamphlet — Tory 
brochure — sent out of Saskatchewan encouraging the people to 
come to the great province that was left behind by the New 
Democrats. And it says, “10 years as a growth leader in Canada,” 
and they talk about the gross domestic product: Saskatchewan, 51 
per cent increase; change in Canada, across Canada average, 30 
per cent. 
 
Investment during those 10 years from ’72 to ’82 — investment 
grew by 338 per cent in Saskatchewan compared to the Canadian 
average of 275. Retail sales outstripped the Canadian average, 197 
to 186; personnel disposable income increased 333 per cent; in 
Canada, 267. This is the document that you put out to indicate to 
those investors how good Saskatchewan was. I wonder if the 
minister is prepared to indicate what went wrong. 
 
You made so many promises to the people of Saskatchewan; you 
held out so much for the young people. What you’ve given them is 
unemployment, increased tuition fees. To the average citizen you 
have given tax increases; to the oil companies you’ve given 
breaks; to the province you have indebted to the tune of $2 billion, 
interest rates of $201 million. This is the legacy of people over a 
four-year period. The magnitude of it is staggering to the people in 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, the people are saying: when will 
they call the election? 
 
This outfit cannot manage the province, and we’ll be getting into 
it. We talk about the Weyerhaeuser deal, and they pretended that it 
was such a magnificent deal; that was the thing that Saskatchewan 
needed. And I wonder why, Mr. Chairman, they won’t table that 
agreement, only a small portion of it. And when we analysed the 
small portion, what did we find? I’ll tell you, the people of  

Saskatchewan were not being protected by this government. Their 
managerial skills of attending to managing the affairs of the 
taxpayers’ dollars is wanting. 
 
They’re asking: who’s in charge of this government? And what I 
want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what, in fact, went wrong? What, in 
fact, went wrong? If things have been growing, if as you’re trying 
to say that the economy is booming, why are we in fact increasing 
taxes on the ordinary citizen and in fact putting this province into 
billions of dollars of debt. 
 
We want to go into some of these announced programs that you 
have for economic development, and indeed we want to see what 
part of the puzzle you played in developing the Weyerhaeuser 
transaction as we know it this far. But what has been supplied to 
us, this is your showcase of economic development. 
 
And let’s just take a look at what we know about this deal — 
Weyerhaeuser — the one which you’re saying is the reason why 
you should be re-elected because of such economic growth. You 
have a plant at Prince Albert — a pulp plant; and you have some 
sawmills and you have a chemical plant and you have about 8 
million acres of forest. And what you have said is that you’re 
going to sell that to Weyerhaeuser. That’s what this document 
says. 
 
You made out a press release and you said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, we got a $500 million economic boom coming. 
That’s what you told them. You misled the people of this 
province, because when we looked at a part or a portion of the 
agreement, Mr. Minister, do you realize that Weyerhaeuser, in 
purchasing all of the assets that I mentioned, will not have to pay 
one single cent of money. That’s not only a possibility; it’s a 
probability — that they will not pay one single cent of money for 
an asset which you put in the document as being $248 million. 
 
That’s how the people of Saskatchewan are disappointed. They’re 
disgusted because you’ve misled them. You bring a fellow in from 
Edmonton, Gainers, Mr. Pocklington — and we want to get into 
that one — and you make a great big announcement that he’s 
going to invest millions of dollars. But in truth there was not going 
to be millions and millions of dollars invested. In fact, there’s 
going to be a relatively small plant — and we’ll get into that — 
about $3 million, most of it taxpayers’ money; concessions from 
cities; documents won’t be tabled. When you analyse that 
transaction you have blown that up completely and totally much 
larger than what the benefits will be. 
 
And then to top it off you thought you were going to call an 
election. And you have an upgrader that you’ve announced three 
times in Regina — three times. In every budget speech it has been 
announced since you’ve been here, three, four times. And then 
you thought you were going to have an election and so you 
announced a tax to the non-existent upgrader. You said you were 
going to build a fertilizer plant. And it went out over the wire, in 
the news, “Premier Devine announces a new fertilizer plant for 
Regina.” Ha! Do you know what it was? It wasn’t that; they 
weren’t studying it, and they hadn’t agreed on a fertilizer plant. 
They hadn’t agreed on it. The headline was April 30th as to 
whether or not they would continue to look at the feasibility of it. 
And that deadline has passed  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2183 
 
 
 

and I haven’t heard it reannounced yet whether they are still 
considering the feasibility of going together. 
 
This is the type of sham that you’re putting up, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are sick and tired of it because it doesn’t create 
jobs; it doesn’t give them economic security. In fact, what it does 
is to give them further and further risk in any investments that are 
coming into the province that the taxpayer is guaranteeing. 
 
You know, you talk about the great economic development. Yes, 
I’m going to summarize it. You’ll have your turn. But you say 
that, you know, you were going to get private investment. And 
you know the only way you could get an upgrader going is total 
government guarantee. You couldn’t get one single cent of private 
money invested. You couldn’t get one single cent of private 
money. Every single cent. 
 
And that’s nothing wrong. I’m not saying . . . I’m not being 
critical. But let us not fool the people of Saskatchewan that 
somehow you got economic development, that you have opened 
the doors for outside investment. 
 
Most people would be reluctant to deal with the likes of Peter 
Pocklington, given his record in the labour fields . . . labour strife 
in Alberta. But certainly not the minister here, because they were 
desperate to get some kind of an illusion that there was, in fact, 
economic development. And there was none. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you have a key portfolio for economic 
development. And it seems to me that we haven’t had much 
performance. And so what I want to do is give you an opportunity 
to comment on this, and certainly we are going to get into some of 
the specific projects that you are putting up as a showcase for your 
great economic development. 
 
(1315) 
 
I’d ask you, what went wrong with this great open for big business 
operation that you commenced? All that has happened so far is 
that you’re trying to govern: one, by polls, and secondly, by public 
relations. You can’t win on that because the people of 
Saskatchewan are on to your game; they can’t believe you any 
longer. And once the people of Saskatchewan have lost faith in 
you and cannot trust those of elected office, then I’ll tell you, your 
days are numbered. 
 
So I give you an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to indicate to the 
people what basically went wrong. Why are all the economic 
indicators the opposite to what they were during the ’72 to ’82? 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hampton: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce to you and other members of the Assembly, on behalf of 
my colleague, the member from Regina North West, a group of 
students that are seated in the east gallery. They are from W. H. 
Ford Elementary School here  

in Regina. I understand there are about 29 of them; they are grade 
5 students. They are accompanied by Mr. Gullickson, their 
teacher, Mrs. Newton and Mrs. Hildebrandt, their chaperons. 
 
It’s unfortunate that right at this time your member is not in the 
Assembly. He will be here very shortly. He will be meeting with 
you at 1:45 in the members’ dining lounge downstairs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would ask that all members of the Assembly 
greet this group from W. H. Ford School in the normal way. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member from Quill Lakes raised 
several points, and I’ll try to respond to them. He began by reading 
a series of press releases. And I have a stack of press releases here. 
If we want to go through this side of the House saying that we 
have this many press releases, and the opposition is saying they 
have that many press releases, we can do that. But I’m not 
convinced that we serve a great deal of purpose by simply reading 
press releases. If you want me to do it, one can, but I think that is 
the to and fro of political debate. And if you want to get into it, we 
can go through a series of press releases that are clearly supportive 
of this particular government. And I’m not convinced that the 
people out there really want two members to stand in this 
Assembly saying: I’m better than you; no, you’re better than me 
— that type of thing. So I’ll resist doing that. 
 
With regards to the population numbers that the hon. member 
referred to, the hon. member’s numbers clearly are not correct and 
I’m here referring to the Department of Statistics in Canada. And 
we’ll go to the last year, the last years of the NDP administration 
— ’78 through to 1981 and early into 1982. 
 
In the year ’78 there was a net loss of 3,701 people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. In ’79, 3,510; 1980, 4,382; 1981, 521. So the 
last four years of NDP administration is hardly something, as the 
hon. member stands up and says, we were having a population 
growth of 10 per cent a year. Now 950,000 people for 10 per cent 
a year you’d have been well over a million people in that period of 
time. That was not, in fact, the case; it was going the other way. 
 
We then come to office and somebody says, well you guys started 
to lose population. The numbers don’t say that. The first year in 
office — 1,744 positive — first time in five years, first time in six 
years. The next year, 2,500, 1,700, and the list goes on. So the 
statement made by the hon. member is clearly not, in fact, the 
case. 
 
And then as we saw, and as everybody knows, that the  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2184 
 
 
 

population of this province exceeded a million people. I think 
that’s the first time since back in the ’20s perhaps when we had 
close to 2-300,000 farmers scattered through the rural part of this 
province. And that’s not, in fact, the case. 
 
The hon. member also refers to investments and what is happening 
to investments in this province. Well the investments are in fact 
going up in this province. The most significant thing that we see 
with regard to investment in the province of Saskatchewan is that 
the private sector investment is increasing; the public sector 
investment is decreasing. And we don’t apologize for that because 
quite frankly, as a government, that’s what we believe it should be 
— more investment by individuals and less investment by 
government — because we don’t happen to believe that 
government does a good job of buying or creating a business, or 
buying another company, or whatever it’s going to be. 
 
So in that period of time, 1982 to 1986, private investment as a 
share of total investment has increased from 63 per cent to 66 per 
cent in this province, and I think that’s a good move. Public sector 
has in fact declined to 33 per cent. So while you still have some 
public sector investment and we don’t apologize for that, the lines 
are starting to change. And that’s something that we believe, as a 
party, should change. 
 
In other words, we as a province, and the people of this province, 
must be encouraged to invest their money, whether you’re in 
business, whether you are a farmer, whether you’re starting a 
small store, whether you’re building a big company. But it should 
be the private sector that is doing more investing, and that’s in fact 
what is happening — increase of 3 per cent over total investment, 
private sector; corresponding decrease in the public sector. 
 
And we don’t apologize for that, and that’s clearly the 
philosophical difference between this side of the House and the 
NDP, and has been since 1944. You believe, and as well it’s your 
right to, that government should have a larger and larger role as far 
as owning the economy. Now, that’s historically been the 
relationship in this province, and you tend to still endorse that as a 
party, that you should have more and more public sector 
investment as opposed to private sector. 
 
We agree differently. We believe it should be different, that the 
private sector should be the vehicle by which you use to create 
that. And if we want to get into that debate over the next couple 
hours, well then we can get into that debate on philosophy. And 
that’s exactly what this institution is about, debating the 
philosophy of whether you have government buying something or 
the private sector buying something. 
 
The member asked about the overall economic situation within the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have made no secret of the fact 
that the last two and three years have been very, very difficult 
times for the farming community. And my father farms, and many 
of the people in this area farm, and I can assure you that they have 
difficult times. They have difficult times because the price of grain 
is going down, and we’ve had a couple of the worst crops  

we’ve had in a long, long time in this province. 
 
And when agriculture dominates the economy of Saskatchewan 
the way it does, then that’s obviously going to impact on you. And 
that’s going to make problems for our economy; problems for the 
farmer. The farmer doesn’t have money then to go to town to buy, 
whether it’s a new car or whether it’s a new house, or whatever 
it’s going to be. So that hinges it down a bit. And that’s a problem 
that no government can easily snap their finger and somehow 
come to a solution. We can’t increase the price of wheat to $7 a 
bushel; we’d like to, but you can’t do it. 
 
We have done what we can to try to assist agriculture, and I think 
we have . . . and I’m not going to get into Agriculture estimates. 
There’s many that are more capable than me of doing that. But all 
I’m saying is from an overall factor, agriculture has had a fairly 
difficult impact in this province, and everybody knows that, or at 
least anybody that lives in rural Saskatchewan understands that 
fact. And I’m sure the member from Quill Lakes does. 
 
At the same time we’ve had some difficult trends in commodity 
prices. Again, commodity prices that are established world-wide, 
and we are but one group of people that must take and face up to 
those particular commodity prices, whether it’s potash which the 
member has in his riding. That price has dipped significantly in the 
last four years. That is again a series of reasons, and I can go into 
the reasons as to why. But I don’t think that’s the purpose of the 
debate here. The price of potash has gone down in the world 
market, and we’ve had to adjust to it. And we’ve tried to do what 
we can to make that adjustment to that, to preserve as many jobs 
as we can in the potash industry and those related to the potash 
industry. 
 
The uranium industry which is another big factor in this province. 
The price of uranium has for a long time been seen as the golden 
boy that can get us out of some of our problems, and some day 
we’re going to have 50 or $75 a pound uranium. And that would 
be well and good if that day came. The people of this province 
would benefit, and benefit greatly should that happen. 
 
But we’ve been chasing that, I think, for some time and hoping for 
some time that that price is going up. On a world market today the 
price of uranium is at best, static, and at worst, under risk. In 
which case, if the price of uranium goes down further we, 
obviously, again will lose money both in the treasury and lose 
money by way of economic activities and jobs in this province. 
The oil industry that the hon. member speaks of — he said that 
what we did as a government was to make massive give-aways to 
the oil companies. Well, that’s been a line used by the members 
opposite since 1944, and I don’t think is a valid argument. 
 
I come from a riding that happens to have an oil industry in that 
particular area. I can assure you that there’s a lot of jobs and a lot 
of jobs for local kids; a lot of jobs for farmers working in that oil 
patch — whether it’s a job on the rigs; whether it’s a job with a 
service company; whether it’s a job driving truck; whether it’s 
even the fact that they get  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2185 
 
 
 

increased dollars for surface leases on their land. 
 
As we have seen, the dollars rolling into government over the last 
few years have been very substantial from the oil industry. It’s a 
case where everybody gains. You have more dollars come into 
government; you have more dollars going to the company. And 
there’s nothing wrong with that. There’s nothing wrong with a 
company making a profit, by our philosophy, nothing wrong at all, 
because when they have that profit, they reinvest it back into our 
economy and create more jobs, create more investment, and in 
turn create more revenues to government. 
 
We don’t apologize for that, and if the hon. member wishes to 
debate the oil industry . . . And what he calls a give-away is what I 
call a viable and valid economic policy to create activity, to create 
revenues to use our resources in a proper way. I have no problems 
with it. 
 
With regard to the questions of some of the major projects that the 
hon. member raises, clearly the one on the bacon plant in North 
Battleford was done by the Department of Economic 
Development and Trade and the previous minister, and I’m 
prepared to defend that action, and I’m sure that we will deal with 
that particular action. 
 
With regard to some of the other ones he referred to, as the hon. 
member knows, those particular projects were done not by 
Economic Development and Trade but by other projects within 
government, and therefore this particular department is not 
involved in the Weyerhaeuser deal, is not involved in the 
NewGrade deal. So I’m not equipped at this point in time. I’ve 
been involved in a different capacity, but certainly the officials 
have not been, and we’re looking at the Department of Economic 
Development and Trade, as I understand. 
 
So certainly with regards to the Gainers’ projects, the members 
opposite have been very critical of that particular project. It’s 
going to be built in the city of North Battleford. It’s probably 
going to be completed in August of this year, create 300 jobs 
where none existed before — 300 jobs for people, and many of 
them not highly trained people, in the North Battleford area of this 
province. 
 
The assistance that the government gave in that particular project 
was very similar to what we give to any industry that is building 
and creating jobs in our province. For every job they create, 
there’s a $7,500, with this proviso — that that job is there for at 
least a year. It’s got to be there for a year, and there’s got to be an 
equivalent investment by the company for each job that is created. 
 
And what we have in North Battleford is 300 jobs — that’s what 
we’re projecting — at $7,500 a job, is $2.25 million that we would 
pay under the industrial incentive program; a program, I might 
add, that has been accessed by well over 300 companies in this 
province — some very small, some only one job, some five, some 
10. But they’re all driven by the fact that you must have 
performance, and you must create the job. 
 
Now it strikes us that that is a more rational way of economic 
activity than simply saying, I will give you some money if you go 
out and cut somebody’s grass. I will give you some money if you 
go out and paint the park  

bench or build a fence. Because each year it goes on and on and 
on, and you have to continue to pay that. So I’m sure the hon. 
member has further questions with regard to Gainers, and I will 
certainly entertain those questions with regard to Gainers. 
 
He tries to make, and the NDP have tried to make, the position 
that somehow Mr. Pocklington and Gainers are inspired by the 
devil and that he is out to destroy the world. I don’t think that’s 
quite a fair statement to make. Somebody is investing his dollars 
in our province, creating a lot of jobs in our province for our 
people, and all of it is performance related, and I don’t apologize 
for that. 
 
(1330) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the minister, I suppose, did as well as he 
could in defending what is going on, but certainly didn’t get into 
the depth of defending his policy other than to say that there was a 
drought. 
 
But let’s not fool the troops. Your economic gamble that you took 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan started before any 
drought came. Because immediately, as soon as assuming office, 
what you started to do is to run this province into a massive debt. 
And in ’82 you predicted a $220 million deficit. The actual deficit 
was 225. There was no drought. In ’83 they predicted $317 
million. The actual was 331. And it has continued each year. 
 
I want to say that you haven’t been able to demonstrate where the 
private investment has been significant. Most of it that is being 
invested, Mr. Minister, is with the guarantee of the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s the new proposal that you’re putting 
forward. 
 
You have a coal mine at Coronach — Manalta Coal — which we 
owned. And you sold it off to Manalta, and you guaranteed the 
money to Manalta to buy a coal mine which we already owned. 
That’s what you do. That’s a good deal for the business 
community, but not particularly good for the people of 
Saskatchewan, because they assume the risk without the 
maximum of the benefits. 
 
I want to . . . I’m glad to know that the minister is ducking from 
some of the transactions. I would have thought that his department 
would have been involved in the major, so-called economic 
showcase projects, but he indicates he’s not. So I want to get into a 
few of them. And the one that I wouldn’t mind getting into, Mr. 
Minister, is in respect to the Pocklington deal or the Gainers deal. 
 
I’d like, if you could, to indicate what agreements has 
Saskatchewan government entered into with Gainers? Obviously 
you announced that you had . . . were able to negotiate an 
agreement with Gainers. And I ask you, what is the basis of the 
terms of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to two questions there. One 
with regards to the . . . Now what we have done with regard to 
creating jobs in the private-sector investment, and you would 
suggest that somehow there was no private-sector investment. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2186 
 
 
 

Under the industrial incentives program, and the way that works is 
that the company has to make an investment, who in turn creates a 
job, and if after a year of that person being on the job, 
uninterrupted, then they get a payment of $7,500. The results of 
that since that program was brought in — what? — two and 
one-half years ago, is that there has been 308 applications 
approved — that’s 308 small businesses or businesses that have 
been expanded. They have created 3,404 jobs, and they have 
capital expenditures of $104 million. They have earned $17 
million by way on incentives through the IIP (industrial incentive 
program). 
 
So for $17 million incentives to small business we’ve created 
3,400 brand-new jobs and attracted investments of well over $100 
million; and those projects, I might add, are throughout the entire 
province, and the list is very long. Whether it’s All Thread 
Industries in Estevan, three jobs created threading pipe; Canwood 
Percussion, Lloydminster, created one job, musical instruments; 
Image Printers created a job in Humboldt; Master Rock Pickers of 
Leoville, five jobs . . . I can go through the list; it’s very long. 
There’s 308 of them. Those are all spread across this entire 
province. They all created jobs. They all attracted investment, and 
that investment was all done by private people. As I indicated, 
that’s the direction that we wish to go. 
 
With regard to the Gainer project, so that you can appreciate the 
Gainer project. What we have with Gainers is as follows: We have 
a broad understanding that if we can get the hog industry 
increasing the number of hogs, a large processing plant will be 
built. But initially what we have, and the only thing concrete with 
regard to Gainers, is the bacon plant in North Battleford. As I 
indicated to you, it will be open and into production in August of 
this year. 
 
Now a project that I understand . . . certainly your NDP candidate 
in North Battleford has said, we would support; your leader has 
indicated that you would support. Under that project there will be 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . It’s not an agreement. The project 
involves the building of a plant. 
 
If they build the plant, and if they create the 300 jobs that they say 
they’re going to create there and keep those jobs for a period of 
one full year, then they earn their industrial incentive grant of 
$7,500. That in 300 jobs will mean that they would earn an 
incentive of $2.25 million because they’re creating 300 jobs. If 
they create 400, they get more; if they create 200, they get less. 
And that’s simply not part of an agreement. That means they’re 
just simply accessing a government program that was put in place 
two and a half years ago. 
 
As well, part of that proposal would involve a mortgage from 
Sedco — only part of it, okay? And the other would be an 
investment with regard to Gainers itself and the project. The Sedco 
loan is basically a Sedco loan that thousands of people over a 
period of time have accessed in Saskatchewan. So the Gainers’ 
project in North Battleford involves the industrial incentives 
program. 
 
The other project that was announced will not go forward until 
such time as the hog population in this province has  

increased. And I would hope that it does because, I think, as a 
province we must increase the amount of diversification that we 
can see in agriculture. Because if we simply rely on producing 
wheat and hoping the market will and the world will buy it, we 
could be in trouble as the markets start to shrink. So we have to 
look at other ways of processing food, other ways of turning grain 
into food, to access the markets of the world. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just thank you for that information. In respect — 
let’s just narrow down to the bacon plant that’s going up in North 
Battleford. What will be the total amount of provincial moneys 
that will be provided to Gainers in the development of their plant 
in North Battleford? There’s no use talking about the larger project 
because that’s dependent upon, you know, a greater hog 
population in order to make it feasible, and you’ve indicated that. 
But just in respect . . . do you know, first of all, what is the total 
cost of the investment of the bacon plant — how much is that? 
And what is the total amount that Gainers will qualify under any 
of the programs of the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The North Battleford project is as follows. 
It will cost $7 million to build that plant, $7 million. Of that, 1.7 
million will be cash or equity by Gainers. There will be a $5.3 
million loan through Sedco that will be at going Sedco rates. 
Okay. Just a normal Sedco mortgage — 5.3; equity will be 1.7 by 
Gainers. Gainers will then be able to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
If the people want to talk, can they go outside? and we can discuss 
our estimates. 
 
Then Gainers will be able to earn the industrial incentives grant 
program of $7,500 for each permanent job created after one year, 
which would then be applied off on payment of the Sedco loan. So 
from that point of view, it’s a fairly straightforward, clean deal 
with regard to the North Battleford plant. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And when one figures that out: $7 million plant, 
$1.7 million put up by Gainers. But they, in a year’s time — since 
they’re going to put onto production, you say, 300 jobs, and they 
would qualify for about 2.2, I guess — so in a year’s time they 
would get back totally, as a form of a grant, all of their total cash 
investment that they initially put in, plus some. In other words, all 
they would have then is the remaining part which is put up also by 
Sedco in the form of a loan. 
 
So really in essence it’s only interim financing by Gainers. They 
put up, as you say, $1.7 million cash. But a year hence, if they 
create the 300 jobs, they get $7,500 for each job as a grant, and 
that comes to 2.25. And so what they can do is in fact pick up 
about $500,000 and have a plant and owing only the loan. That’s 
not a bad deal. Now is that not accurate, given the deal that you 
have outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to the hon. members, first of all 
. . . first of all there’s a Sedco mortgage, and that Sedco mortgage 
secures the property. You understand that mortgage? And that 
arrangement exists for many, many Sedco loans throughout the 
province. You make a Sedco loan, and that Sedco has made that 
understanding. 
 
The plant cost is about $7 million — 1.7 million is equity  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2187 
 
 
 

— and there is a requirement of about $3 million in working 
capital for that plant, that that would be put in by Gainers as well, 
as the working capital; that’s their operations of it. Then they 
qualify, as does any other company qualify, for industrial 
incentives program if they in fact create those jobs and if those 
jobs are in fact ongoing. 
 
So they qualify no different that if it was the hon. member coming 
in and said, I’m going to build a hotel in the Quill Lakes region; 
and he said that hotel is going to cost me a million dollars; Sedco 
is going to finance, let’s say, 700,000 of it; I’m going to put 
300,000 of it in myself and I’m going to create five jobs. Then 
what you do is: you have that same investment; you pay back your 
mortgage; he has to then come up with his working capital to run 
the hotel; and if he hires those people for a period of a year and 
ongoing, then he will earn the $7,500 grant. 
 
It’s exactly the same type of thing that would happen to a person 
building a hotel in — what’s one of the names of the towns in 
your riding? — Wynyard. If they were building a hotel in 
Wynyard, it would work exactly the same way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Tories don’t know my seat very well — that’s 
good. The fact remains, though, Mr. Minister, on the $7 million 
plant, on the agreement that they have, that they’re putting up, 
Gainers is putting up $1.7 million and they’re borrowing $5.3 
million for Sedco, and we’ll come to the rate and discuss that. 
 
If you look at that, that gives you your $7 million. And you said 
this here corporate citizen is going to be providing 300 jobs, you 
said. Based on 300 jobs and assuming that, that under the 
industrial incentive program they could pick up $7,500 for the 
300, that’s $2.25 million, and they’ve only put up 1.7 million; 
they, in fact, if in a year’s time employ the 300 — in a theoretical 
situation, but one which you confirm — they, in fact, have to their 
advantage $550,000 — half a million dollars — over and above 
the investment that they put into it. Now that’s not bad going. 
 
(1345) 
 
You talk about needing working capital. That’s fair enough. I 
suppose . . . I’m not sure what nature or amount of working capital 
that will be required for it, but what they can do, on a theoretical 
. . . not a theoretical, but on the basis of what information you’ve 
given, and what the deal is, is to make, in fact, $550,000. 
 
They invest for one year, 1.7 million. They take a loan for 5.3. 
That gives them their 7 million plant. In a year’s time, when they 
create the jobs — they get $7,500 back for each job — they get 
$2.25 million. And that gives them a net gain of $550,000 for an 
investment of 1.7 million. And they can walk away if they so 
desired. And they would have $550,000. That’s what they could 
have. 
 
But I want to . . . I was just wondering whether you have any 
documents, in respect to this agreement, that we could substantiate 
the agreement of understanding with Gainers. Certainly you say 
you have a kind of a broad understanding of the future, if the hog 
industry goes, that a  

packing plant will be built. I ask you, first of all, if you have any 
documents and whether you’d be prepared to table those because I 
think we would like to have a look at the nature of the agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the question, the only 
written agreement that you have with Gainers with regard to the 
North Battleford project is the mortgage with Sedco. I’ve indicated 
that to you in the House some time ago . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well the members say, let’s have it. Sedco has 
never released information of what mortgage they have with 
anybody, and I don’t think it would be proper for a Saskatchewan 
institution involved in lending money to make public everybody’s 
business that deals with Sedco. Nobody would then, in fact, deal 
with Sedco. 
 
With regards to the project in North Battleford, they have 25 per 
cent equity into that plant, and that’s not uncommon for an 
investment in any business within the province of Saskatchewan. 
The hon. member has various small businesses in his riding, some 
of them likely — and I don’t know this — but some of them likely 
have some Sedco financing. And I would be very surprised to see 
many of those with an equity investment of more than 25 per cent 
and 75 per cent debt — not unreasonable at all. 
 
With regards to a project, to say that somehow the person is going 
to walk in and steal a bunch of money and run away, I think, is not 
being very fair. You don’t go in and build a $7 million plant to 
shut it down a year from now and walk away. I mean, that’s not 
the way that people try to run businesses. 
 
The hon. member from Assiniboia, I don’t think that he would 
look at running a business that way. And I challenge the member 
from Quill Lakes to indicate that 25 per cent equity into a building 
and a plant is an unreasonable amount of equity or not an 
unreasonable amount of equity to put into that. That’s very 
consistent with the industry across the world. 
 
Mr. Engel: — My colleague makes a good point that the 25 per 
cent equity thing is the thing we’re arguing about as far as 
Weyerhaeuser’s deal is concerned, but I don’t want to get into that 
now. I want to stay with this pork industry and the proposals. 
 
What kind of a credit reference . . . for a financial institution to put 
up 75 per cent equity in a business to establish it, what kind of a 
credit check did Sedco do? I’m familiar with Sedco’s dealings in 
some companies before, and they’d get started and then Sedco 
wouldn’t up-front all the money because they felt that it wasn’t a 
good business venture and a good business risk. How much of this 
$5.3 million was put up and on what terms and what kind of a 
credit check did they do? 
 
I think when Mr. Pocklington was sitting right up there in the 
gallery when the program was originally announced, we 
questioned that day, and I was personally involved in some 
questions regarding a newspaper story in the Maclean’s magazine 
that detailed some of the background information on this Peter 
Pocklington and the businesses that have failed under his hand. I 
was wondering, what kind of a credit check did you do on this  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2188 
 
 
 

person and his ability to run and finance and maintain a viable 
business in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If the hon. member is asking for the details 
by which Sedco did a credit check, that’s not done by our 
department. Obviously Sedco take a whole host of loans, probably 
some in your area, some around the whole province, and they have 
the facilities and they have the people that access those particular 
loans and grade those loans and determine whether they should 
make it and then go to a board of directors to determine how to 
make it. 
 
Now I can’t discuss with you (a) the details of what the credit 
rating is. The people here were not involved in negotiating with 
Sedco or doing the credit ratings with Sedco. And certainly the 
forum will come by which we can discuss that in a Crown 
Corporations Committee, but you wouldn’t expect this particular 
department to get into the details of the credit worthiness of 
Gainers. 
 
As to what investigations they did, etc., etc. What they indicated to 
us is that it was a good credit risk, that they made the loan based 
on a good credit risk, and they have 25 per cent equity put in, 
which is not unreasonable. In many of their loans that they do, 25 
per cent would probably be . . . They’d probably have to scratch to 
get the 25 per cent equity in many small businesses. And Sedco 
. . . you know, obviously for different reasons, sometimes Sedco 
might make a loan with less than 25 per cent equity into that thing. 
But 25 per cent equity in any major project, any hotel, that type of 
thing, is not an unreasonable amount of equity to ask for. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I didn’t argue that. The only argument I’m making 
is, if the government’s financial institution, Sedco, guaranteed, the 
taxpayers, if there’s a loss there, the taxpayers pick up the tab. It’s 
not like if the Bank of Montreal puts up the 75 per cent of the 
money, and if it’s a failure, then it’s the Bank of Montreal’s 
problem. 
 
In this case it’s the taxpayers’ problem if there’s a failure. And if 
you’re saying that in light of the man’s stature, Canadian-wise, 
and in light of the news stories and the material that’s out about 
him . . . And that’s public information that’s available at any 
news-stand and in popular magazines that wouldn’t do a story — 
because I’m sure that they’d be libellous if they’d be writing a 
story about a man that lost his care agencies down east and had 
lost this and had lost that; and his house was in jeopardy and he 
had Wayne Gretzky mortgaged and all this. The whole story was 
there, and it was out there before he ever decided to come to 
Canada. 
 
I think the key criteria for a Tory government deciding that he’s a 
good credit risk is that he was a leadership candidate, and it’s just 
as political as that. Because anybody else, any financial institution 
would take a second look and say, look, this man’s business failed 
here, and this man’s business failed there. And I’m sure if our hon. 
chairman were in charge of a bank that would deal with that, he’d 
look at his past performance. He’d look at the past performance 
and say that this one we’re going to give some money to, but this 
one we’ll give 15 per cent, and you put up 85 per cent. 
 

But when a person has that kind of credit risk and that kind of 
problems . . . His hog business in Alberta was in conflict with 
Albert hog producers. And the whole history of the man is such 
that is questionable. And now he’s in the news, the way he’s 
treating his employees. 
 
The thing is, we had a pork producing plant that was willing to do 
the expansion and get involved under the same terms. They said, if 
the market’s there and the expansion’s there, they’re willing to get 
into it. And I’d like you to come up with some documentation 
saying that this is the appraiser’s valuation of the $7 million plant. 
There’s truly the value there, because this is as much as the 
contracts were and this is what this was, equipment and so on 
involved, and the land site, and everything that’s there comes to so 
much money. Because how do we know that when he did the 
contract and when the whole picture was put up there, that that one 
and a half million wasn’t paper, was really not true value there? 
 
I don’t know that. I’d like to have some numbers. I’d like to have 
some numbers saying that he let a contract to so and so for so 
much to build this building, and he’s got a contract for so much to 
buy this equipment, and he’s got a contract for so much, that this is 
the terms of agreement on purchasing the land and the site that it’s 
on and providing the sewer and water facilities. There’s got to be 
some numbers around that substantiate a $7 million plant. 
 
For all we know, the plant’s only worth 4 million, and you put up 
5.3. How do we know those numbers are out there and that you’re 
substantiating it? And is money being advanced in one lump sum, 
or do you give progress payments as the building is being built? 
What are the terms and agreements? 
 
I think you should be able to give us some paper on this kind of an 
agreement because, number one, there’s a question asked by all 
the public; he’s a PC candidate for the leadership of your party. 
Number one, that is out there. So there’s evidence there that 
there’s got to be some conflict of interest. That’s the number one 
issue. And I think because of who he is, and the kind of reputation 
he has, you have to come super-clean on this one and show us 
some numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the Assembly, and that’s 
exactly what I’m going to advise the Assembly, is that I’ve been 
advised by professional people working at Sedco that they are 
comfortable and confident with their loan with regard to Gainers. 
 
Now you would not ask me, and if you do I will not respond by 
giving the details of financial statements of every loan done by 
Sedco . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Now, so you say . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . The members say, well, let’s pick and choose, and 
we will have this particular individual; we want to make him 
public, but not another individual. And that is wrong. 
 
Sedco is an institution that lends money to people that are building 
businesses in this province — many companies. And you don’t 
determine which ones are public and which ones are not public 
according to the politics of that particular person, nor should we 
ever. Because if you get  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2189 
 
 
 

into that you’ve got yourself into running a financial institution as 
exists throughout the country. There’s one in every province, 
pretty well. And nobody does that, and nobody should do that 
because everybody deals with Sedco in a confidential way, and 
people should deal with Sedco in a confidential way. 
 
And I think it would be very improper for a politician to get into 
any details with regards to the Sedco loan and what Sedco 
checked here, there, or the next place. Or the next thing that we 
would know is that you would ask a question of so and so in my 
constituency or your constituency that maybe doesn’t support you. 
So you say, well that guy doesn’t support me; he’s a member of 
the Liberals or the Conservative Party. I want the details on him. 
 
And I think that would be a terrible mistake if we ever made that 
kind of move by governments, dealing with loans directly, not 
directly from government. Government makes a loan directly to 
people. Then I think, well and good; you make that available. But 
when you have an institution over here, that is not the same case. 
And to argue that way would be to argue that Sedco is not an 
arm’s-length, financial institution of government. And I suggest 
that is and should be. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, I think if you would have listened to 
the question more carefully . . . I wasn’t looking for details from 
Sedco. I was saying, can you give us some documentation saying 
that the property is worth X number of dollars; servicing the 
property is worth so much money; the building is worth so much 
money; and the equipment that he’s putting into it is worth so 
much. And there you come up with the $7 million number. 
 
Surely there’s some breakdown of what’s involved so we know 
that . . . and I wouldn’t mind knowing who the various contractors 
were on site that were bidding it. And if you’d have a situation 
where you’re talking about my colleague building a hotel and 
Sedco would be putting up 75 per cent of the money, if the person 
building the hotel were his own contractor and doing the 
construction, he would then have a little more leverage as to what 
is the 25 per cent of his involvement because part of that he could 
maybe be earning as a contractor and part of that could be 
professional fees or whatever. 
 
(1400) 
 
So I think if you, as a lawyer, decide to put together a package and 
up in your constituency put up this licensed dining-room or hotel 
or whatever you want to do, and you are your own contractor, 
your professional fees might be your own 25 per cent. So I would 
like to know some numbers and some details on this deal to know 
that it was actually worth $7 million. 
 
I think, on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that’s not 
asking too much. I don’t think that’s asking too much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well to the hon. member, every time 
Sedco makes a loan to a project, whether it’s this project or 
whether it’s to build a hotel, or whether it’s to build even a small 
operation . . . When they’re advancing 

building a plant or a building or whatever it’s going to be, most 
Sedco loans — pretty well all Sedco loans — are for that. Then 
you will have an audit done during the construction phase by 
Sedco just as you would with any other financial institution. That 
exists for you. If you were going to build your hotel in Assiniboia, 
you would have to go through the audited steps by Sedco to 
guarantee and ensure that in fact this many dollars were put in and 
how they were put in, etc. And that’s done all the time. 
 
With regard to the industrial incentives program, it’s not just 
creating a job, but you also have to make an investment. So from 
that point of view, to fit the rules of that, you also have to, from 
our department, prove that in fact you legitimately spent this much 
capital dollars. 
 
Those are the numbers that we have. We could do that when the 
plant is completed to ensure that in fact it is done. And I can 
undertake to you that this will in fact be done, to prove in fact that 
those people have invested the capital they have to invest to score 
those jobs. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just in respect to the 
establishment by Gainers of the bacon plant, I wonder, did your 
department make any contact in respect to Intercon to see whether 
or not they would be prepared to put in place a bacon plant of a 
comparable size and value as what Mr. Pocklington of Gainers 
were prepared to do. I ask you: when were you in contact with Mr. 
Mitchell, I believe, the president of Intercon, if indeed you were, 
and did you outline the similar proposal to him? And . . . well, I’ll 
let you answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to Intercontinental Packers, 
exactly the same proposal was put to them as put to Gainers, at the 
very same time. And, in fact, Intercontinental Packers are now in 
the process of a $24 million — $24 million — expansion, and that 
$24 million will attract a large number of jobs. 
 
They have been approved — their project has been approved by 
IIP again, industrial incentives program. And every job that 
Freddy Mitchell, Intercontinental Packers, creates, he will get the 
$7,500 exactly the same as Gainers have, and exactly the same as 
308 other businesses in the province have got as well. 
 
So the expansion being done by Intercontinental Packers today is 
over three times larger than the Gainers plant that is being built in 
North Battleford — three times larger; $24 million expansion 
being done by Intercontinental Packers. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I just want to get it clear as to whether or not 
before you made the announcement here in this legislature with 
Peter Pocklington in attendance and all the fanfare, whether in fact 
prior to that date you had in fact given the same proposal, had 
discussions, and asked Intercon whether they were prepared to 
make a similar commitment. 
 
My understanding that that was not the case. It was the case that, 
after the fanfare and the announcement by Gainers, that Mr. 
Mitchell of Intercon was rather perturbed, and then did make it 
known to the government that Mr. Pocklington was not really very 
welcome here  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2190 
 
 
 

and, as a corporate citizen, he wasn’t very impressed with him. 
And from there grew the plans by Intercon to proceed with the 
expansion of Intercon. 
 
I want to be perfectly clear on this, because that’s not the 
information that I get. I got the information that you people had 
the press conference, made the announcement, and it was only 
then, and after then, that you had comment by Mr. Mitchell, and 
only after that did he indicate that he was proceeding with the 
expansion — that you had not, in fact, met with him on the same 
basis as with Pocklington. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, that’s not true. In fact, negotiations 
have been ongoing with Mr. Mitchell at Intercontinental Packers 
for in excess of two years now. That dates back to, I think, 
February of 1984, but certainly back to 1984. 
 
He was determining . . . If you understand the negotiations with 
Intercontinental Packers, the government had owned 49 per cent 
interest in Intercontinental Packers from a purchase made by a 
previous government some years ago. That particular interest was 
valued by three or four appraisers, and we were in a series of 
negotiations from about 1982 up to 1984 wherein we struck a deal 
and sold the government’s 49 per cent interest back to 
Intercontinental Packers; so they now own it 100 per cent. 
 
We then went into negotiations with them to try to encourage 
Intercontinental to do some expansions. Intercontinental’s decision 
to make an expansion move was not taken until after the Gainers’ 
was announced, at which time they announced their further 
expansion. Their further expansion takes in a different direction 
perhaps than Gainers — not quite the same, but it’s still a 
significant expansion. That decision was made by Intercontinental 
when they decided that they wished to expand. But over a period 
of two years, negotiations were going on with them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When the fanfare with Pocklington was 
announced in respect to the slaughtering plant and the building of 
a packing plant and so on, that was not a possibility at the time 
certainly, because the hog population did not warrant a further 
expansion of a slaughtering plant or a packing plant. So what I’m 
saying to you is that in order to magnify the so-called investment, 
what you did is to throw this in to build up the announcement that 
looked like something like $36 million. I ask you: why was it that 
a section of Intercon was in fact shut down here in Regina and 
people lost jobs if, indeed, what you were needing is an expansion 
of facilities which Intercon in fact closed down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Intercontinental Packers made a decision 
that they wished to shut down their Regina operation, and that’s an 
internal decision made by Intercontinental Packers, and it’s not 
government’s job to tell them that they should or should not shut 
that down. They made that decision and they, in fact, rationalized 
to Saskatoon around the similar time that we divested our interest 
in Intercontinental Packers — at a significant loss — but we 
divested it through proper analysis, and they made that decision. 
 

I don’t see anything wrong with having two hog packers in the 
province as opposed to one. I think that competition is healthy. I 
don’t think it’s fair to try to pit off Intercontinental Packers against 
Gainers. I think both of them can function in this province. 
 
The North Battleford plant of Gainers will use . . . Most of their 
product will in fact be back-hauled from Ontario or be taken out of 
the plant in Edmonton, so that they’re going to have a different 
access to a different hog production. The pork bellies are coming 
in from Toronto on back-haul when they take their bacon and ham 
down, as well as processing it out of their Gainers plant in 
Edmonton. Now those decisions are taken at the corporate level, 
whether at Intercontinental or at Gainers, and it’s not for 
government to tell them how to do it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the problem that we have here is whether or 
not a large amount of incentives are going forward to Gainers, 
owned and operated by Peter Pocklington. And the question is 
whether or not efforts should have been made, if indeed a bacon 
plant was needed, to work with the corporate citizens within 
Saskatchewan, the Intercon, Mr. Mitchell’s operation, or whether 
or not you should have in fact . . . whether there is any concern 
with what you have taken on here. 
 
I don’t know, and I’m not attacking, but here is the situation, 
though, in respect to Mr. Pocklington of Gainers. In Edmonton the 
president of 6,000-member Canadian organization of small 
business has sharply criticized Alberta labour laws and Edmonton 
entrepreneur Peter Pocklington. He said Pocklington, who owns 
the company, has given entrepreneurialism a bad name by his 
actions, and the government should now step in. “It’s time to bring 
in the government, says Horrigan.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some socialist . . .(inaudible). . .  
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, he’s head of the small-business organization. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some socialist newspaper. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, yes. So there are concerns in respect to the 
nature of the type of corporate operation that Mr. Peter 
Pocklington runs. 
 
I have here also an editorial from the Prairie Messenger, which 
says, in part . . . “The strike at Gainers.” It says: 
 

Saskatchewan citizens should demand of their government 
an explanation why Pocklington has been invited into 
Saskatchewan with huge incentive grants. If the government 
felt that there was room for expansion of the meat industry in 
this province, why were the grants not offered to the 
long-standing, corporate citizens who have cordial and just 
relationships with their employees and have given 
Saskatchewan good meat at reasonable prices? 

 
That’s an editorial from the Prairie Messenger. Let’s face it — his 
utterances down there during the very bitter strike, 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2191 
 
 
 

one of the most bitter strikes it ever witnessed in Alberta. 
 
And you’ve heard the statements by this corporate citizen that you 
are inducing to come to Saskatchewan with incentives — and I see 
nothing wrong with incentives. But I think if you have options, 
one should go for the corporate citizen that has a relationship with 
workers, as well as making a profit. He has said that he will never 
again operate a business and have a union contract. He has said he 
is going to be determined to bust the union. And he has cancelled 
the pension benefits relative to his plan, according to press 
releases. 
 
Now I don’t know if you have any concerns with this. But I think 
that people across Saskatchewan have concerns, as is evidenced 
by the various articles in the various press releases and the 
editorials of the Prairie Messenger — as you will know, a 
Catholic paper with a fairly wide distribution not known to be 
anti-business but, I think, looking for social justice and fairness. 
 
I don’t think we need to go back to the 18th or 19th century 
labour-management relationship by introducing with taxpayers’ 
subsidization — the very workers of Saskatchewan are subsidizing 
bringing this bird into here to set up a business. I think that, you 
know, we could do better by getting someone with some corporate 
responsibility. 
 
It’s known in Edmonton itself that the facts are accurate in the 
editorial. “The Edmonton plant . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not accurate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well it is accurate. 
 

The Edmonton plant (that’s Pocklington’s) has not been 
modernized. Pocklington has not remained competitive. 

 
So this is the situation. In respect to the corporate record of 
Gainers, run by the president, Peter Pocklington, the former 
candidate for the leadership of the national Progressive 
Conservative Tory party — the most reactionary platform that any 
citizen has seen in Canada . . .  
 
(1415) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Radical right-wing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s right. A radical, right-wing position that he 
put in his leadership bid, and he’s demonstrating that he meant 
what he said. Because he said, I’ll bust unions and I’ll take away 
rights, reduce wages, be unfair, and go out and exploit the 
situation of high unemployment to union-bust and to have worker 
against worker. 
 
That’s the right-wing, Tory approach to labour relations. It’s the 
Margaret Thatcher approach, imported from England. And we 
welcome this great corporate citizen, this former candidate for the 
leadership of the Tory party who says, I’ll beat those workers into 
the ground; they gave me concessions last year; they reduced their 
wages. But the contract comes up and he said, I’ll give them what  

they want because there’ll be no union here. And that’s what he’s 
done, is truck in . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, he says there’s 
truckloads of people brought in, pitting worker against worker, 
unemployed against those that are working. That’s exactly what 
you’ve brought in. 
 
And I don’t think you should brag, Mr. Minister. There’s not 
much pride in importing from another part where he’s practically 
being kicked out of — just about being kicked out of Alberta; 
that’s about where he’s at — and bringing him in here with 
taxpayer subsidies. I don’t think you can be very proud of that. 
 
I’ll tell you, if you brought in or if you expanded the facility with 
good corporate citizens who have some desire of creating 
productivity; Fred Mitchell, Intercon, could have done the job — 
says it’s a scam what Pocklington is trying to do, cutting back the 
wages of the workers. And this is the guy you bring in, and you 
hold it up and say, what a great thing we’re doing. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce to the legislature and all my colleagues a group of some 
36 students from the Langenburg area. It is in fact the grade 5 
students from Langenburg elementary school down in my 
constituency. They are with their teachers today, Rick Goddard 
and Hazel Okrainetz. Their bus driver is B. Foley, and I don’t have 
the first name. 
 
I want to welcome you to the legislature. Generally on Fridays we 
are finished by 1 o’clock in the afternoon, but we’re sitting 
extended hours. So you’re lucky, and I’m glad to be here to have 
the pleasure to introduce you to the Assembly. We are in 
committee, and I thank the hon. opposition member for giving me 
the opportunity to introduce you to my colleagues. I will meet you 
for pictures right after you leave the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
So I would ask all hon. members to welcome them in the usual 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member from Quill Lakes makes 
two points here: number one, that there was no offer made to 
Intercontinental Packers. As I indicated, Intercontinental Packers 
are expanding their operation through exactly the same process, 
exactly the same IIP (industry incentive program) grant. Theirs is 
going to be 24 million as opposed to the $7 million plant with 
regards to at North Battleford. 
 
The hon. member reads a couple of editorials, he says, from the 
Edmonton Journal, or statements in Edmonton with regard to the 
labour laws in Alberta, with regards to the way Peter Pocklington 
deals with his people. The 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2192 
 
 
 

labour laws at Gainers will have to deal under the labour laws of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
With regards to the dispute in Alberta, I think the dispute is best 
exemplified — how positions are being frayed — when you look 
at The Globe and Mail article today. In today’s Globe and Mail, 
headline reads: “Radical unionist leads labour fight in Tory 
Alberta.” Now the members opposite say we don’t have radical 
unions any more in this country. But let me read from the Globe 
and Mail, what The Globe and Mail says in an interview with 
Dave Werlin who is the head of the Alberta Federation of Labour. 
Just listen to this. The member from the North West might be 
interested in this. Here’s reading from The Globe and Mail 
interview. The Globe and Mail is obviously a recognized 
newspaper in this country. And here’s how the interview with Mr. 
Werlin goes. 
 

“I’m a Communist,” Mr. Werlin said in an interview. “It 
means I take a class position on things. I don’t just see it as a 
simple struggle between a group of workers and an 
individual employer; I see a transfer of wealth from working 
people to the corporate elite.” 

 
Now that’s the type of statements that the union leader is making 
against Gainers project in North Battleford. Says, in an interview 
of one Mr. Werlin’s associates: 
 

Mr. Werlin’s politics do not seem to have hurt him. 
 

“He’s not a proselytizer,” one official said, “He just does 
what he’s supposed to do. You can’t really say he’s doing 
things on orders from Moscow.” There have been some 
instances of red-baiting,” but mostly the reaction has been, 
‘So what?’” 

 
The latest burst of union solidarity in Alberta has Mr. Werlin 
as high as a kite, prompting one (labour) official to declare 
that “Werlin thinks the revolution is about 17 minutes away.” 

 
As if to confirm that view, Mr. Werlin tells a reporter, 
(here’s what Mr. Werlin tells reporters — and this is in the 
dispute with Gainers), “The whole capitalist system is in 
crisis . . . and the latent fight-back determination of the trade 
union movement has been awakened . . .” 

 
So what he is saying is that (a) I am the leader of the Alberta trade 
union movement across all of Alberta, and I’m a Communist, and 
I’m proud to be a Communist. I want to eradicate capitalism; that 
this fight is not between the workers at Gainers and Peter 
Pocklington; the work is a class struggle. That’s what he said to 
8,000 people on the steps of the legislature of Alberta, and that’s 
what he told The Globe and Mail. 
 
The members opposite say, so what? So what, they say? What 
they say is: Peter Pocklington is all bad; the workers movement 
and the leadership is all good. Now they say that the union 
leadership is all good; that our party supports the unions; that the 
unions support our party; that there’s one person that’s inspired by 
the Devil and the other one inspired by the Great Lord; and we’re 
on his  

side, and you’re on the Devil’s side. It’s not that simple my 
friends. 
 
And the labour union and the labour dispute in Alberta I hope 
stays in Alberta — does not come over here. Gainers will operate 
under the laws of the province of Saskatchewan. Gainers have 
1,200 job applications from people in North Battleford and across 
the province, looking for one of those 300 or 200 jobs, and that 
seems to me to tell you something. 
 
The members opposite would rather we didn’t have the jobs 
because we might have Gainers in Saskatchewan, and I think that 
is shameful, and that is inconsistent with anybody asking for job 
creation in this province; it is disgusting and disgraceful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ll tell you . . . I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Premier Devine and Peter 
Pocklington. That’s the new economic generator of this province; 
that’s the line-up. Just imagine, they’re going to build 
Saskatchewan and they bring Peter Pocklington, who was driven 
out of Alberta to Saskatchewan, to build Saskatchewan. And you 
know who they line up with this Pocklington who is being run out 
of Alberta, has no credit, and you know who they take on? The 
workers of Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Can we have order, please. 
Let’s have some order, please. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was wondering when 
you were going to perform your duties. The position that 
Pocklington has established is very clear, and he says, “Days of 
union workers are over at meat plant,” and what reason? Canadian 
Press: “The days of union workers at Gainers Meat Packing Plant 
in Edmonton are over,” — millionaire entrepreneur . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I thought you said he was broke? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well he is, but they put that in, and plant owner 
Peter Pocklington said Wednesday: 
 

“I am not going to have another collective agreement with 
anyone,” said Pocklington, whose strike-bound plant has 
been the scene of violent confrontations this week. “I will 
deal with employees on an individual basis.” 

 
Now I want to say, that really represents the new labour relations 
policy adopted by the Premier Devine and the Tories if they 
happen to get re-elected. That is exactly the standard of labour 
relations that they are going to adopt. Margaret Thatcher started it. 
Every union worker in Great Britain was a communist. 
 
His defence takes on the workers. The workers who co-operated 
with Pocklington in Gainers plant in Edmonton took a reduction in 
order to keep operative and now, when the collective agreement 
expires, he casts them out and he trucks in unemployed labour. 
And that’s the standard of collective bargaining and labour 
relations — the new team. 
 
So I say to the workers across Canada, and indeed in 
Saskatchewan, because they’re being introduced, is in fact this is 



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2193 
 
 
 

the evidence of the new labour relations policies of the Devine and 
Pocklington team. This is what they have to look forward if indeed 
— God help us! — if he ever got elected again. But I can assure 
you, you won’t have an opportunity of putting into effect this new 
labour relations policy — the Grant Devine-Peter Pocklington 
labour relations. 
 
And so I say that I have no, no problems whatsoever. When union 
people have been reasonable, and no one has said that they haven’t 
been here; they’ve took a decrease in wages. And in fact, as the 
Prairie Messenger says: why are we in fact bringing in a corporate 
citizen with such a shabby record? That’s what they’re asking. 
 
And I ask you that, and the people of Saskatchewan ask you that. 
And you can’t cover up every conceivable mismanagement by 
yourself and your government and the radical right-wing parties 
by the communist scare. It doesn’t work in Saskatchewan. I’ll tell 
you, it doesn’t work. Tommy Douglas, as he marched across this 
province for 20 years, was called a communist by people like you. 
And I’ll tell you, when he passed away, the respect he had across 
this nation was unequalled. 
 
And I’ll tell you, we will continue to march in tune with what 
Tommy Douglas laid. Fairness in society is what we want. 
Fairness in society. A co-operative approach; not pitting 
management against worker, and worker against worker, and in 
fact putting up the old communist scare. Typical Tory defence of 
their vicious attack on labouring people. 
 
And I say to you, in Saskatchewan here the CCF, the forerunner to 
the NDP, under Tommy Douglas, set out best working labour 
legislation in North America. There’s no doubt about it. And 
we’re proud of that. And I’ll tell you, that was done in an 
agricultural province. And the farmers in Saskatchewan agreed 
with fairness. And I’ll tell you, you introduced the Peter 
Pocklington-Premier Grant Devine new type of worker 
relationship, and they’ll throw you out because the people of 
Saskatchewan are used to the fairness that the CCF and Tommy 
Douglas and the NDP have established for working people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1430) 
 
Fairness is what they want; not the Peter Pocklington and Premier 
Devine type of right-wing labour relations. No respect for the 
worker. That’s what you are proposing. 
 
You stand up here and say, he’s a good corporate citizen. That’s 
what you say. But I’ll tell you, he’s not a good corporate citizen. 
And the editorial of the Prairie Messenger says that he’s not a 
good corporate citizen. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mitchell from Intercon says he’s not a good 
corporate citizen. I’ll tell you the business  

community, small-business association, 6,000 in Alberta, said he’s 
a bad corporate citizen and giving them a black eye. And you 
stand up here and support him and say, we support him; he’s a 
good corporate citizen. That’s what you’ve said. 
 
And I’ll tell you, yes we do. We stand here supporting workers 
across Saskatchewan for fairness. And I’ll tell you, we’ll fight 
against any entrepreneur, be he a candidate for the Tory leadership 
that you have brought in and given special privileges, or not. We 
want to fight, and we will fight for fairness. And that’s what the 
people want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And let it be known. So the workers are obviously 
aware of the fact now that what they have to look forward to by 
bringing in this here great entrepreneur that needs government 
grants in order to establish a plant — he can make $550,000 on his 
initial investment in a year’s time. Great entrepreneur. 
 
And I’ll tell you, if he comes into Saskatchewan and does what he 
does in Alberta, I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan will not 
tolerate it because we’re used to having very, very fair labour 
relations here. And that’s all that people want. They don’t want 
unfairness on either side — union or management. 
 
And that’s our position. And I think that’s the position that you 
should be taking, rather than tying yourself — tying yourself 
solely — and endorsing . . . And the Premier bringing him into the 
legislature here and standing him up as an example of a great 
entrepreneur coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
And look at what he has done. Look at what he has done to labour 
relations. I say, Mr. Minister, I don’t think you can be proud of the 
development, nor can you be proud of the special arrangements 
that you have given — the special arrangements that you have 
given to one of the former Tory candidates for the leadership of 
the national Tory party. I think you should be ashamed of yourself, 
as is evidenced in the editorial from the Prairie Messenger. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member makes like somehow, 
I’m red-baiting, saying that all unionists in Alberta are 
communists. What I’m saying is simply quoting — I am quoting 
from The Globe and Mail, an interview with the union leader that 
is the head union leader of the province of Alberta, head of the 
Alberta Federation of Labour. 
 
It’s not me saying that; it’s him saying that. Read it — black and 
white in The Globe and Mail today. “I am a communist and I am 
proud of it.” That’s not me saying that; it’s him saying it himself. 
 
Now the hon. member talks about Tommy Douglas . . . (inaudible) 
. . . in the province, and Tommy Douglas did many things. But I’ll 
tell you, Tommy Douglas and many of the people in the CCF 
would not like your alliance with the trade union movement when 
these people stand up and talk this way. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2194 
 
 
 

There’s many in my riding, CCFers, who would read this article 
by the head of the Alberta Federation of Labour, and ask 
themselves, are we in the NDP . . . is the NDP and the CCF the 
same thing, when some of their leaders . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Let’s have some order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I ask the members opposite, and I ask this 
simple question: Tommy Douglas and the CCF, would they 
approve of the head of the Alberta Federation of Labour? And do 
you approve of the largest and biggest union leader in all of 
Alberta, the head of it, standing up and publicly saying, I’m a 
communist and I’m proud of it; I want to eradicate Alberta of all 
capitalism. And this is a class struggle. This is not between 
Pocklington and the people at Gainers, the workers at Gainers. 
This is a class struggle. 
 
That is what he is saying in the paper. And I defy the members 
opposite to say that the old CCF under Tommy Douglas endorsed 
that type of statement. I don’t believe they did . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . 
 
The member opposite says, well Peter Pocklington should not be 
allowed in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s exactly what 
they’re saying. That’s exactly what they’re saying — Peter 
Pocklington should not be allowed into the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what kind of . . . You can only take two positions from that. 
So members opposite should say, we will make up a list of people 
that are not welcome in our province. And what does that mean as 
a nation? Peter Pocklington is not welcome. Who’s next on your 
list? You go down the list. Who else is not welcome in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Even if he comes in and creates a shop, creates a lot of jobs, you 
say, no, that man is not welcome here. But the members opposite 
are saying something more than that. What the members opposite 
are saying is, when they were in government, the day when they 
were in government, Mr. Chairman, they are saying the following: 
we want to buy part of the only packing plant in Saskatchewan, 
and that was Intercontinental. And that’s what they did. They 
bought 49 per cent of Intercontinental Packers. And what we did 
was sold that back to the private sector, because what the NDP had 
in mind . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order please. I must once more, regrettably, 
interrupt proceedings to call for order. I would please ask the hon. 
members to keep the level of noise down so the debate can go 
forward in a reasonable manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What the NDP did in their last term of 
office was buy 49 per cent interest in Intercontinental Packers. 
They didn’t help them expand; they bought half their operation. 
They bought half the operation, 49 per cent, a very good chunk of 
money, put it into their pocket and away they went. What they 
wanted, of course, what they wanted was their next step was going 
to be they bought 100 per cent of it, so they owned the whole thing 
themselves. And that’s exactly what the members opposite want. 
 

The members opposite say, this guy is a bad business man; don’t 
get him in here. This guy’s a bad business; we don’t want him. 
That guy’s a bad business; we don’t want him. We don’t want any 
business men. We want to own the packing industry by the 
government, and they attempted to do that through Intercon. 
 
We, in fact, divested ourselves of that. And there was a howl and 
squeal from the members opposite when we did that. They howl, 
you give all this away to Freddie Mitchell. Remember that? Two 
years, three years ago. Oh, you guys got a sweetheart deal with 
Freddie Mitchell at Intercontinental Packers. You gave all this 
money back to him. Now all of a sudden you’ve got a new-found 
hero. Freddie Mitchell is their hero. What they want is a party, the 
philosophy they believe in. 
 
The philosophy that they believe in, Mr. Chairman, is this: 
government does better owning than business. Government is 
better to own than business. Now we don’t support that. We can 
sit here till 10 o’clock tonight arguing that point. Their philosophy 
is government owns it; our philosophy is that business should own 
it themselves. When we move in that direction, they move in the 
other direction. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that is the philosophical difference between the two 
of us, and I think and I hope it always remains a philosophical 
difference between us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to conclude this part of the discussion by 
indicating to the minister that I’m very pleased that he stood up, 
and now for 10 minutes took on all of the working people in 
Edmonton and across Canada; has essentially called them 
communists if they are in the union. That’s what you’re saying. 
You’re saying that this here is a good corporate citizen, when in 
fact I’ve read to you before, the president of a 6,000-member 
Canadian organization of small business has criticized Peter 
Pocklington. And he says that he has given them a black eye. So 
6,000 business men are against his particular corporate behaviour. 
 

“Gainers pulling a scam,” says Mitchell. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

“Gainers’ owner, Peter Pocklington, is trying to pull a big 
scam in efforts to undercut meat packing industries’ wage 
standard by $6 to $7,” says the president of Intercon. 

 
That’s what he says. It’s a scam. This is a responsible, corporate 
citizen of Saskatchewan, and no one can deny it. He says that 
about Premier Devine’s new corporate friend, Peter Pocklington 
— Premier Devine’s new corporate friend. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, the Prairie Messenger has also 
indicated that Saskatchewan citizens should demand from their 
government an explanation of why Pocklington has been invited 
into Saskatchewan with huge incentive grants. If the government 
felt that there was room for expansion of the meat industry in this 
province, why were the grants not offered to the  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2195 
 
 
 

long-standing corporate citizens who have cordial and just 
relationship with their employees and have given Saskatchewan 
good business practices? 
 
Those are the people that have spoken out, who’ve examined this 
new corporate citizen — the new team, the new industrial team for 
Saskatchewan, the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, 
Premier Devine, and Peter Pocklington, the ex, the fellow that ran 
for the Tory leadership. That’s the new corporate elite 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I say that we’re pretty pleased to go forward here in this to 
have the workers of Saskatchewan and the farmers and the 
business men working co-operatively together. That’s been our 
goal and our practice. And if you want to pit management against 
worker, and worker against worker, I’ll tell you, that is not a 
successful course of action. Because I’ll tell you, you may get a 
term of office with that, but your political career is going to be 
short-lived. 
 
And I say, you don’t have a very successful combination because 
what you’ve got going for you now is the Premier, Grant Devine, 
this great corporate citizen, Peter Pocklington, and the president of 
the multinational corporation from United States, Weyerhaeuser. 
That’s the new corporate team that’s going to develop 
Saskatchewan, undermine the workers, who all they demand is a 
fair return for their labours. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you have to build a society — build a society 
with co-operation of these groups, not confrontation. 
 
You go to western Europe and you go into Sweden or into West 
Germany, and I’ll tell you, you will find social contracts being 
developed. You go to Australia and look at what the Social 
Democrats did there. They talked, they brought in labour, 
government, and management, and they built a team to develop 
the economy, rather than through confrontation. 
 
(1445) 
 
I’ll tell you, the right wing that destroyed a province was the 
Premier, the right-wing Premier of British Columbia — 
confrontation — and he has to resign. He can’t run again because 
he can’t make it. The same is going to happen here. This outfit 
can’t even call an election after over four years in office because 
they have no friends left. You can’t get elected by only associating 
yourself with the Peter Pocklingtons and Weyerhaeusers. They 
don’t have a vote. The voters of Saskatchewan will decide. 
 
And I’ll tell you, I welcome the next election on your new 
corporate citizens’ little trio going forward as being the economic 
generator of this province. 
 
So I welcome that you got up and indicated and defended your 
friend, the candidate for the leadership of the Tory party, and that 
you took on and you scorned the working movement across this 
country and in Alberta. You slurred them by inferring that in 
forming a union that that’s something wrong about it. That’s what 
you’ve done. And I think it’s unfair. 
 

I’ll tell you, every working group here you’ve been in 
confrontation with — doctors, the chiropractors, the nurses, the 
teachers. For instance, the teachers, when one of your members 
was talking about the great development going on in 
Saskatchewan and the tax base was going to be increased, 
mentioned the Pocklington plant over in North Battleford, and the 
teachers booed him. 
 
Are you out of touch so much with the people of this province that 
you will confront and slur the people who have built this province 
for some reprobate coming from Alberta? That’s what you’re 
doing. I’ll tell you, the corporate conduct of Mr. Pocklington is not 
one that should be put up in a show-case. 
 
So I’ll leave that particular subject matter. I think there’s a number 
of people who will disagree with you that he’s a good corporate 
citizen. I’m disappointed in you, Mr. Minister. I didn’t think you 
would take on the workers; I didn’t think you would do that. I 
didn’t think you would take on and slur every working person. 
That’s what you have done, and so I regret that very much. And I 
would expect, Mr. Minister, that it’ll come to pass. But certainly 
people here in Saskatchewan will, I think, be up to it because 
they’re used to fairness over the years that the CCF and New 
Democrats were in power. And I’ll tell you they won’t tolerate a 
right-wing approach to labour relations. 
 
I want to basically turn to another area of interest to you, and that 
has to do, Mr. Minister, with an area also that I want you to 
perhaps put your position, and that’s on the subject of free trade. 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could outline to us your basic 
definition of free trade, and when you and your Premier and your 
government are discussing the topic of free trade, could you 
clarify and define the meaning of free trade as you use it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I want to respond first to the members 
opposite with regards to their particular attack on Gainers. What I 
was indicating for all of this province to see is an interview in The 
Globe and Mail with a Dave Werlin, who is the head of the 
Alberta Federation of Labour. It’s not me saying anything. It’s 
Dave Werlin speaking to The Globe and Mail in today’s paper 
saying that: I am a Communist, and that we’re in a class struggle. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He said the wrong thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well this is what he said, and I’m simply 
saying that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The members opposite . . . I was simply 
referring to a Dave, an interview with Dave Werlin . . . They don’t 
want to hear this, but I’m going to tell them anyway. 
 
They don’t like to hear about the interview where the head of the 
Alberta Federation of Labour says in a quotation in today’s Globe 
and Mail . . . 
 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2196 
 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Would you let the minister answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . that he indicates that he is a 
Communist, that there’s a class struggle in Alberta, and that’s 
what the class struggle is about. Now that’s what the guy said. 
 
Now I get a chuckle out of the members opposite. Now they say 
that Peter Pocklington and the Gainers plant is not welcome in 
Saskatchewan. But not more than a month and a half ago their 
leader was up in North Battleford saying: we will proceed with the 
Pocklington plant if we’re elected. 
 
The NDP candidate in North Battleford says: I support the 
building of this Gainers’ plant in North Battleford. But all of a 
sudden now you get into the session here and your real feelings 
come through and you’re saying Peter Pocklington isn’t welcome; 
Manalta Coal isn’t welcome; Weyerhaeuser isn’t welcome; 
nobody is welcome in this province if they’re in the private sector. 
Nobody is welcome if they are in the private sector because we 
want to do it by government; that’s exactly what you’re saying. 
You’re against every one of these things existing in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Every one of these you’re against. 
 
My view, and where my view separates from yours, is I believe 
you build with private initiative, Mr. Speaker, and private business 
building. Now that’s what you do, Mr. Speaker. They disagree 
with that. We happen to be of that view. I believe that the jobs in 
this province are going to be created by the private sector investing 
and building in the province of Saskatchewan. They disagree. 
They believe that the best way to build and create jobs is to build 
more and more Crown corporations. We disagree with that and 
have for some time. 
 
Moving to the second point, Mr. Speaker, with regards to the 
question on trade and free trade. And the hon. member asked what 
is our position; what is the position of the government with 
regards to free trade. 
 
If you look at the province of Saskatchewan, 85 per cent of 
everything that we produce is exported under free trade 
arrangements, whether that free trade arrangement is between 
Canada and the United States or other areas — 85 per cent. 
Virtually everything that we produce has to be exported. If you 
look at a grain farmer, he must export. If you look at a potash 
miner, he must export. If you look at Ipsco, they must export. If 
you look at uranium miners, what they produce, they must export. 
If you look at farm machinery manufacturers, they must export. If 
you look at trucking firms, half of their work is involved hauling 
stuff back and forth to the United States. And trade to them is their 
life-blood. 
 
Now there’s other parts of this country that have lived through the 
national policy of this nation which was to be protected — 
whether it’s the automobile industry, but more likely the textile 
industries, manufacturers of various products most of which are 
located in central Canada. 
 
For a long time the national policy of this country was as follows: 
we must protect these infant industries so they  

can have a domestic market and for the most part have an 
advantage in that domestic market. That was the national policy of 
the Government of Canada since confederation — protect those 
industries. 
 
The problem that is arising today is that we, in this part of the 
country, have been paying for that protection for a long time. You 
pay it in the cost of an automobile; you pay it in the cost of a 
refrigerator or television set; you pay it in the cost of clothing 
through people that buy every day. Those are bought in protected 
markets, and you pay tariffs for it. 
 
So historically in this country, people in the Prairies have been 
free traders. People in central Canada have tended to support the 
idea of protecting our industries. 
 
The farmer produces something; he must sell it onto the world 
market. What we have seen of late has been a growing 
protectionist mode around the world, whether in the EEC 
(European Economic Community), and more recently in the 
United States. 
 
What we are saying is that we, and in the interests of western 
Canada — but particularly in the interests of Saskatchewan — we 
must protect those markets, and we must protect those markets 
against unfair countervail, unfair tariffs that are being developed in 
the United States today. And the best way to protect that is to 
come to an agreement with the United States for an overall trading 
relationship that allows those goods to continue back and forth 
between our two countries. 
 
That has been something that has been fundamental to the way 
this part of the world has worked for a long period of time. Our 
position with regard to the bilateral negotiations is that we must 
maintain that free flow of goods and provide other markets for the 
free flow of goods that we produce in this country. Canada has a 
population of 25 million and they produce enough for far more 
than that. And therefore, they can no longer — and never have 
been able to — rely on a domestic market for their production. 
They must always go beyond it. What we are trying to do, whether 
it’s under the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
negotiations or whether it’s under the bilateral negotiations with 
the United States, is to ensure . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Pardon 
me? 
 
Well the member from North West says there will be no GATT 
decisions. GATT will sit in September of this year for the latest 
round of GATT negotiations, and that is an important dimension 
for the people of Saskatchewan, particularly the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, that they must ensure that those markets exist for 
them in the world. 
 
So the member opposite asks a question: why do we support more 
open and freer trade with the United States? Our life-blood and 
our economy relies on us being able to deal with the Americans. If 
we can deal with the Americans straight up, one on one, we 
believe we can compete with them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’ll check your definition. I thought it would 
have been a bit shorter. You have certainly positioned yourself and 
the Premier, Premier Devine, as clearly stating that they’re free 
traders. And in establishing  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2197 
 
 
 

that position, I was wondering if you could indicate what studies 
has the province done or commissioned regarding the impact of 
the free trade talks on Saskatchewan. Can you indicate what 
studies you have commissioned prior to positioning yourself as 
free traders? What studies have you done? What facts have you 
assembled in positioning yourself, in adopting the free trade 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well we haven’t commissioned studies 
outside of government. With regards to the civil servants, with 
regard to the civil servants within the province, we’re obviously 
doing analysis and studies as to what our position will be and our 
particular bargaining position on A, B, or C. And that’s been done 
internally. But as far as hiring some outside consultant, that’s not 
been done. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I was wondering if you would be in a 
position to table any of the studies that you have done. Certainly I 
would have thought that if you are looking for consensus, that the 
federal government did a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We were going to get Ron Ryan to do one, 
but he was busy. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Oh, he was busy? I see. It would have been quite 
a commissioned project too. He goes fairly expensive, I hear. But 
the federal government did a study, and be it all they released the 
study after they had essentially censored it, and it is not of much 
value to the opposition parties or to the general public. But are you 
saying to us here that, one, you have no study that you could file in 
respect to all of the benefits that would accrue from free trade, 
which you have been alluding to and which certainly Premier 
Devine has been alluding to? 
 
Can you indicate . . . Are you saying that you have absolutely no 
formal study that you can make available to the public or to the 
opposition on the basis on which you support free trade? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well all I’m saying to the hon. member is 
that he understands how government works. You are preparing 
analysis, whether it’s through the Department of Agriculture, or 
Department of Energy and Mines, or various departments of 
government, all co-ordinated under the trade secretarial to draw 
together that information. We will release that information, use 
that information, as the bargaining process unfolds. 
 
With regards to studies that we have . . . the federal government 
has had 20 sectorial studies done on particular trade dimensions 
across this country. Those studies have been made public, and the 
member certainly could have access to those. 
 
The Canada West Foundation — I sent for a copy of that 
particular study with regards to the impact of tariffs on various 
regions of the country, and I will give you the copy of that. 
They’re readily available. But we’re not going to, nor does 
government when they’re involved in a process, made available all 
internal documents and studies during the process of that 
particular negotiation. 
 

I go back to the constitution when you folks were fighting for the 
constitution to get us a Charter of Rights. You did not make 
available all your internal studies with regards to that, nor should 
you. The reality of it is that we have internal studies, internal 
compilations of various analyses, and those will be made available 
when it’s strategically wise for us to make those available at the 
bargaining table as we deal within our country with regard to the 
trade-offs. 
 
What I can tell you is this, though, to the hon. members — a study 
done by Canada West Foundation. The nature of protectionism in 
Canada — and this is protecting eastern industries — there’s two 
provinces that gain from it: Ontario, at a rate of $57 per capita, and 
Quebec, at $9 per capita. Every other province in this country pays 
for that protectionism — Maritimes, on average, $48 per person. 
And the Maritimes pay to help subsidize central Canadian 
businesses. In the West it is higher than that. And of the four 
western provinces, Saskatchewan pays more than anyone else — 
$92 per capita — to help support eastern manufacturing industries. 
 
Now if that’s the national policy that we’re going to have, and if 
that’s the policy that the NDP support, then I think that’s not 
totally fair to regions outside of Ontario, and to a lesser degree, 
Quebec. Now those are the types of things that we would see as 
important to try to come to grips and deal with because surely free 
trade is more than simply the trade with United States. 
 
It means, should the people of Saskatchewan pay $75, every time 
they buy a television set, to help support an eastern business? Is 
that fair? Is that any different than a tax? Should we pay $15 every 
time a woman buys a dress in this province — should we pay $15 
towards helping the textile industry in Ontario and Quebec? Is that 
fair . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No. But that is the questions that 
we ask. 
 
And we say if as a nation, should we decide to do that, then there 
should be offsetting benefits for us. It’s not all one way. It’s not all 
Ontario first and everybody else last. If we look at the inequities in 
this country that existed for a long time, we believe that we should 
be compensated for those. 
 
So with regard to the Canada West study, and I’ll have it down 
here in a minute, I’ll send that to you. With regard to any internal 
studies, we will release those when it’s appropriate and strategic to 
do so. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I take it, though, that in putting forward your 
position here that you would confirm that you have done your 
analysis, and that that has essentially been completed in supporting 
your position. You have done your basic analysis, and from the 
standpoint of analysing the impact and the benefits of free trade, 
that you have essentially completed your studies. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to you it’s an ongoing analysis. 
We have done a great deal of analysis. We intend to do a great 
deal more of analysis. And probably there’s various analyses 
you’re going to do as you go through the trade negotiations with 
the first ministers, or  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2198 
 
 
 

with trade ministers, as to the particular negotiation stance that this 
country will take as the process unfolds and as the thing 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well, the member from Regina North East does not understand the 
negotiations of the trade. You don’t go into the trade negotiations 
and say, here is my position; I’m going to kick this one off, this 
one off, this one off. What you do over a period of time is, you are 
negotiating with the Americans. The Americans are saying, we’re 
not prepared to give up this. Well, then we won’t give up this, and 
the trade-off goes on. And this process is going to be very 
dynamic. It is not something you’re going to do in a very static 
way. 
 
I can tell the members opposite, though, as follows. As it relates to 
agriculture, primarily that’s going to be a dimension of GATT 
negotiations, because what we’re trying to do is bread down the 
trade war, if that’s possible, between the EEC and the United 
States. And that’s the impact, is going to be primarily, of GATT 
negotiations. 
 
With regard to potash, I can tell you that we are going to want that 
trade to be a free trade relationship; same with uranium,; same 
with oil; same with farm machinery; same with agricultural 
products, whether it’s hogs, beef, whatever it’s going to be, that 
those should continue to trade in the free and open market as they 
have. 
 
And that’s the type of position that we wish to maintain in this 
province for the large majority of producers of this province, 
whether agriculture, resource related, or manufacturing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
understand the process. I know that when you’re at the table, how 
you negotiate. What we want to know from you is: have you at 
least internally established your position so that you know where 
you stand? When you get to the table, you obviously will need to 
know what you can trade off or what you can do. But do you 
know your position internally, and have you drawn some 
conclusions so that you’re capable to negotiate? Because if you 
stand up in the House and say you have not done that internally, 
you’re not capable of negotiating because you don’t know what it 
is you’re negotiating, or what objectives you want to achieve. 
Now that’s the question we’re asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Obviously we know what our position is, 
and obviously we’re not about to go out publicly and say, here’s 
what our position is going to be. We are negotiating on an ongoing 
basis, whether at the minister’s level, whether at the first ministers’ 
level, or whether the trade commission negotiating with Simon 
Reisman, and that is almost a weekly basis where that 
communications comes back and forth with regards to what issues 
are going to be discussed, when they’re going to be discussed, 
which items are going to be discussed first, which ones come 
second, later on down the process, and where we particularly 
maybe would stack up against the — let’s say the textile industry. 
 
Now the textile industry is going to be one that says, because they 
now have protective tariffs, is that now going to allow free trade 
back and forth in textiles? That’s 

a good example. Now obviously that’s a very large issue for both 
Ontario and Quebec because there’s a number of people working 
in that industry, and so they’re going to say, we want to protect the 
textile industry. 
 
People of Saskatchewan are going to say, well, we don’t gain a 
great deal by those tariff barriers on textiles because we pay for 
them. How do we then protect our agriculture industry, or how do 
we get another market that is now protected in the United States? 
That is the dynamics of the negotiations I talk about. 
 
And for you, if you’re asking that I set out totally what our 
bargaining strategy would be as a province, I think that would be 
very foolish to set out for all of the other provinces so they can 
pick us off, what our strategy is going to be. 
 
We understand the position that we will be taking on the trade 
talks, and we intend to protect and to be able to grow and expand 
in this province because we believe that for a long period of time 
we have been inequitably dealt with under the national policy of 
this country. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reason 
why I’m asking questions is because there is obviously some 
questions that the opposition will not ask, one of which is . . . I’m 
interested in trade. I understand that exporting, importing, and the 
trade itself is really a federal jurisdiction, but we’ve just had a 
discussion about free trade and we have moved in certain 
directions about trade. 
 
I want to know — also, I don’t expect any way that you could give 
me this information now, but I want it on public record that I 
asked — I would like to know what exports do we have in 
Saskatchewan that come from the U.S.S.R. and the satellite 
U.S.S.R. countries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Do you mean imports? 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Yes, imports. Right, whichever. I want to know 
what comes from Russia, the imports — the exports we get from 
Russia which are imported here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the Iron Curtain countries 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . With regards to negotiations between 
Canada, trade balances, trade imbalances between Canada and the 
Soviet Union, the Soviet Union has been one of our most 
cherished and most important grain export markets that we have. 
In fact, it is the best market that we have for wheat. We ship a 
great deal of wheat into the U.S.S.R.; in return we primarily get 
back cold cash. 
 
Now the Soviets are trying to, through a series of things, trying to 
export things into the West. One of them is tractors, a lot of 
automobiles, that type of thing. For the most part, the Soviets’ 
manufacturing base has not been as strong, let’s say, as either the 
United States or specifically the West Europeans or the Pacific 
Rim. 
 
So for the most part we don’t import very much, but what I’ll 
undertake is try to get a breakdown for you of the things that we 
do import from the Soviet Union. But you have to bear in mind the 
Soviet Union is a very  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2199 
 
 
 

important market for Canadians and for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — At this point I don’t need to make a value 
judgement on that, but I would like some detailed information that 
your department can give. 
 
The next question I would like is: what kind of . . . One thing 
about this . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. The member from Saskatoon 
Westmount is having difficulty asking the questions. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I would like to know: what trade level do we 
have with South Africa? How many products are we 
exporting/importing from South Africa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What we have been traditionally exporting 
and importing from South Africa — has been importing some of 
their wines; our exports has primarily been potash. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — We are still exporting potash, I presume. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We are at this point in time, subject to any 
federal rules that they might impose by way of economic sanctions 
against South Africa. Any decision taken by the federal 
government on that particular question we would honour and 
recognize. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Of course federal jurisdiction is clearly going to 
affect our provincial policy, and naturally we have to go along 
with that. In the question of South African wines, was that a rule, 
or was it a willing agreement to go along with a federal policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It was a decision taken by government — 
more appropriately addressed to the minister responsible for the 
Liquor Board. He made that decision and that announcement. It 
was, as I understand it, a decision made by government, and a 
position taken that would be our response, in conjunction with the 
federal response, to what we see as an improper regime within 
South Africa at this point in time; and that this is our message to 
them, that we did not approve of their apartheid policies. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — What I’m asking is . . . I certainly understand it 
was a government position, and I’m not here to attack the 
government position but only to clarify it. What I’m asking is: was 
it a response from a policy that was a law, an edict coming down 
from the federal government, or was it something that we could 
have not done — do you understand — at the same time not 
violating the laws of the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If you’re asking, in spite of the decision 
announced recently by Joe Clark, could we still import South 
African wines, still buy South African wine — we could. As a 
provincial government we took the decision that we should not. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I thank you for that clarification. In  

asking these questions — and I’m most sincere about asking for 
the information about Russia, and I will be using it, although not 
necessarily in the House — I would just like to say that I have no 
objection to us selling wheat and trading with Russia because I 
don’t really understand any reason to attack the economy of 
Russia any worse than . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member for Regina North West, 
the member for Saskatoon Westmount is again having difficulty 
posing her questions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, I can speak from any seat in the 
House too. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Your complaint is entirely out 
of order. Members may ask questions from any seat in the House, 
as you well know. And I would appreciate if you would simply 
show some courtesy towards her and allow her to ask her question. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — What I merely would like to say is that in our 
policy with Russia we have decided that although they have a 
government that is an oppressive government, we still continue to 
export . . . and I would like to . . . Since we became government 
Russia has shot down a flight 007 plane; assassinated Americans 
and Canadians; has had the Afghanistan war, which was clearly an 
invasion; has attacked continually religious freedoms in its own 
country; and wherever there is communism, no one has a right to 
vote, not just some people. And although I’m most certainly not 
supporting the apartheid position, I still would like, as a private 
member, to issue at least my statement that I tend to think our 
position on Russia’s human rights record is somewhat inconsistent 
with our position on South Africa’s human rights position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I acknowledge the argument you 
advanced. I think the Canadian government has never used food 
embargoes of any kind in the world. We believe that food is not a 
good tool for any kind of embargo, regardless of philosophical 
views. Number two, we have in fact made food products available 
or wheat products available to many people of the world under 
totalitarian regimes, and we will continue, I would hope, to do 
that, whether it’s Poland or some other countries. 
 
So I hear what your argument is. It’s basically, are we being 
consistent with South Africa as we are with the Soviet Union? We 
will continue to export food to the U.S.S.R. We support the 
embargoes being placed on South Africa, of wine products. And 
let’s leave it at that. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I’ll just finish with a final statement and most 
certainly leave it with . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Could we have some order, 
please? Order. Order, please. Order, order. Please allow the lady to 
ask her questions. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I know everyone, including myself, wants to not 
waste time today, but I refuse to talk when someone is talking. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2200 
 
 
 

There is a great concern in South Africa that much of the dissent 
may turn into a communist take-over, and I tend to think that we 
may be supporting a dubious government that may go to a 
totalitarian, communist government. And I think that position has 
to be stated, simply because it isn’t. 
 
But I would like to end not on arguing this point. But I would like 
to congratulate you on bringing to the fore the attention that the 
present Alberta unrest is being caused by a Marxist, 
self-proclaimed communist who is doing a great deal of violence, 
including breaking legs, etc., etc., of other people who are trying 
to feed their family. And I congratulate you for your continued 
efforts to bring in entrepreneurs, and I congratulate you on getting 
the NDP to state on June 20th that they are opposed to 
entrepreneurs coming in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Comment number one is, don’t put words 
in my mouth as to what I say about Alberta labour laws and what I 
say about the particular thing going on in Alberta. That’s number 
one. 
 
Number two: I don’t think that you can make the statement that 
the regime that is fighting for the equal vote for black people in 
South Africa are communist-inspired because I don’t believe they 
are. And I don’t believe that we should be trading . . . I don’t 
believe that we should be recognizing a firm that has, or a 
government that has the type of mentality that they do with regard 
to the right of one person, one vote. I think that is very repressive, 
so I don’t support that at all. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister, just to continue with 
the estimates on free trade. You’ve indicated that you have put 
forward a position that you are not making public . . . You indicate 
all that you can make public is this document here in putting 
forward your position. I ask you though: how does the process 
work? The negotiations are under way. All right? And we have the 
chief negotiator for the federal government. I ask you: what is the 
mechanism for the process of Saskatchewan making sure that your 
input is getting, in fact, discussed at the talks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What happens, and the way the process 
will be working is as follows, from a process point of view: Simon 
Reisman and the Reisman group that meet with Murphy in the 
United States meet on an ongoing basis. That particular group, 
Reisman’s group, will then meet in Canada with the various trade 
officials in Canada. So it’s Reisman, in our case, would be 
meeting with Wakabayashi to update him with regard to the 
negotiations and where it is going. 
 
As well, Reisman would meet with a federal cabinet committee 
headed by Joe Clark. Joe Clark then would dialogue with regard to 
the various trade ministers and that’s on an ongoing, two-week 
basis, sometimes by telephone, sometimes in private meetings. 
 
As well, the first minister would meet with the first ministers of 
the provinces at least every three months to update on the 
negotiations and any trade-offs that might happen. Those 
trade-offs are most likely to be taking place later on in the process, 
probably after November,  

December period of time, when you get right down to the 
crunching as to what you give and what you don’t give, or what 
you take and you don’t give back. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, how are you assured . . . I 
understand the process that the federal negotiator, Mr. Reisman, 
meets with Mr. Murphy and that group, and they discuss this topic 
of free trade. And then they go back and you say that Mr. Reisman 
meets with counterparts of the provinces. That’s fair enough. But 
what I’m asking you is: how can you determine how much 
emphasis is being put on western Canada’s position which in fact 
could be detrimental to eastern Canada? 
 
You yourself, when you stood up, you indicated that western 
Canada had been hard done by by the extent of tariffs. That’s what 
you’ve said. And what I’m saying is, first of all, the negotiator 
who’s an eastern Canada bureaucrat — I use that — a skilful 
negotiator; I’m not denigrating against him. But all I’m saying is 
the political reality of the negotiations, because you have Quebec 
and Ontario which, you say, have the benefits of the tariffs and 
protectionism, and that represents the largest percentage of the 
population and the political power. And what you are depending 
upon is a federal negotiator, and I don’t know how you can 
guarantee that western Canada — or Saskatchewan, more 
particularly — that the emphasis is being put on your position 
sufficiently to make the point and bring forth the benefit to 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know how that is achieved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What you’re basically saying is the reality 
of this country, which is that of 25 million people, perhaps 10 
million of them live in Ontario, perhaps eight million in Quebec, 
and the rest live in the other regions of the country. And that’s 
been a problem of determining national policy in this country for a 
long time and probably always will be, as long as we have a 
system of one person, one vote. 
 
And so you always face that problem of political pressures, and 
the dynamics of politics is going to be that people in a larger area 
are going to have probably a little more say than people in others. 
 
The way these negotiations have been struck is, number one, the 
western provinces for the most part are taking a fairly much of a 
common front. And at the western premiers’ conference they were 
. . . the trade ministers and the officials would meet on a separate 
basis to try to negotiate from a common front of four provinces 
and therefore a far larger, when you get into that process, than 
simply Saskatchewan versus Ontario. 
 
The other thing to keep in mind is, I think the commitment of the 
Government of Quebec to far more open trade negotiations is seen 
to be probably far more committed than Ontario. So I don’t think 
you want to say that Ontario and Quebec are just like that, because 
there’s quite a difference between those two groups. And they 
have obviously varying interests as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the negotiations has been started, and the 
relationship of the negotiation is the federal representative 
negotiating with Mr. Murphy. Supposing the reports come back 
and the trade talks are going in a  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2201 
 
 
 

particular direction. What veto power has Saskatchewan over the 
continuation of the negotiations? 
 
We have launched it. Be it all, I know the federal negotiator, Mr. 
Reisman, and Mr. Murphy will be determining what’s going to be 
on the table. Okay? But what I’m saying is that, as it goes on, what 
veto power does the province have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think you have to appreciate there’s 
two dimensions. Go back to the constitution of our country. 
There’s set out in section 91 and 92 of the constitution, there are 
certain powers — the province has certain power; that the federal 
government has certain powers that are shared. 
 
Ultimately I suppose the power of the province is that the federal 
government cannot bind us to say that you must legislate this, 
which is a jurisdiction of the province, or you must not legislate in 
that way. That constitutional protection is always there, which 
forces you then into a situation of trying to build a compromise 
with regard to the trade negotiations. 
 
And that compromise was worked out by the first ministers with 
the Prime Minister, saying that any region of the country would 
have the right, basically, to walk away from these deals if they 
were materially being negatived by these particular trade 
negotiations. So that was the most recent deal worked out by the 
Prime Minister and the provinces. 
 
(1530) 
 
But ultimately your power rests with . . . The federal government 
cannot bind the Government of Saskatchewan, let’s say, to a 
particular position on property rights or a particular position on 
something else which we have jurisdiction for — liquor boards, 
for example, under provincial jurisdiction, that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Oh, but let’s get into the real nuts and bolts of it. I 
grant you that there is a division of powers and certainly the 
federal government can’t in fact circumvent or impose anything 
which is within provincial jurisdiction. But if you take what we’re 
dealing with here, the trade and commerce and international 
agreements and so on, that is in the jurisdiction and the power of 
the federal government to enter into trade agreements and, in fact, 
the provinces unilaterally don’t make international agreements. 
It’s within the federal government. 
 
So if you’re saying that they can’t affect the rights of the provinces 
or the jurisdictions of the provinces, I agree with you. But that is 
very limited when it comes to negotiating the free trade pact with 
the United States. 
 
So I’m really saying to you that you’re saying there is no 
mechanism where if all of the western provinces . . . You said 
there’s some joint approach to it. Is there no actual veto power 
whereby provinces can in fact say to the federal government, stop; 
go no further? Can you discontinue? 
 
I suggest to you that you cannot in fact — that the federal 
government can, once it’s been put in motion. They’re at  

the tables now and if they want to continue they can, within the 
jurisdiction of the powers of the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay, let me give you an example. The 
first ministers and the Prime Minister worked an arrangement 
whereby any region of the country can in effect put a kibosh onto 
that whole process. One of the big issues that is being negotiated 
on the trade questions is procurement — procurement policies that 
you can say you must buy within Saskatchewan or you must buy 
within Ontario and those cannot be superimposed upon you. And 
to break that together or to break that part out of the agreement 
would stop the agreement anyway. 
 
I wonder if the hon. member . . . 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ve a couple of guests in the west gallery 
to introduce, two visitors to us from Israel. I will have a go at your 
names. I talked to both these gentlemen the other night at the 
Western Farm Progress Show, a Baruck Barak — now that’s 
pretty close — and a Mr. Gilboa. 
 
Both of these people are involved in a veterinarian pharmaceutical 
project that they’re exploring to build in our province, and we 
certainly would welcome them here and hope that some day you’ll 
be able to see a project being built in our province. So I certainly 
welcome you to the legislature and certainly welcome you to the 
province of Saskatchewan. I understand you’ve been here on a 
couple of occasions. 
 
The hon. member . . . It might be of some interest that I talked to 
these two gentlemen last night, or two nights ago, and they were 
advising me that some year and a half ago the State of Israel had 
entered into a free trade arrangement with the United States. And 
that’s the only country in the world today that has a free trade 
relationship between the United States — Israel and the United 
States. 
 
They had indicated to me that the process had been working 
reasonably well over the last year and a half; that there’s been 
some bumps, and one expects bumps whether you’re under a 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement or 
anything else. But they had indicated it was working fairly well. 
 
I would hope that we, as a nation, can be successful as well in 
maintaining our trade relations that’s so important with the United 
States for us, number one; and preserving industries in this 
province that so rely upon it; and also creating the ability to build 
new ones, perhaps like a pharmaceutical business, that can also 
export into the United States and make a project in Saskatchewan 
viable. 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2202 
 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister: do you know whether 
or not the U.S. agricultural Bill has been placed on the tables yet? 
Certainly it’s having a tremendous impact on agriculture. They put 
into place a substantial subsidization of agriculture in the United 
States. I ask you whether you are aware whether the United States 
have put on the table a discussion of the U.S. agricultural Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . (inaudible) . . . so much a question of 
. . . The Americans agreed to that at the last Tokyo meeting of the 
group of five. The bigger concern was whether or not the EEC 
(European Economic Community) would be prepared to deal at 
GATT with their particular subsidies into their agriculture 
industry. 
 
Recently, I think it was two to three days ago, I was reading the 
Globe and Mail where the Europeans have agreed to discuss their 
very broad agriculture policy and not simply restrict it to the 
various subsidies, that they are presently under way. 
 
So we would take that to mean, in the information that we have, is 
agriculture should get on the agenda at GATT, and I think that’s 
very, very important for us. It looks promising now that GATT 
will in fact deal with agriculture and agriculture will be an issue on 
the agenda at the GATT negotiations coming in Uruguay in 
September. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There are some discussions recently coming over 
the news that, for instance, that the auto pact may in fact be put on 
the table. I’m wondering whether or not you have any information 
of confirmation of that. Also in respect to social programs, the 
discussions are that social programs are going to be insisted on 
being put onto the table. Such things as unemployment insurance, 
unemployment benefits for fisherman in the Maritimes, and other 
social programs which we have here across Canada — medicare 
— may well be a part of that. I wonder whether there has been 
some consensus as to what in fact is going to be on the table and 
can you update us as to what is on the table. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Again, I would not make any internal 
negotiations we have public. But I think the statements by Simon 
Reisman two days ago, following his meeting with Mr. Murphy in 
Washington, was number one, that the auto pact was not on the 
table. And I think the words he put it, “If it ain’t broke, why fix it;” 
and number two, he said social programs are not being negotiated 
and will not be negotiated. And he say that very, very 
emphatically, as has the Prime Minister. 
 
The interesting part about that whole question, it seems to me, is I 
have never been able to understand how people could determine 
whatever kind of health care program we have in Saskatchewan, 
what that’s got to do with free trade, because I don’t think it has 
any bearing on trade whatsoever. It’s a particular way that we deal 
in this country with various social programs and I think that the 
way the process is, is you have to be able to establish that it has 
some relationship to trade, and we don’t believe that there’s any 
chance of the U.S. doing this. 
 
So I think both the statements made by Mr. Reisman and  

our own particular information and evidence which show that the 
social programs are not at risk with this at all. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to join with the minister 
who welcomed the gentlemen from Israel here, as one who has 
family in a Yushiva in Israel now and I would wish them much 
success and nokous on what they’re about to do. Thank you. 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can the minister 
indicate what is the trade position between Canada and the United 
States at the present time? I understand that we have a trade 
imbalance in our favour of a very substantial benefit — some $20 
billion, if I’m not mistaken. But perhaps you could better explain 
the trade position between United States and Canada at the present 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the trade imbalance today between 
Canada and the United States is about $24 billion off-side and 
Canada’s ahead by $24 billion. 
 
That figure can be distorted if you want to get into some statistics. 
On a current account basis it’s somewhat less than that. And then 
you have to measure, perhaps, flows of interest rates, flows of 
dividends, that type of thing, back and forth. 
 
Obviously the U.S. trade imbalance is about $148 billion, of which 
Japan is the largest at about almost 50 billion, and Canada is the 
next largest at 24 billion. So obviously we’re a fairly large player 
in that game. That imbalance is fairly high, but we think that that 
doesn’t tell the whole story. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well we have a reasonably favourable position 
when it comes to trading with our largest partner, the United 
States. I guess the question that I ask you and many people ask is: 
are we going to be able to improve that? Is that what we’re aiming 
for? Or have we really awakened a mighty giant which will in fact 
start examining it now and may in fact decrease our position 
relative to where we are at the present time? 
 
I wonder what you expect out of the trade talks — an 
improvement of the position, a consolidation of it, or whether the 
United States will in fact start to take a look at the imbalance and 
we’ll have perhaps more problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think there’s two things to say. Number 
one, American protectionism is growing, and everybody knows 
that. And that didn’t start because we decided to enter into trade 
negotiations with them. That started some time ago. And from 
Saskatchewan’s point of view, what we want to do is try to ensure 
that the things  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2203 
 
 
 

that we trade with United States continue on a free market basis, in 
the sense that softwood lumber, potash, uranium, farm machinery 
manufacture, beef and hogs, primarily, other agriculture products, 
etc., other manufacturing products within this province, can 
continue to trade back and forth. 
 
Now that imbalance. Obviously the biggest player in the trade 
imbalance, of Canadian provinces, is Ontario. They trade far more 
and they make up the lion’s share of the trade imbalance between 
Canada and the United States. So from that point of view Ontario 
is by and far the largest player in the trade imbalance. A goodly 
chunk of that is the auto pact. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well there’s no doubt I want a great deal more in 
a topic of major importance to the future of our province, and 
indeed our country — the topic of free trade. 
 
But I am amazed at the position of your government again. We’re 
at the table already and negotiating, and only yesterday or the day 
before the Premier established a commission — three 
commissioners — and the three commissioners are Cy 
MacDonald, Wakabayashi, and Elizabeth Anderson. I wonder 
what is the process here. 
 
I would have thought that if you’re wanting people to give input, 
that before the trade talks commenced, before as you have already 
indicated, you have done your analysis. Now what you’re saying 
is you’re going out to get input having already made up your 
mind. That has to be the position, because if that’s not the position, 
then the only other position is that you’re not prepared and the 
talks are under way. 
 
There’s only two conclusions. If you have done all your 
homework, and you’re at the table, and you’re making your input 
to the federal negotiator, that’s one position. Or is the position that 
you haven’t done your homework, and now your setting up a 
commission to go around the province to get input to determine 
what your position is, and you’re already negotiating. 
 
And the amazing . . . if you can feature what is happening . . . Well 
I’m going to allow you to explain that process, because it seems to 
me that if anyone was watching from the outside, they would think 
that you haven’t done your homework, or else you’re doing some 
kind of a facade, a pretence of getting a political cause to try to 
perhaps convince people now of the position that you have taken 
and are dedicated to, but you can’t be getting new information, 
because then you aren’t prepared at the negotiating tables. I’d like 
you to give us your interpretation of what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The trade negotiations, as I indicated to the 
hon. member, the trade negotiations will be getting into the more 
significant trade-offs and downright crunching about November of 
this year, and that’s when we’re going to get into it. 
 
Now the trade commission that will have a series of five or six 
hearings in the province in August will serve two purposes. 
Purpose number one will be used to educate and talk to various 
people that have an interest in the 

trade, one way or the other. The second dimension of it is that any 
specific things as they get down to the finer tune, finer points of it, 
as to the mood of the population with regards to what they might 
do on trade-offs, etc. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now you have three commissioners named. I was 
wondering whether you could indicate what are the terms and 
arrangements made in respect to each of them. Mr. Cy MacDonald 
I’m familiar with. Perhaps you could . . . Isabelle Anderson is an 
assistant professor. I’d like to know a little bit about her 
background. And what are the arrangements for paying the 
expenses for the commission to do its tour, and what is the 
estimated cost of the tour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The only one that would receive a per 
diem out of it would be Isabelle Anderson. It’s about $250 a day 
for the days that they are sitting. Any other work that she would do 
would be paid on that type of a basis as well. It would be our 
understanding that, because the hearings are going to be for a 
period of time, a fairly short period of time, that the cost would not 
be very excessive — perhaps $20,000 at the most. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are there any advertising associated with the 
commission hearing, and is there a budget associated with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Only the notices of meetings. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is your position consistent with that of the 
Premier in that he indicated that he’s going to set up a commission 
that will go around in a very short period of time, as you indicate, 
to gather information, I take it. 
 
What particular information are you seeking from these hearings? 
Who do you expect will be giving you the advice in respect to the 
complicated problems of trade in respect to relationship with the 
United States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can go through a list of people that 
have phoned and expressed a desire to advance their particular 
views: Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, who have commissioned a 
study on trade; Ipsco; the trucking industry; software computer 
manufacturers; the farm machinery manufacturers; the forest 
industry; potash industry; the uranium industry; various other 
agriculture sectors; Consumers’ Association of Canada, 
Saskatchewan division. Consumers’ association have expressed 
from the price of consumer goods. And then the various list goes 
on — various agriculture groups. 
 
Then we’ll also probably have opinions from various labour 
groups as to their particular positions. And the labour unions, I 
suppose, split one way or the other. The IWA (International 
Woodworkers of America), for example, are strong supports of 
free trade. Some of the public sector unions are against free trade. 
I suppose we’ll have hearings from the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business who have expressed a desire because they 
have just polled their membership on the question, and that is 
representing very many of the small businesses around this 
province. 
 
So those are the types of people who have expressed an interest. I 
suspect that you will also have the United  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2204 
 
 
 

Church and some of those people that perhaps have a different 
view. And so we would hear all of them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So basically what you’re doing is going out with 
the commission and getting an opinion whether they agree or 
disagree on the position that you have put forward. Is that what 
you’re doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We’ll get their view on their particular 
sector. For example, the trucking industry might say, we endorse 
trade relationships but we want . . . a specific point that you might 
make as it relates to the trucking industry when you’re dealing 
with the federal government, or with the U.S., that there’s 
particular elements that the trucking industry want done here, here, 
or here. Some of the restrictions — let’s say that the state of 
Oklahoma or state of Montana put on truckers from Canada and 
how it becomes impossible for us to compete. That type of thing 
would come. Small-business men maybe say, well the 
procurement policy of a particular state might be this and we have 
poor time to get access to it. 
 
That’s the type of information I think you’re likely to garner from 
those hearings, and I think that’s a worthwhile exercise. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you think it might have been valuable before 
you formulated your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The position that I indicate to you is that 
we by and large want to see more trade opportunities with the 
United States, number one; and we want to see them not put on 
countervails on a lot of the very fundamental products we have. 
Now that’s a stated position of the government. That’s not going 
to change because it relates to a given industry, let’s say the 
brewery industry or the chicken and feathers industry or whatever 
you call it. Those types of things might have a specific concern 
that they have, that there’s a very small print on the particular 
negotiations or deal that might be struck, and so that we want to be 
cognizant of and be able to fight their particular cause. 
 
What I’ve said is, we’ve taken an overall position that we want 
free access to that U.S. market and that’s very important for us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One never knows how accurate press releases are, 
but I want to indicate to you that it says here, “Premier Devine 
says study on free trade may change his mind.” Is that the impact 
that this here commission tour is going to have? Is this going to, or 
is it an exercise of trying to get some public support to the free 
trade discussions which you have initiated and the position you 
have already taken? 
 
I suspect, Mr. Minister, that you have done a poll and the people 
are not totally with you. In fact the recent poll is that it has 
decreased from 78 per cent to about 50-50 right now. That’s the 
position and that’s the recent poll. And you have concern that 
you’ve hung yourself out to dry without a lot of detailed research 
into the consequences. 
 
What you’re doing here with the commission is really a public 
relations effort. It’s a pretence of getting input from  

people. Because if you were serious about getting input, you 
would have done it prior to the commencement of the talks, 
because that’s when you should have had it, their input. Because if 
it’s worth setting up the commission to get the information, it’s 
worth having it before you put your position forward to the federal 
government. 
 
And I can’t understand how the Premier can stand up and say that 
if he goes around . . . What he’s really saying is, if I’m cornered, 
I’m going to change my . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Going to run. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . I’m going to run. That’s what he’s saying. 
Now I think that the people of Saskatchewan want to know if that 
is a fact, that if you go and have these hearings for a very short 
period of time, meet with some of the groups that you’ve 
suggested, and you don’t get unanimity, or if the public isn’t fully 
in support or understand completely, that your position can 
change? That’s what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — First of all, I think that you would not be 
fair to say that the Premier’s press release said that; it didn’t say 
that. What it did say is that . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, but I 
was at the press conference — if you want the information as to 
how that arose. 
 
We had a question from one of the great political geniuses of the 
world, Larry Johnsrude, from Saskatoon, who said: if everybody 
at these hearings is against free trade, are you going to still go 
forward with it? If everybody in the province is against free trade, 
were against it . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, that was simply 
the reaction to it. The reaction was to a question by Johnsrude. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I can only put to you this. If a process to 
canvass Saskatchewan public opinion comes out — to canvass 
public opinion — comes out squarely opposed to free trade 
negotiations with the United States, Premier Grant Devine says he 
will reconsider his position on the issue. That’s really political 
leadership — real political leadership. Because he says, I’m for 
free trade. And they’re running into problems, as Premier Getty 
has indicated, because of the congressional elections this fall and 
the protectionism that is developing in the United States as a result 
of this. And we’re getting close to an election here too. 
 
And what he is saying here is, what’s wrong? Why keep to a 
principle? We’re going to have flexibility on this. Because, if we 
call an election and our polls say that free trade is not going to sell, 
we want to be able to send this commission out and say, well the 
public’s not ready for it yet, and change their position. Because 
that’s what he said. 
 
That’s real leadership — terrific leadership on the part of the 
Premier and this government. A lot of confidence the public 
should have sending those or having at the head of the province 
someone with such convictions — such tremendous convictions 
— that polls can, in a major issue, change his mind. That’s what 
he’s saying. That’s what he’s saying and the facts are in fact 
clearly set out  
  



 
June 20, 1986 

 

2205 
 
 
 

here. That’s the concern that we have. 
 
There’s a tremendous amount more, Mr. Minister — and you 
might want to comment on that, fair enough — that we can talk 
about in respect to the free trade issue. But we will have an 
opportunity also to discuss it with the Premier during his 
estimates. And certainly I appreciate your comments on it. So I 
think we’ll close with that comment. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
(1600) 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d just like to ask the minister, is this the area in 
which the advertising budget would be found, in this subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 19 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 19 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I thank the officials and I enjoyed the 
debate with the member opposite. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:05 p.m. 
 
 


