



















































Hansard: March 17, 1986


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 17, 1986 

4391 

 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

PROROGATION 
 

At 10:02 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

His Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to thank you 

and congratulate you on the work you have done. 

 

In this fourth session of the twentieth legislature you have passed legislation to respond to the challenges and 

opportunities facing this great province. 

 

In recognition of the importance of agriculture sector, you have passed The Farm Land Security Act to protect 

the family farm. In order to assist farmers who are adversely affected by low commodity prices and poor 

production, you have amended the Act respecting the Agriculture Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, which 

will provide farmers with low interest cash operating loans. As well, you also have passed an Act to transfer 

royalties from oil resources to farmers in the form of refunds in respect to fuel costs. 

 

As part of your continuing commitment to reduce unemployment, you have enacted legislation creating the 

Employment Development Agency, thereby ensuring a consistent government-wide strategy to meet the 

employment needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You have passed The Mental Health Services Act to ensure that the rights of patients are adequately protected. 

 

You also have passed The Film and Video Classification Act, in recognition of the need to provide parents with 

discretionary power to protect their families. 

 

In recognition of the need to protect the people of Saskatchewan from dangerous chemical spills on our 

highways, you have passed an Act respecting the Transportation of Dangerous Goods in Saskatchewan. 

 

In taking leave of you, I thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the activities of 

the Session and wish you the full blessing of Providence. 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure 

of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued until late today, the 17th 

day of March, 1986, at 2 o’clock p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:06 a.m. 


