


















































May 9, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 9, 1986 
 

1187 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, a group 
of 28 students from Preeceville School, sitting in the Speaker’s 
gallery. They’re accompanied today by Mr. Lorne Plaxin and Mr. 
Gwyn Watkins, two of their teachers; their chaperons, Mrs. 
Marion Milette, Mrs. Joanne Chernyk, Mr. John Maslow, and 
Mrs. Lorna Brodziak. I hope that you find question period very 
interesting this morning after the Alberta election. I think that 
there will be some excitement here this morning. I’m going to 
meet with you at about 10:30 for pictures and refreshments, and 
I want to welcome you all here today. Will everyone join me in 
their welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may, I’d 
like to add a word of welcome to the students from Preeceville 
and, in particular, Mr. Plaxin, an old friend of mine. My first 
teaching position 20 years ago was in the town of Preeceville, a 
nice area. the MLA for Canora has graciously invited me to join 
you for a few minutes at the end of question period for 
refreshments and discussion. I take him up on the invitation, and 
I look forward to meeting with you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would, too, like 
to join with the member from Canora and the member who just 
spoke in extending greetings to the students and the chaperons 
and teachers from Preeceville. Preeceville is the school that my 
wife attended, and I know that she has a lot of fond memories 
about the school and the community, which we visit quite often. 
And I would just like to say on behalf of her and myself, welcome 
to the students who are here, and to also hope that they have an 
interesting time in the legislature and an interesting visit in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Payments to SGI Board of Directors 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. At a time when your government is 
cutting public services, raising taxes, and still running a $2 billion 
deficit, can the minister explain why there has been a 65 per cent 
increase in the amount paid by SGI to its board of directors over 
the past two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, there was quite a bit of noise 
from his colleagues there. I missed the very part . . . 65 per cent 
increase in which?

Mr. Shillington: — There was no noise, Mr. Minister; you 
weren’t paying attention. 
 
It is an increase of about 65 per cent in the amount paid by SGI 
to its board of directors over the past years. When your 
government is running a deficit and cutting public services, when 
you’re unable to provide fresh food for people of northern 
Saskatchewan, when food banks are overrun in the cities in 
southern Saskatchewan, how do you justify such largess for your 
own friends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member would have 
been in Crown Corporations Committee yesterday he would have 
had the sheet of paper and heard the explanation that I gave at 
that time. 
 
There were more meetings of the board of directors of SGI; there 
were more committee meetings, such as the safety committee on 
the Lights On For Life program, which I indicated yesterday in 
the House is meant for safety, and that committee has done a lot 
of very good work in developing the Lights On For Life program. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, when the member alleges that taxes 
have gone up in this province, I’d like to remind him of the many 
tax reductions, the latest of which is the E&H tax removed on 
clothing under $300, added to the gasoline tax removal. And, 
indeed, when you look at the budget preparations, indeed the 
province of Saskatchewan is next to none in all of Canada for tax 
increases in this country. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll tell you, this company is second to none 
for a Crown corporation, and it’s more a director’s fee. 
 
New question, Mr. Speaker. I have the information that was 
tabled in Crown corporations, and that is what I found so 
outrageous. Let me just remind you of some of the totals paid to 
some of these hard-working individuals. 
 
Mr. Henson — $12,000; MacLean — 10,000; Nicholson — 
17,000; Wagar — 12,000 for 10 meetings. Mr. Minister, we have 
the information that’s tabled. How do you justify . . . this is 
public money, this is not a private company. How do you justify 
spending public money in such a lavish fashion for a few of your 
friends and not providing the basic necessities of life, fresh food, 
for people of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only incumbent 
when the member reads that kind of information he gives the 
whole story; the number of meetings — compare it to the years 
before. And I think also, Mr. Speaker, it might be a good time to 
mention just the performance of the board of governors of SGI 
and the management of SGI, and what has gone on for the past 
four years under this administration as opposed to the last four 
under the NDP. I remember very clearly rate increases of 
approximately 20 per cent in 1980; 28 per cent under the NDP in 
1981. At the same time they raised their deductible from $200 to 
$350, and they lost money. Their rate stabilization reserve was 
negative. That’s the management that came 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1188 
 

under them. 
 
Under this board of directors, of SGI under the Progressive 
Conservative government, we’re seeing things like a large rate 
stabilization reserve. We’re seeing a decrease in the rates of the 
auto fund. We’re seeing surpluses there. We’re seeing good 
management. And when you’re talking about taxpayers’ money, 
I’ll compare the performance under this administration and these 
books than any of the ones in the last four years of the NDP 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. By that logic, 
Mr. Minister, you ought to double the fees of the board of 
directors of the potash corporation, and maybe they’d stop losing 
so much money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, since you’re prepared to 
justify this, I want to pick an example. One Henson, struggled 
into seven of 12 board meetings and, for making it to seven of 12 
board meetings, you felt necessary to reward him with a sum of 
$12,000. Would you tell me what Mr. Henson’s qualifications 
are that he deserves an average of an $1,000 a meeting — more 
than that — about $1,500 a meeting for attending only seven of 
12 board meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to follow 
the ridiculous logic of the member for Regina Centre, if we’re 
paying money to our board of directors that are coming back with 
performances like these, I submit that their board of directors 
under the NDP should have been paying to SGI to go to those 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wanted not some silly 
nonsense. I wanted to know why you think you have to 
compensate this man $12,000 for attending seven board meetings 
and perhaps some committee meetings as well, I don’t know. 
Why do you think his time is so invaluable that he has to be paid 
that kind of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly the per 
diems and that, that are paid to board of directors for SGI, has not 
changed that much in the last whole bunch of years. I guess the 
change is that we have got a lot of people in there — he mentions 
Mr. Henson; Mr. Nicholson has been mentioned before — a lot 
of very good people on there that are making a very solid 
contribution towards the running of our Crown corporation SGI. 
And I might also mention the chairmanship of Mr. Al Wagar. 
 
And I think it’s incumbent, when we’re looking at the taxpayers 
of the province of Saskatchewan, we have these Crown 
corporations. They are out there performing a need in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I hope, Mr. Member, that when 
you’re talking about these kind of things you look at the bottom 
line. 
 
I sat in Crown Corporations yesterday for three and a half hours. 
Not once was there a question about the financial position of SGI 
— not once. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the

NDP want to talk about anything good. They’re probably 
lamenting the latest rain that’s out there right now as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. By way of background let me 
suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the explanation for these per 
diems is that this is the first opportunity the Tory hogs have had 
at the trough in 50 years, and it’s going to be the last, and you’re 
going to make good use of it. And that’s what you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s exactly what you’re doing. Let me 
pick another — Mr. Nicholson, who attended 10 of 12 board 
meetings. He struggled in to 80 per cent of the board meetings. 
You felt it necessary to pay him $17,000. May we have his 
qualifications and his expertise in the insurance industry? Would 
you give us that, and save us the speeches about how well you’ve 
done with SGI and what a mess it was for the first 40 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t claim SGI was a 
mess for the first 40 years, but there’s probably about 11 that I 
could pick out of that 40 that I could really relate to. 
 
You know, he mentions Mr. Nicholson now, and certainly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, he mentions Mr. Nicholson, and 
yesterday I explained that he is the chairman of the safety 
committee of the board of directors for SGI. And they have 
implemented a program called Lights On For Life. Some of you 
might be aware of that. It was brought in and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The House cannot operate with 
the amount of noise that we’re having. And I’m going to ask for 
order on both sides of the House so this House can perform its 
duties here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — As I say, Mr. Nicholson is the chairman of 
the safety committee of the board of directors of SGI. And they 
have had numerous meetings over the past few years to develop 
the Lights On For Life program. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
yesterday in question period, the Lights On For Life program are 
coming in with very good results as far as awareness is 
concerned. And the number of collisions in the province is down, 
and indeed the number of fatalities. And indeed you can’t relate 
it directly to a program because it’s impossible to directly 
affiliate, but I believe it has something to do with it. 
 
And like I mentioned yesterday, I go around the province, people 
are asking, what are the results of the Lights On For Life 
program? Is it helping in our province? They’re concerned with 
safety. And like I mentioned yesterday, not once has an NDP 
member ever mentioned the word “safety,” what are the results. 
They don’t care about safety; they’re looking at the money 
involved. 
 
And I’ll just reiterate once again the financial position of SGI: 
the rate decreases that have gone on under this government as 
opposed to the rate increases of 20 per 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1189 
 

cent, 28 per cent; the increase in the deductible under them. And 
at the same time they had the gas tax on that went to SGI, and 
they still operated at a loss . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m going to caution the member 
for Quill Lakes. I just asked for order and you’ve been hollering 
continually, and I would caution you to control that. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister 
responsible for SGI. Mr. Minister, as the result of the Alberta 
election last night of which you’re well aware, and I understand 
that you spent $600,000 on your Lights On For Life campaign, 
have you and your colleagues decided what amount of money 
you’re going to spend on your “lights out” campaign? 
Something’s got to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how we can 
respond to this except, as I mentioned last night in my estimates, 
there’s an old saying that I’m reminded of, and that’s “They’re 
so far behind, they think they’re ahead.” 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, again to the 
Minister of SGI. Would you care to have me give you a hand this 
weekend when I go home to do a little bit of a poll, give you an 
idea of whether one’s on and one’s out, or whether they’re both 
out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of comments come to mind 
right now, but certainly there are usually two headlights on every 
car and there are a lot of headlights now on in our province due 
to the program for Lights On For Life, a program that’s brought 
in by this government for safety purposes. And if you want to 
look at it as a poll, we take it very seriously — issues such as 
safety. We’ll continue to do so and we’ll stand behind that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Air Travel — Frequent-Flyer Plans 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question 
to the Deputy Premier. It deals with the government’s policy 
respecting airline frequent-flyer plans. And on Tuesday, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, you said that it was government policy that 
employees who enrolled in such plans were not to use the bonus 
points for their own personal use but have them be used for 
government business. 
 
Yesterday you admitted that the policy had been violated by the 
president of Agdevco. Can the Deputy Premier tell the Assembly 
whether a recent trip to London by one Terry Leier was also in 
violation of the policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, Terry Leier doesn’t work 
for Agdevco or for the Provincial Secretary or for Sask Power or, 
to my knowledge, any of those things that I’m responsible for. 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know anything about a 
recent trip by Terry Leier to London. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary to the minister in charge 
of the Crown management board. Can you, Mr.

Minister, advise the Assembly whether a recent trip to London, 
England, by Terry Leier was in compliance with, or in violation 
of, the policy enunciated by the Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of any 
recent trip. If you could give me details of the time, I can check 
that particular thing out. 
 
With regards to when the question was taken, I checked, Mr. 
Speaker, with the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade, the department I am responsible for, and found that there 
were no people under that particular department that used the Air 
Canada plan, and I satisfied myself of that. I will undertake to 
check through CMB as to whether or not anybody used that plan. 
I would doubt that that’s the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Deputy Premier. Can you advise when the government’s policy, 
which you enunciated, I believe, yesterday in the House, was sent 
around to senior public servants. I find it difficult to believe that 
the policy had been circulated to Agdevco prior to Mr. Wells’ 
trip. And I ask you: when was this policy circulated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My recollection is, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was in April of 1985 that the deputy minister to the Premier 
informed all deputy ministers and department heads in 
government. My recollection as it relates to the timing of when 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . .Well, the hon. member from 
Regina North who is all wise — North East . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And he will structure his organization 
— heaven forbid that he should ever get back to this side of the 
House — so that he does have a deputy minister in charge of 
Agdevco. We don’t have a deputy minister in charge of Agdevco. 
We don’t have a deputy minister in charge of Agdevco; we have 
a president in CDO in charge of Agdevco. It’s a commercial 
Crown and a trading company and one that works very hard. And 
they spend a lot of time away from home travelling in eastern 
Europe and other parts of the world selling Saskatchewan, and 
do an excellent job. 
 
Now to get back to the question, Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of 
precisely when Mr. Wells became aware of the policy as it relates 
to these rewards through frequent traveller plans. The fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, that when he did become aware of the policy, he 
reimbursed the portion of his wife’s ticket — his wife’s ticket. 
And I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that his wife was an invited 
member of that delegation so, you know, there could well be a 
question as to whether she should have been paid for in the first 
place by the corporation. But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the minute 
that he became aware of the policy as it relates to frequent flyer 
programs, the corporation was reimbursed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Would you acknowledge that the reimbursement took place this 
week after the matter was raised in this legislature? 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1190 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I won’t acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, 
because quite frankly I didn’t ask the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you 
saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Crown corporation for 
which you are responsible and, you are asking us to believe, to 
which over a year ago a government policy in writing was 
circulated — that’s what I take; and if I’m wrong, please correct 
me — are you suggesting that when that came to your attention, 
you did not know when the reimbursement was made? Are you 
saying you don’t know when Wells reimbursed Agdevco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m saying that a written 
policy was circulated to all departments of government over a 
year ago, in April of 1985 — all departments of government, all 
deputy ministers and department heads. I did not say that the 
policy was extended to the Crowns at that time. I did say I don’t 
know when Mr. Wells became aware of that policy. I did say that 
the minute that he became aware, he reimbursed the Crown, the 
corporation, as it relates to that frequent-flyer program and that 
policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
Would you advise the House when the reimbursement was made, 
and will you acknowledge that it was made this week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge when 
it was made as soon as I find out when it was made, and I will 
direct the question to the Crown, and find out. I haven’t asked the 
specific question to the Crown, and I will undertake to find out 
for the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary, and I will 
direct it to the minister in charge of the Crown Management 
Board. Have all Crown corporations been advised of this 
government policy, and if so, when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of that 
question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the question 
becomes, Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not Crown Management 
Board — I take it from the basis of the hon. member’s question 
— as to whether Crown Management Board notified other 
Crown corporations. I took that to be the question of the hon. 
member, and that’s what I will undertake to do. 
 
The Crown Management Board is not in the business of sending 
out directives to every Crown corporation as to how and when 
they do it. I said I would undertake to see whether or not that was 
done. I think the observation made by the Deputy Premier was, 
as I understand, is that the Government of Saskatchewan — the 
Government of Saskatchewan, through the deputy minister to the 
Premier — sent out a notice to all deputy ministers, and that’s 
usually the flow of information with regards to that. 
 
The Crown Management Board does not send and does not deal 
with other Crown corporations in the same way that the deputy 
minister or the Premier deals with other deputy ministers, as you 
are perfectly aware of that. What I undertook to do for you is to 
indicate whether or not that policy flowed through the Crown 
corporations through

CMB. And I undertake to provide that information to bring it 
back to this House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Deputy premier. This has to do with the same issue and with the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, for which I believe you are 
the responsible minister. Can you advise us when that policy was 
made known to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, which 
does not have a deputy minister, and whether or not the policy 
has been applicable to that corporation, and for what period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll find out specifically 
and precisely when the policy was communicated to all those 
Crowns that I’m responsible for and make this House aware. 
 

Closing of Campsites in Province 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister in charge of parks and Renewable 
Resources. And it deals, Mr. Minister, with your . . . The question 
I’m asking, Mr. Speaker, is and it deals with the Minister of Parks 
and Renewable Resources, last week’s decision to close down 36 
campsites along our highways and roads. And just a very quick 
question, Mr. Minister. 
 
In view of the fact that these roadside campsites are very 
important to the tourism industry in our province, especially the 
one site that you have planned to close down in Beaupré Creek, 
which is a historic site, which was the first conservation officer’s 
home in that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, once again I ask you: will you reconsider your 
decision to close down the 36 campsites, and if not, later today 
would you provide the Assembly with a list of the 36 that you 
plan to close down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has 
referred to 36 campsites. I’d like to correct that misinterpretation. 
They are not campsites. Only 10 of 36 are campsites, involving 
75 camping spots. And, Mr. Speaker, these are not fully-serviced 
lots. We’re not talking about electrified lots. 
 
Before any decision was made, Mr. Speaker, on the 36 facilities 
. . . before any decision was made, we consulted with the 
Department of Highways, the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business, and there were 18 separate criteria used for evaluation. 
We were assured, Mr. Speaker, that there would be no harm 
whatsoever to tourism closing three primitive camping spots in a 
far northern part of Saskatchewan which is already very well 
serviced by a number of camping spots in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have tried to do in our rationalization is 
look at what the public wants for camping spots and for 
recreation sites. And what the public is telling us it they like 
having 17 provincial parks, fully modern, with showers and 
facilities like that; they like having 101 regional parks; and they 
like the 252 other camping facilities we provide in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are providing approximately 9,000 camping 
spots in Saskatchewan. I did some checking; that is the highest 
per capita in Canada. We are also 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1191 
 

scheduling, Mr. Speaker, the opening, the introduction of five 
new provincial parks. 
 
When we look at these facilities — and they are not campsites, 
only 10 of them are campsites, we’re talking of closing — we 
find they are totally underutilized. There will no staff cut, Mr. 
Speaker, and there will be an increase in service to the more 
popular areas. Things such as boat launching, access to lakes and 
access to fishing are in no way impeded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have had inquiries from communities and individual groups 
since it became public that some facilities would be closed, and 
those individuals have indicated to me that they might even be 
interested in taking them over and running them themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we anticipate generating savings of $100,000 per 
year with these measures. With $100,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, 
we feel we can redirect superior services to other cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of Renewable Resources. The question that I asked you, 
Mr. Minister, would you reconsider closing down these 
important campsites? You indicate that the department is closing 
them down due to a study that you took and that the sites are 
really not wanted, and another example you gave was that you 
were going to save $100,000. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 
is not true because those sites are very important, and you have 
letters on file from individuals from the communities who want 
them to remain open. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you once again: will you provide us with that 
list that you plan to close down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, in the Athabasca 
constituency, 16 sites providing 320 camp spots which will 
remain open. The hon. member referred to Beaupré campsite as 
being historic. It is not a historic site, Mr. Speaker, and there are 
three tenting spots available on that site. At Doré Lake, 16 
kilometres away, there are four sites with 43 camping spots 
available. 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, of the rationalization, in my own 
constituency there are three facilities which were scheduling to 
close, one of which by example is Bug Lake, which roughly 
corresponds to one of the ones the hon. member referred to in his 
remarks. 
 
But Lake, Mr. Speaker, is a small little area on a lake with three 
spots for tents, that is never used, and a couple of picnic sites. 
And I was saying, Mr. Speaker, we won’t be maintaining that site 
as a campground. The people, who use it, generally go there just 
to take bait out of the lake, or route to better camping facilities a 
few miles further down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Increase in Opportunities ’86 Program

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today as the 
minister responsible for the Employment Development Agency, 
and I’d like to make a statement concerning the initiatives being 
undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan to create jobs 
for Saskatchewan students this summer. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, I find it rather interesting that with the 
monthly job statistics having been released this morning, that in 
question period we didn’t have one question from the vigilant 
opposition on the item of job . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Ministerial statements are to be 
statements of what’s happening and not to enter into political 
debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, my apologies. 
First of all, I would also like to inform the members of this 
Assembly that the job creation record of the administration is 
again unmatched by any western province and, indeed, by any 
other province outside of Ontario. 
 
This morning’s information from Statistics Canada puts the 
actual unemployment rate in Saskatchewan at 8.2 per cent, a drop 
of 1.3 percentage points from last month, and on an unadjusted 
basis the rate has dropped to 7.6 per cent. In the month of April 
alone, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Statistics from Statistics 
Canada do not enter into a ministerial statement as new 
information. If there is something new that you have that deals 
with your department, I’d like to hear it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I assure you that the 
information that I’m preceding with is very relevant, but anyway 
I will come to the point. Earlier this year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Earlier this year I announced the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities ’86 program, a wage subsidy 
program designed to create summer jobs for post-secondary 
students and secondary students who intend to return to school in 
the fall. At that time I indicated that we intended to spend some 
$8.5 million to create jobs for up to 9,000 students. I also 
indicated that this program would be operated solely by the 
Saskatchewan government and that the federal government 
would operate its own summer creation program for students. 
 
The Opportunities programs, Mr. Speaker, were instituted by this 
administration in 1983. Opportunities ’83, ’84, and ’85 created a 
total of 17,230 jobs for summer students. Last year, looking at 
the results of a drought year, we, and the Government of Canada, 
co-operated in the Canada-Saskatchewan Opportunities ’85 
program that spent $9.1 million in creating 9,730 summer jobs 
for Saskatchewan students. 
 
This year the federal government decided to operate its own 
program of just over $3 million and we anticipate 15 . . . 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1192 
 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. This is 
ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister is patently talking about past 
programs. He’s not making any announcement. This is a straight 
political statement and it’s out of order in ministerial statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. When I’m on my feet I’ll ask the 
members to be absolutely quiet. Ministerial statements are to be 
new information provided from a department. The member is 
covering areas that I have cautioned you were not classified as 
ministerial statements. If there is some new information, I’ll take 
that. Otherwise I would ask the member to refrain from speaking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I assure you there’s very 
significant new information, but in order for the impact to be 
understood, some of the background at least has to be presented. 
 
The Saskatchewan government, considering the effects of a 
second year of drought and the effects of lower oil prices in the 
oil patch, decided that last year’s program, large as it was, might 
not meet the need this year. 
 
In order to ensure that students who wish to continue their 
education have the opportunity to do so, we have announced 
measures to improve our students’ assistance program in a 
greatly increased Opportunities ’86 program. In this fiscal year 
we will increase expenditures for student assistance by 45 per 
cent to over $60 million. 
 
Our announced $8.5 million Opportunities ’86 program, Mr. 
Speaker, will provide an increase of over 27 per cent in funding 
for student employment. The deadline for filing applications to 
the Opportunities ’86 program was this past Monday, May 5. As 
of this morning, we have already processed 5,500 applications 
and approved just over 8,000 summer jobs for Saskatchewan 
students, at a projected expenditure of $8.4 million. 
 
Response to the Opportunities ’86 program has exceeded even 
our increased expectations. As of yesterday we had received 
about 2,000 applications that had been mailed by the closing date, 
over and above the ones that we have now approved. I am, 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, pleased to announce that the Government 
of Saskatchewan will increase the budget of the Opportunities 
’86 program by a further $2 million . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — . . . to a total of $10.5 million, thus 
allowing us to respond to all of the applications that had been 
mailed in by the program’s closing date. This will bring the total 
of jobs created by the Opportunities ’86 program to over 11,000, 
and the total number of summer jobs created . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order.

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder how long this 
Assembly is going to be forced to listen to a political speech by 
the minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! When I’m on my feet, 
I’m going to caution the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
not to be hollering. 
 
If the members had been listening, you would have heard the 
minister announcing just now a $2 million increase in the 
program. That is the point of the ministerial statement. Now the 
minister has gone on excessively long, and I would ask him to 
finalize the statement immediately. And in the future ministerial 
statements must be short and to the point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In summary 
I once again indicate that because of the demand that we have 
received for this program, which has significant benefits to the 
students of the province as well as to many small-business men 
and farmers and communities in the province, we have increased 
the total budget by $2 million. We will be providing somewhere 
in the area of 13,000 jobs, which is an increase of 33 per cent 
over last year’s program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, what we have just heard is a 
complete abuse of the rules of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, all we have that is new is an 
updated estimate of what this program is going to cost us. Everything 
that was said this morning was announced months ago, and all we 
have is an updated estimate of the costs. 
 
I don’t intend to dignify what has happened this morning by making 
the same mistake of carrying on with a 15 minute diatribe, Mr. 
Speaker. Suffice it to say that if this government thinks it’s good 
politics in a time of food banks and record unemployment rates in 
this province . . . if you think it’s good politics to stand up and beat 
your chest and say what a grand job you’re doing, then maybe we 
just ought to let you, in spite of the fact that this is contrary to the 
rules. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1193 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proposing 
amendments to The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, and copies of 
the proposed amendments have been distributed to members. 
 
The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act requires lenders and sellers to 
disclose credit charges in writing. The Act coverts provincially 
regulated lenders such as credit unions and trust and loan 
companies. It also covers sellers such as department stores or 
farm implement dealers who finance purchases. These are 
sometimes called line lenders. 
 
Banks, which are regulated by the federal government, are 
allowed to offer variable loans. As a result, banks have had a 
competitive advantage over provincially regulated financial 
institutions. Current legislation prevents provincial institutions 
from offering variable interest loans because their cost of 
borrowing cannot be expressed in advance in dollars and cents, 
as is required by the Act. 
 
The proposed amendment is intended to clarify the Act and 
update it to reflect market-place realities. Specifically, it is 
proposed that variable rate loans be allowed subject to very strict 
conditions. 
 
For example, let us suppose a consumer wants to borrow money 
from a trust company. The consumer now will have a choice 
between a loan with a fixed interest rate and one with an interest 
rate, usually lower, that rises and falls with the Bank of Canada 
rate. If the rate falls, the consumer will be better off than if he 
had taken a loan with a fixed interest rate. If the rate rises, the 
consumers’ cost of borrowing would of course rise, and it is to 
address this point that this amendment contains a number of 
safeguards. 
 
These safeguards require the lender or seller to make certain 
disclosures to ensure the consumer fully understands the 
implications of taking out a loan with a variable interest rate. The 
conditions we will be imposing include the following 
requirements: one, a clear statement that the interest rate and 
other factors can vary; secondly, the borrower or the buyer is 
allowed to pay the outstanding balance without penalty; three, 
examples of cost of borrowing are set out; and four, statements 
are sent out at least every six months. 
 
If a lender does not fulfil all these conditions, Mr. Speaker, the 
borrower or the buyer may not have to pay the cost of borrowing. 
Permitting variable interest rate lending or financing will benefit 
both consumers and provincial industries affected by this 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, variable rate loans are not new. However, there is 
growing consumer demand for the flexibility variable rate loans 
provide. The proposed amendments

do not affect the civil rights of Saskatchewan citizens. No 
additional administrative or other public costs are required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is one that will be welcome by 
provincially regulated credit unions and trust and loan 
companies, I’m sure. I move second reading of The Cost of 
Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I thank the minister 
for what I think was a fairly full explanation of the detail of the 
Bill. 
 
She made one comment in closing that I thin is very accurate, and 
that is that the Bill is going to be welcomed by the trust 
companies and the banks. You bet your boots it will be. You bet 
your boots it will be, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I grant you there are certain difficulties which 
have arisen with respect to this Bill. But I say to . . . I yell; I try 
to yell above members opposite — including the Minister of 
Finance, who ought to know better, who is the dean of this House 
and ought to know better — I say to members opposite that this 
Bill is not in the best interests of consumers, Madam Minister. 
And this Assembly has to decide whether or not we exist for the 
benefit of the banks or the benefit of the people, because the two 
interests, I think, do not coincide here. 
 
(1045) 
 
I know there’s a problem with the existing Bill. It was brought 
into existence some 17 years ago, 18 years ago, at a period of 
time when all interest rates were fixed. But it served a useful 
purpose in that it gave to the consumers clear and concise 
information with respect to what they were paying. 
 
They could understand the cost of borrowing, and, in my 
experience, most people who get into financial difficulty don’t 
understand the cost of borrowing; they don’t understand what the 
interest rate is going to mean to them and how quickly it’s going 
to overcome them. And that is why so many people who borrow 
get into trouble. This Bill attempted to deal with this, and the 
minister is gutting the Bill with this amendment. It will no longer 
provide that information to people. 
 
The important point of the Bill was that people got . . . Well the 
minister is shaking her head in disgust. The important point of 
the Bill was, you got this information in advance. It doesn’t do 
you a lot of good to find out afterwards you couldn’t pay the bill; 
you couldn’t pay the loan off. That’s not very useful. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if this . . . I say now in a non-partisan 
fashion, I wonder if this is a Bill we should be passing at this 
session. I wonder if it wouldn’t be a better procedure to refer this 
Bill to a special committee of the legislature and have the Bill 
considered. It touches upon some difficult, complex matters. I 
know the banks want it passed today, but I don’t think the 
consumers, if they understand it, want it passed today. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1194 
 

I’ll ask Madam Minister to stop yelling till I’m finished. I listened 
with interest and quietly while she was talking. I ask for the same 
courtesy, Madam Minister. Well now she’s saying some things 
that are downright unpleasant. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if it wouldn’t be a better idea to let 
this Bill stand, refer it to a committee, and consider the matter, 
because it raises some complex issues. The consumers should 
know and should know in advance what the total cost of a loan is 
going to be, and they should have an opportunity to figure out 
whether or not then can afford it. If they can’t understand the cost 
of borrowing, they’ll never know whether or not they can afford 
it. That’s simple logic. This Bill attempted to deal with this. 
You’re gutting the Bill. 
 
You might argue that the Bill was gutted by events, and I think 
largely it has been. The Bill has been ignored for 10 years. 
Variable lending rates have been the common practice, and the 
Bill has been ignored, and it hasn’t been enforced except by some 
sharp-eyed borrowers and their lawyers, on occasion, who have 
used the Bill to avoid paying interest. So I’m not claiming . . . 
I’m not making a great argument for the Bill as it stands. It’s not 
working and it’s probably unworkable, but the principle of the 
Bill is one that we should seek to preserve. 
 
That is why I say, Madam Minister, I would ask you to consider 
referring . . . letting the Bill stand over, perhaps referring it to a 
special committee of the legislature. Let us consider the matter. 
It is complex and it’s very important. It’s not something . . . This 
is one of those areas when a government can fall into the trap of 
listening to the lobbyists. The banks and the trust companies have 
every means available to make their views known to the ministers 
and the department. They’re very effective lobbyists. The people 
who can’t pay their debts don’t have that, and their voices are 
silent, but they are legion. 
 
So I’m going to in a moment ask for leave to adjourn this debate 
to give it further consideration. But while I am reviewing the Bill, 
I want to ask of the minister and the treasury benches opposite 
that you consider giving this Bill a good deal of serious study, 
because the original principle embodied in the Bill is well worth 
preserving. 
 
With those comments, Mr. speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Credit Reporting Agencies 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, The Credit Reporting 
Agencies Act, 1986 has been provided to the hon. members. This 
Bill will replace the current legislation, The Credit Reporting 
Agencies Act, which is to be repealed. 
 
The Bill does not include licensing and bonding provisions. All 
references to licensing and bonding are removed. In all other 
respects the proposed legislation is identical to the existing 
legislation. 
 
Hon. members will appreciate that the new legislation

continues to protect consumers by prohibiting undesirable credit 
reporting practices. As well, legal remedies are granted 
consumers for incorrect or false information supplied by credit 
reporting agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bonding provisions of the former legislation 
have never been used because credit reporting agencies do not 
actually handle or receive people’s money. The agencies affect 
consumers’ credit ratings, not their finances, so bonding does not 
protect consumers. Consumers can still check their files and 
correct or challenge the contents. Consumers may also seek legal 
remedies for libel and slander outside this Act. 
 
The role of licensing is to identify credit reporting agencies 
operating in Saskatchewan. Licensing is unnecessary for this 
purpose because the three agencies operating in the province 
must register under The Business Corporations Act or The 
Business Name Registration Act. The new Act will save 
Saskatchewan taxpayers money because of administrative 
savings. The revenue generated by licensing only three agencies 
barely, if at all, covers the cost of issuing the licences. 
 
The new legislation is yet another example of the government’s 
common sense approach to governing. We are doing away with 
an unnecessary licensing function and its attendant 
administrative costs with no compromise, Mr. Speaker, of any 
kind in consumer protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of our commitment to better 
legislation, not more legislation. No part of the Bill gives powers 
which interfere with the civil rights of Saskatchewan citizens. I 
would be pleased to go into further detail respecting the Bill in 
committee of the whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Credit Reporting 
Agencies Act, 1986. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, all I can say is, if you’re 
serious about what you said, I hope this session is truncated by 
an early election and this Bill is never passed. 
 
Madam Minister, you may not have enforced the bonding 
provisions; I don’t know. But let me give Madam Minister some 
assistance with what bonding and licensing is supposed to do. 
Bonding is not supposed to just protect the consumers’ money. 
It’s also supposed to ensure that (a) the legislation is obeyed, 
since the bonds are forfeited if you don’t; (b) anyone who suffers 
damages can collect it. 
 
At the hands of an irresponsible credit reporting agency, people 
can suffer enormous damages. The purpose of the bonds was 
supposed to be that it would ensure that people who were injured, 
got judgement, could collect it. That’s what a bond is supposed 
to do. Licensing was never intended to assist people in 
identifying a company. Of course that’s available elsewhere. It’s 
a lot easier to find through the registrar’s branch than it is through 
your licensing system. 
 
Licensing is an enforcement provision. If you disobey the 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1195 
 

legislation, you lose your licence; it’s that simple. It’s the only 
way of enforcing this legislation against companies who often 
have very few assets in this province. The only way you have of 
dealing with agencies, credit reporting agencies, whose assets 
and whose business is in another jurisdiction, is licensing. You 
cannot effectively discipline them in any other fashion. 
 
To remove the licensing provision removes any ability to enforce 
this legislation, Madam Minister. And I’m surprised that Madam 
Minister has been a minister for three years now, if I’m correct, 
and understands so little of the consumer protection legislation. 
 
Madam Minister, I may change my views, and our caucus may 
come to a different conclusion, but as I stand here now I’m not 
impressed with this legislation as you explain it. The purpose of 
this department is not . . . Well the Minister of Tourism and Small 
Business is going to have lots of opportunity to get into the debate 
later in the day in your estimates. I wonder if you could just 
maintain yourself and contain yourself for a few minutes until we 
have these Bills out of the order paper. 
 
Madam Minister, the function of your department is not to make 
life easier for credit reporting agencies; the function of your 
department is to protect consumers. When you remove the bonds 
and you remove the licensing provision, you might as repeal the 
Act, because there is nothing left of it, and no means of enforcing 
it. 
 
I think I am correct in saying that no credit reporting agency has 
its head office in this province. They’re all in Toronto and New 
York. And you, madam Minister, if you . . . If the Minister of 
Justice is around, and he’s not . . . He’s very ready with advice 
when he is, but he’s not at the moment. The Minister of Justice 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member realizes that you’re 
not allowed to draw attention to members that are here or not 
here, and I would ask the member to stay with the subject. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wasn’t doing so in a pejorative sense, 
although it might have sounded like it. I was making the point to 
the Madam Minister that it’s fairly elemental law. There’s no 
means of enforcing our provisions against people who aren’t in 
this province. Legislation under our system of law can have no 
extra-territoriality. The only way you can enforce it is to license 
them; you’re taking that away, in my view — and I may change 
it. In a more studied view, I may have a different view, but in my 
view now is, you mustn’t repeal the Act. I don’t know what 
you’re leaving the legislation in place for. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m going to again ask for leave to adjourn this. 
Again, I wonder if madam Minister wouldn’t reconsider it and 
perhaps when you’re reconsidering it, perhaps let this Bill stand 
over as well until another session and allow people an 
opportunity to make representations on it. I don’t think it’s in the 
best interest of consumers. With that, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 

Debate adjourned.

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, last day 
in Tourism you gave a statistic that $1 worth of advertising buys 
exactly $12.40 cents worth of goods. I asked you how you’d 
arrived at that figure; whose number is that? And you have failed 
to give that answer. I would like to get the source of that statistic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the 
delay. We have an official coming down from the upstairs 
balcony. We’ll get that information momentarily. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That’s fair enough. I think that’s a fairly basic 
question that I’d like answered because of the fact that we 
delayed the estimates yesterday to give the minister a chance to 
talk about how much more they’re spending on advertising. And 
this government puts a lot of emphasis on the value of 
advertising, so I think before we get into the basis of why they 
spent an additional $3 million in advertising in the department, it 
would be nice to know what he uses as a source to say that $1 
spent on advertising buys $12.40 worth of sales. And I’d like to 
know: is that a national average from the advertising bureau or 
. . . he didn’t say 12.50; he didn’t say $12; he said $12.40. So 
somewhere along the line somebody did a survey, somebody did 
a study, and I’d like to have the terms and the background 
material from that study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, the information that 
we have been providing is acquired through the studies that are 
carried on, both in-house and by external consultants, and I 
submitted the last day . . . I know my material has 11 pages. I 
think we condensed it to four or five pages of the consultants who 
we have contracted with over the last year. 
 
What happens, of course, is that the inquiries that we receive . . . 
People are sent questionnaires asking for detailed information. 
There are then some simple extrapolations made, and we come 
up with the numbers that we have given you. They are 
Saskatchewan specific. They are not in any way a national figure. 
 
The general term for the studies is conversion studies, and some 
of the results . . . The number that I gave you was in general 
touring. All right. And we find that, of the inquiries that come in, 
almost 67.2 per cent of the inquirers actually take a trip in 
Saskatchewan. For every dollar that is spent on advertising, 
12.40, which is the number I gave you, was spent by tourists in 
the province in that general category — general touring. 
 
In sport fishing, 20 per cent of the inquiries actually came to the 
province. And for every dollar spent on advertising in that area 
of sport fishing, $21.80 was spent by tourists in the province. As 
far as what we classify as general adventure, 64.1 per cent of the 
people who made inquiries about that type of holiday actually 
took a trip to Saskatchewan. And for every dollar that was spent 
on 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1196 
 

tourism advertising in that area, 2.50 was spent by tourists in the 
province. 
 
It’s important to note that these are based only on inquiries. These 
are people who come to the province after having made an 
inquiry, so these . . . There’s then a follow-up questionnaire. This 
does not include the benefits of the electronic media, of some of 
our other programs. These are very well defendable figures and 
are taken from those conversion studies which are the type we’re 
talking about. I trust that provides the information the member 
needs. 
 
Mr. Engel: — There’s information we get when advertisers try 
and sell us on advertising, even politically. They’ll give the 
numbers saying that so much money spent on advertising will 
buy this degree of success. And I was wondering if that’s the kind 
of number you had there and that’s what you were using. And I 
appreciate the minister’s answers. 
 
I’m concerned with the money you’re spending on advertising, 
and with the announcements you made, because we adjourned 
this Tourism estimates, and the announcement you made in 
Saskatoon yesterday — and I watched it. Do you wish to share 
with us . . . have you a paper you want to send over and give us 
a breakdown of that $3 million worth of advertising? I’m just 
pulling the number out of my memory from what you had. Can 
you send a paper over saying who the agencies are that are going 
to place it and what the advertising package is going to be about? 
 
On the basis of your own press release and your own 
salesmanship of it, I want to tell the minister that I was more 
impressed with the former minister’s little announcement here in 
Regina, compared to yours in Saskatoon, because at least he 
didn’t wind up — at least he didn’t wind up the same way you 
did. And I don’t know if I have the minister’s attention or not. 
But when you wound up your little press conference up there, 
Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Maybe, Mr. Chairman, I should wait until he’s going to listen 
because I don’t know why I should be repeating my question if 
he’s not listening to the answer. But when you wound up your 
press release yesterday, you made the statement that there’s that 
many people going to have to stop in Saskatchewan anyhow on 
their way to Expo. And I thought, well I wonder, why are you 
then spending this $3 million if those guys have got to come here 
anyhow on their way to Expo? I think you boobooed a little, and 
maybe you should try and make up for it today to the listeners we 
have that are out there watching and that were so disappointed in 
saying that you’re going to spend three million bucks. 
 
Would you tell us who is placing the ad and what basic number 
. . . The advertising on your communications budget — is that 
going to stretch the 4.253 million that you have budgeted, or is 
that going to fit within that framework? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Just let me here first of all clear up a 
misconception. I imagine the member opposite was doing 
something else at the time he was watching the

television. 
 
The comment about the Expo traffic coming anyway was made 
by the press, not by me. The point is, in response to a question at 
the post press conference interview, there was a question asked 
about the problems that the tremendous number of visitors we 
would have this year, what that would mean for next years 
tourism numbers. And I made it very clear that we see 1986 as a 
year of opportunity; that we as a department, and we as a 
government, feel our role is to do everything we can to encourage 
those travellers who will cross the province to leave the beaten 
path — the two major east-west arteries — to get into other parts 
of the province to see the things that we have to see. 
 
And we’ve also made it very clear that from there the 
responsibility rests with the private sector, with the tourism 
industry in the province, that employer of 32,000 people, to 
provide the services, to provide the facilities, and to provide the 
attractions that will send those people home in a positive frame 
of mind about our province, that will have those people providing 
word-of-mouth advertising, and in fact will bring those people 
back. 
 
So the advertising program that we’ve undertaken this year is 
built and designed to coincide clearly with the opportunity and to 
make that opportunity in fact a real one. And I think that the 
people who saw the demonstrations that my colleague from 
Regina North — soon to be from Regina South — put on here in 
Regina, and our demonstration in Saskatoon, were very 
impressed with the quality of the material and even as much so 
with the enthusiasm of the staff. And I think that speaks highly. 
 
In terms of the other portion of the question, to break down the 
tourism promotional expenditures . . . and if I could have the 
member’s attention so I don’t have to repeat this. A breakdown 
of tourism promotional expenditures: we’re talking here, of 
course, of moneys that come from two subvotes in the blue book, 
the communications budget and the tourism marketing budget, 
and they are in separate sections. 
 
Breaking down that promotional expenditures, paid advertising 
amounts to 1.7 — well let me give it completely — $1.75 million. 
Publications — and I in the House the other day demonstrated 
some of the things. We have many, many publications, and we 
had a kit prepared yesterday for the press people, and some of 
them may share it for you. If you’d like to come by my office, I 
can give you some samples. Or you can simply write the 
department, as thousands and thousands of people are doing, to 
get that information. That amounts to $950,000. 
 
Audio-visual productions: this is for production of the 
audio-visual portions. An example would be Sun Spirit 
Saskatchewan, although that’s not included in this particular 
budget. But our advertising packages which were made public 
yesterday, the targeted television and radio ads to the various 
markets, is $75,000 — that’s for production. The exhibits and 
displays that we have, that we take with us to the various sport 
and travel shows that we attend across North America — the 
exhibits amount to 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1197 
 

$10,000. And our direct sales projects, expenditures there are 
$430,000. 
 
And I believe, when you total that, you will find the total of 
$3.215 million that is spent in those general categories. 
 
It might be of interest as well to — I’ll give you all of this — the 
increases over the previous budget, just so . . . simple for you. 
The paid advertising has an increase of $464,000. The 
publications — and the key expense here is the additional 
publications that we need because of Expo — we anticipate an 
increase in the requests for our publications. That is what you 
would consider, I suppose, normal increases. But the Expo 
opportunity and the material that we will be displaying on site at 
Expo amounts to a significant increase, and that’s about 
$350,000. And our direct sales projects — and again related 
primarily to Expo activities, on site primarily, but also off — is 
$75,000. 
 
So the total increase is $889,000 over ’85-86. And I think 
hopefully that clarifies the breakdown of the moneys and where 
the increases come. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The major portion of the question that I directed 
to you was: who’s doing up most of these for you? What are the 
agencies that are handling it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — In terms of the expenditures when we 
discuss the production, the development of the product, whether 
they be the publication or the ads, that work is primarily done by 
Roberts & Poole. the placement of the product, that is when 
contacts are made and agreements made with television stations, 
with networks, with radio stations, and also in our publications 
— which magazines they would appear in — the placement is 
done by Dome. So we have two elements, one being the 
production development, the other being the placement. 
 
(1115) 
 
And it’s important to emphasize — and the members have made 
this mistake, and I’m sure it’s inadvertent — but the members 
have several times indicated that a significant portion of money 
went to Dome. The money went to Dome, and Dome dispersed 
it amongst all those electronic and print media people. So it is 
really inaccurate and totally misleading to this committee to 
indicate that that money went to Dome. And I’m sure that the 
member, now that that’s been clarified for him, will not make 
that mistake in this Assembly again, and certainly not outside. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’ll make it inside or outside. When you gave us 
the numbers of how much Dome got on the advertising, it was 
over $1.5 million, Dome’s contract was. Now if they spent a 
million dollars on placing it and had a half a million — and our 
understanding and the information we have is that Dome credits 
your party with 15 per cent of all their placement costs. And 
that’s why we’re concerned about Dome. Because when Dome 
works for your department for $1.5 million and gets 15 per cent 
credit to do PC ads, and they do the same amount for SGI and 
this department and that department, that adds up to a sizeable 
amount, Mr. Minister.

Now the question I have today: of this 3.25 million, how much 
of it is placement costs, and how much of it is production costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I have to take rather 
considerable objection to the preamble to that question. That is 
absolutely false. I believe, and I don’t profess to know, but I 
assume that that was the practice under your administration. I can 
understand why you would make that mistake. But I assure you 
that that is not the situation with this government, and I am really 
disappointed that you’d make a charge like that with absolutely 
no basis in fact. And that certainly is disconcerting. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Are you going to answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Possibly the member could eliminate 
the inaccuracies in the preamble and ask the question. I’ll try to 
get him the numbers. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The minister is very sensitive, because I would be 
sensitive too if I were spending the kind of money with Dome 
advertising. The question was straightforward and very simple. I 
wanted a breakdown between the production costs and the 
placement costs of the $3.25 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — On average, Mr. Chairman, in 
response to the last part of the question, with our advertising, the 
production and development costs are between 20 and 30 per 
cent. And the remainder are the media costs — how much it costs 
to get the production on the air or into the magazine. So we can’t 
provide you with each specific item, but on average those are 
good guide-lines that we can go by. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Last year the placement costs were 1.5 million, 
and this year you’re going to 2.6 million, an increase of a million 
bucks in your one department on advertising. Is that a fair 
assumption if you’re not going to give us any details? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, I will 
repeat very clearly what I have already given, I thought, very 
clearly. The increases over ’85-86 — all right? — increases, paid 
advertising, $464,000. I realize that wasn’t the previous question, 
but I thought I could maybe anticipate and give it to you there. 
Again, paid advertising: $464,000. 
 
Increases in publication. Those are things that we print for use. I 
think of the Saskatchewan holiday, the several publications that 
we have that are recognized, I think, all across the continent for 
their quality — $350,000 increase there, and the majority of that 
— not all, but the majority of that will be because of on-site Expo 
activities in which we will be providing information to the 
millions of visitors who will attend the pavilion at Expo. Direct 
sales, direct sales projects — again the increase is primarily 
related to the Expo activities, the on-site activities — and here 
we have $70,000. 
 
Just so the member understands clearly, in terms of publications, 
the “Saskatchewan Accommodation” 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1198 
 

guide, which lists all the accommodations in the province, an 
invaluable piece of information for a traveller who is spending 
some time in the province, and certainly something that I’m sure 
the hoteliers in your constituency as well as across the province 
are appreciative of. 
 
The Saskatchewan vacation book separates the province into the 
various regions, goes through the attractions and the facilities that 
are available. Again, a publication that is gaining recognition 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Outdoor adventure, which 
is obviously aimed at a specific type of tourist, a major 
publication. and there are others. But when we talk publications, 
that’s the type of thing we’re discussing. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, yesterday or last day you gave me 
the information that Dome Advertising had a $1.5 million 
contract for placement. You said that of the $3.215 million in 
advertising costs, about 80 per cent of the closest breakdown you 
want to give us. About 80 per cent is placement costs. And I 
suggest that 80 per cent of three million and a quarter is 2.6 
million and my question to you is simple. Are you going to give 
us the information or are you going to talk around it? Is Dome’s 
new contract this year 2.6 million? It’s a simple, straightforward 
question from the numbers you gave me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I’ll just make it very clear again. The 
member is, I’m sure again not intentionally, but tends to make 
misleading statements. We have indicated clearly what was spent 
last year on our media buy, what it cost us to get our product on 
the air or into the books. The numbers that we have are 
projections. We have no contract with Dome that says in this year 
you will get X. We develop our programs and we are very open 
about them. We took our entire package to the public yesterday, 
and you’ve alluded to that, both in Saskatoon and here in Regina. 
 
We indicated exactly what the program looked like. The staff 
gave some tremendously interesting and detailed information 
about why we had structured certain ads and certain ways into 
various markets — demonstrated the differences between them. 
We indicated to the private sector how they can tag on by sharing 
the costs of some of these. 
 
So obviously what we have in the blue book are estimates. And I 
think that’s even the name of what we’re doing here, our 
estimates of what we would intend to spend this year. And we 
readily admit that we’ve attempted very hard to increase the 
amount of money that we put into this. We do it for two reasons. 
We do it first of all because of the Expo opportunity, which has 
been discussed in some detail, and we do it because we’re eight 
miles behind everybody else. 
 
For instance, and I think these numbers are revealing, in paid 
media advertising for tourism in Canada, $19.5 million is spent 
by the federal government this year. In British Columbia, $6.6 
million was spent last year — these are last year’s figures, 
obviously. In Alberta, 6.1; in Saskatchewan, as we’ve indicated, 
$1.3 million; we’re in eighth place. Manitoba, 1.5; Ontario, 9.5; 
New Brunswick, 3 million; Nova Scotia, 3.5 million. The two

provinces that trail us, Newfoundland and P.E.I. And I think it’s 
important to note that we would like to be spending more 
because, as we have indicated through the conversion studies that 
we talked about, there’s tremendous benefit coming to the 
province from that. 
 
And the problem is of course is that we have started at a very low 
base and are gradually working our way up. In essence, or in fact, 
in 1981, in Saskatchewan, and I believe your party was the 
government in 1981, a total of $149,000 was spent on tourism 
advertising — $149,000. Clearly you didn’t understand or were 
not prepared to become involved in the commercial benefits that 
flow from tourism. And I’ve named these figures several times, 
but by the year 2000 we’re talking about the largest single 
industry in the world — the largest employer in North America 
— currently, 32,000 people in the province, and increasing, 
depend on this industry. And we are not apologizing in any way 
for increasing. As I said in question period the other day, I wish 
it more. 
 
And we will work as a department and as a minister with the 
support of my colleagues to see that that budget increases 
because these are well-spent dollars that are reaping returns to 
this province. And I think that the problem that we face in terms 
of our relative standing to those other provinces, as I indicated, 
is the fact that in 1981 we spent next to nothing, and we’re slowly 
building from a very poor base that was established prior to ’82. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to quote a 
couple of lines from page 491 of the last year’s blue book — not 
the estimates now, but Public Accounts — from Public Accounts 
in the blue book. 
 
And the minister has been making snide remarks about why I’m 
sceptical, and why I’m a little bit sceptical. You even used the 
words “misleading.” And I’m going to tell you; I’m wondering 
who’s misleading who. 
 
If you look at employment and development, your estimate last 
year was 1.42 million, an estimate of 1.42 million. And let’s look 
over at the other side, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll tell you, that’s why 
things are changing for right-wing governments across this 
country. You look over at the expenditures side, when things are 
getting into a slump and the private sector isn’t picking up their 
share to hold up and hold employment up. What did this 
Department of Tourism and Small Business spend on 
employment development? Fifty-six thousand dollars. The 
estimate, 1.4 million; the expenditure, 56,000. And you wonder 
why I’m sceptical and why I wanted just some details of your 
estimate when you say you’re going to spend twice as much on 
Dome for advertising placement costs. I’m sceptical when I hear 
you say numbers in estimates if you don’t give me some back-up 
information and some answers. 
 
Look at the second line, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan small 
industry development program. Now here’s an area where 
everybody agrees that the small-business man can create jobs. 
The small-business men can take the people that are unemployed 
employables off of welfare. In 2978, my good friend Mr. 
Minister, there were only 1,800 people that were employable on 
welfare that weren’t getting jobs. In 1979, there were 1,862; in 
1980, there 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1199 
 

were 2,000; in ’81, 2.600. What happened in ’84 and ’85 . . . 
11,984 and 10,720 in ’85, employables, can’t find work, having 
to stoop to get help from the state at your expense. And I’m 
telling you, Mr. Minister, when you budget 81,000 and you spend 
8,000, that’s the reason. That’s the reason. 
 
Industrial and technical assistance: estimate 175,000; 105,000 
wasn’t spent. You spent 70,000, and you wonder why I’m 
frustrated. You wonder why I’m trying to get some answers, Mr. 
Minister, because what you’re doing is a lot of talk before an 
election, but no action — no action. And I think that everything 
you’re saying today has to be read with a degree of scepticism, 
with a little bit of scepticism here, because when you made your 
own big, grandiose press release about spending 3 million bucks, 
you says, well they’re going to come to Saskatchewan anyhow 
because they can’t get to Expo without coming through 
Saskatchewan. That’s the attitude of this minister, and I want to 
tell you, when you look at the results, when you look at the results 
of estimating 1.4 million and spending 56,000, something’s the 
matter. 
 
(1130) 
 
Something’s the matter when you’re talking about employment 
and development, subvote 10. The estimate, 1.4 million, and the 
expenditure . . . Well they spent, Association of Metis and 
Non-Status Indians, 2,400; and you could go down the line and 
list the different ones that got it. But $56,000 was it. That’s for 
employment opportunities and development. Mr. Minister, your 
campaigning and all your talk, all your talk about this grand 
effect your advertising’s having, sure isn’t working here. I 
suppose in your advertising, and when Dome spent $1.5 million 
advertising your department last year — and we’re talking about 
small industry development program — you had $80,000 on the 
estimate, and they spent 8,000 bucks. Ten per cent — 10 per cent 
— picked up on it, and the Alberta people . . . And I had a little 
paper here that I was going to show you, that in Alberta their 
right-wing policies aren’t working and they’re falling down right 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now what? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We’re not talking about Alberta; we’re 
talking about estimates here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re making comparisons. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Estimates deal with Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, get out your Public Accounts 
book; turn to page 491 and you look at Saskatchewan’s small 
industry development program. The estimate was 80,000; 
expenditure was 8,000. And I’m saying governments that depend 
on the private sector for development — governments that 
depend exclusively on the private sector and say that they’re 
going to be the engines to get our economy going, are getting 
turfed out. Turfed out. And to prove that they’re getting turfed 
out, look at P.E.I. In P.E.I. they had a right-wing government

that operated like you do. They put in there in employment and 
development estimates, this one here of 1.4 million and spent 
56,000. I wish somebody would calculate what that percentage 
is. What is 56,000 of 1,400,000? What is the percentage? I don’t 
even think it rates. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well it’s 5 per cent, about 5.6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well 5 per cent of a million dollars would be . . . 
Yes, exactly 5 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five per cent. 
 
Mr. Engel: — They had a 5 per cent batting average. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five per cent. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Five per cent of their estimate was spent, and you 
tell me I can’t tell you that right-wing policies aren’t working. In 
Alberta, where they have the same right-wing, reactionary 
government that’s trying to get the private sector to get their 
economy going, didn’t work. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member to get to the 
point of his question with the minister and not debate with the 
Chair what my ruling is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Touchy, touchy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. On a 
point of order. I listened closely to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who was speaking directly to a point he 
was making to the minister in charge of Small Business, very 
clearly talking about comparisons of other provinces and 
including the estimates that were made in previous years and 
what was spent. 
 
What he said is that the minister’s department had estimated $1 
million, and in reality in Public Accounts had spent 56,000 which 
is about 5 per cent or less of what they had promised to spend. 
Now I don’t . . . I want to complete my point of order, and if the 
chairman would quit reaching for the button to cut us off, because 
I’ll tell you, when members of the opposition want to raise a point 
of order, they’re not going to be pushed around by a chairman 
who wants to cut off debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask the member to get immediately 
to his point of order, and I’m quite willing to listen. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well then sit down and listen. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if I could have the floor to complete 
my remarks. and I want to talk for a few moment s— and if I 
could talk for a few moments before I get to my point — and I 
won’t be getting to it immediately because I want to explain some 
background. I want to explain some background as to what my 
colleague has been doing. He’s been raising important issues 
about small-business people and their concerns. 
 
And the members opposite laugh. And this is the arrogance of 
this government. Even after Prince Edward 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1200 
 

Island and Ontario and Alberta, they are still as arrogant as ever. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve heard the member’s point of 
order and the debate should get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The point I’m making, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chairman, is very plain — that under a right-wing government 
you spend a lot of money on advertising . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What are you talking about now? What did I say 
that’s wrong? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — When the chairman is on his feet, would the 
member please sit down. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Why are you interrupting me? You’re ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you challenging the Chair . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Will we have order, please? Order. Order, 
please. Order. 
 
While the member was asking the question, the member for 
Shaunavon and the member for Quill Lakes were continually 
talking and hollering. I would ask the members from Shaunavon 
and Quill Lakes to please stop disrupting the House with their 
hollering. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The member for Lumsden was talking louder than 
my colleagues were. I see that the members opposite are very 
sensitive, but the point is clear. It is a sensitive point that we’re 
making — that you either depend on the philosophy, you depend 
on the philosophy that you’re going to have big business be the 
engine of the economy. That’s the philosophical question we’re 
debating here. 
 
They said the employment and development opportunities are 
going to be generated in this province by big business. Well, big 
business backed off and said that when the economy’s tough 
we’re not going to do it, so they budgeted 1.4 million, spent less 
than 5 per cent — spent 56,000 — and it didn’t work, because 
the measure of whether it works or not is have the people believe 
it’s acceptable or not. 
 
Across Canada right-wing governments who have tried this 
philosophy, Mr. Minister, are telling us it’s not working. The 
premier of P.E.I., the premier went down the tubes. What 
province . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Prince Edward island. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Prince Edward Island. I was right. I thought I was 
wrong there. But the premier himself lost his own riding. In 
Manitoba . . . In Ontario, Davis tried to make it work and he got 
turfed out. and in Saskatchewan you’re trying to make this 
philosophy work. You say we’re going to spend more. It’s not 
working, so what do we do? We spent more money on 
advertising, and we advertise with the same firm that does our 
political advertising. 
 
And I made the point loud and clear — and I made the

point loud and clear — that Dome Advertising does the 
advertising for your party, and they’re getting more and more and 
more money. Last year they got 1.5 million; this year they’re 
getting 2.6 million in an election year to do some advertising for 
you — 2.6 million, placement costs, according to the 20 per cent 
figure that he gave me. Of $3.215 million in advertising, 20 per 
cent goes to Roberts and Poole. And I wonder if they do some 
production. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh yes, they’re on their list. 
 
Mr. Engel: — They’re on their list for production as well. And 
Roberts and Poole get 20 per cent, and the other 2.6 million goes 
to Dome, he tells me, placing for media advertising and tourism. 
 
I think this government shows a lack of understanding of how to 
be credible and how to prove to the people of Saskatchewan. You 
don’t say it over and over, and you don’t say it louder, and you 
don’t spend more money advertising if your programs aren’t 
working. You change your direction. You change your 
philosophy. And if you don’t, it’s going to happen to you like it 
did in Alberta where 16 seats decided that the NDP have the right 
philosophy. In another 16 seats, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in another 
16 seats we came within 100 votes. That’s 32 seats decided that 
our philosophy works — our philosophy works; our philosophy 
where the people have a piece of the action, not just big 
businesses, not just Weyerhaeuser, not just Weyerhaeuser. 
Tourism and Small Business should be for all the business men. 
There should be money there for all the business men, but the 
only increase — the only increase — is in advertising. 
 
Advertising increased: let’s get on the radio with some 
fancy-coloured ads; let’s put on some productions with the TV. 
Now that sounds awful funny. the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, 
our Attorney General, thinks that is very funny. He’s laughing 
till he’s red in the face because we’re doing some fancy 
production and we’re going to spend $1.5 million more in 
advertising on political ads — politically-coloured ads is what 
they’re going to do. And I want to tell you, the Mac attack’s going 
to be on, not only in your riding but right across Saskatchewan, 
right across the province. People are going to do like they did in 
Alberta in 32 seats this time . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member is once more straying from the 
topic and he’s getting into political issues. Would he please get 
back on the topic, or we will go on to the next speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, the committee of estimates is 
political. I’m here because I’m a politician. And if you don’t like 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! The ruling of the Chair is not 
debatable. Would you please get back to the topic or, as I said 
before, we will go to the next speaker. Political issues are not part 
of estimates. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve struck a very, very sensitive 
note. I see about 20 long faces and another . . . I’m not even going 
to count how many empty seats. We’re not going to talk about it. 
I’m not going to name any of the empty seats this morning. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1201 
 

But if you think that we’re going to stand in this Assembly, and 
we’re going to sit back, and we’re not going to cheer about 
what’s happening across Canada when people are waking up to 
the fact, when all the voters are waking up to the fact that you 
can’t buy elections with advertising — increasing the advertising 
budget to 4.215 million bucks directly spent on advertising — 
and he sat down and told me that Alberta’s spending more . . . 
(inaudible) . . . And I want to say that that’s not the way to sell 
Saskatchewan for small business. 
 
And it doesn’t work in tourism either, because the Minister of 
Parks is closing down park sites — and my colleague’s going to 
be talking about that in a very short time — closing down park 
sites along the Trans-Canada Highway. And he’s spending 
$350,000 more to advertise about Expo, and we’re closing down 
the park sites when people are travelling through the province. 
Now that makes good sense. Now that is a government that is 
planning, that has faith in the advertising. 
 
Well I don’t think their advertising is geared to bring more people 
to Saskatchewan. The advertising is geared to try and save about 
38 seats over there; that’s what they’re trying to do. And that’s 
why you’re trying to buy the support of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, my people that are in here are chomping at the bit 
and all want to get into this debate. But I want to raise the issue 
with you and say, Mr. Minister: what can we expect from your 
estimates when you spent 10 per cent of what you estimate on 
employment development? You spent exactly 10 per cent on 
Saskatchewan small industry development program — $80,000 
budget; $8,274.84 spent. And industrial technical assistance, 
175,000; you spent 70,000. How can we believe you this time 
when you’re that far off on your estimates? How can we trust 
you? How can the people of Saskatchewan trust you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think the answer is 
relatively simple. I’ll try to keep the response slightly briefer than 
what I’ve heard from across the way. Employment and 
development and small industry development are the two 
subvotes in the blue book that were put in the blue book under 
the previous administration. We have left them there to end them, 
and have replaced them by programs that are, in fact, efficient, 
and not programs that are simply give-aways. 
 
I would point out to the member, if his colleagues would be quiet 
enough to let him hear — I know it’s very difficult — that the 
employment and development line is a Special ARDA 
(Agriculture and Rural Development Act) program. Changes 
were made in the administration of this program which 
rescheduled the number of projects being paid by us to only 
business projects. In other words, we didn’t put them into those 
non-business sectors. 
 
Processing and payment of other projects under ARDA were 
channelled through other departments. I emphasize that — 
payments through other departments, Advanced Education, 
Social Services, and Agriculture. This accounts for the 
differential between the budget and the actual. And I repeat once 
again: an ARDA project, the money was spent through other 
departments,

consequently that discrepancy. 
 
(1145) 
 
In the small industry development line, if the member would look 
at his Estimates for last year — I believe he was the critic last 
year — he would see that the program had been replaced last year 
completely. So in other words, it wasn’t there. If he was so 
concerned about it, I’d suggest last year would have been a more 
reasonable time to bring this up. 
 
I think the important point here is that that small industry 
development program, which for the most part was simply a 
give-away program, totally ineffectual, not effective in providing 
for the needs of small business — and that’s not an assessment 
that I made or that my colleagues made — that’s an assessment 
that small business made. And when we set up this department, 
they asked us for some programs that had some meaning. And so 
I think it’s important to look at what has replaced that program. 
And we see things like venture capital — $15 million in tax 
credits this year for venture capital. That is equity money that 
will go directly into small businesses all over Saskatchewan. 
 
The small business interest reduction program, or the nine and 
five-eighths program as it was known before my colleague 
brought down his budget — now the 8 per cent program — $15.8 
million in benefits to small business are budgeted in that 
program. 
 
Marketing benefits program, the Saskatchewan Made, for 
instance — an exceptional program that has been widely 
accepted. Over 25,000 projects, or products, excuse me, now 
registered in that program; the business resource centres which 
we’ve talked about at some length in the community economic 
development program — all things that replace that small 
industry development line in the blue book that simply didn’t 
work. 
 
I would point out as well, and it’s important to understand this, 
that in Tourism and Small Business, to say nothing of the new 
and innovative programs that I just discussed, we now have 
dealing with this sector, the Department of Science and 
Technology, which was unheard of previously; the Department 
of Economic Development and Trade — again two departments 
who impact greatly. And it’s important to take the whole thing 
into consideration. 
 
I think however, Mr. Chairman, the proof of the pudding is in the 
eating. And I think it’s important that we look at results and what 
is being accomplished. And it was interesting to me this morning 
that we went through question period on the day that was . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The minister is trying to answer the 
question and there’s a constant talk from the opposition benches. 
It just does not hardly subside for a minute. I would ask the 
members of the opposition to please quieten down and listen to 
the answer of the minister. 
 
I’m warning the member for Quill Lakes to please quieten down. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1202 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, just to condense . . . 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg doesn’t seem very 
interested in hearing the answer, Mr. Chairman. As you’ve tried 
to point out, we’re having some considerable difficulty this 
morning. I assume that the buoyancy opposite is a result of the 
Alberta election. I would suggest it’s a little false bravado. 
 
To get to the specifics of the question, he indicated that some of 
the budget numbers did not match the estimates last year. I have 
indicated very clearly to him why those budgeted numbers, the 
Public Accounts numbers, do not match. And in a sentence, it’s 
because the programs were either ineffective and we had to 
improve them or eliminate them. In many cases, they were 
channelled into departments where they should have been in the 
first place, and in other cases they were eliminated. But as I was 
indicating, when you had problems with the opposition, the fact 
is that it’s a matter of the results that are attained. 
 
And this morning, this morning we had the employment statistics 
released in Ottawa. the members chose to disregard those in 
question period, which is unusual, but the fact is that 
Saskatchewan has the second lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada. The unadjusted rate is 8.2 per cent, and on a seasonally 
adjusted basis, again the second lowest rate at 7.6 per cent, Mr. 
Chairman. That means to revert it, to put it in a positive sense, 
over 92 per cent of the people in this province are, in fact, 
employed, and I think that speaks to the successes of these 
programs. 
 
I could go through many of the details, and the month to month, 
and on the year to year, but there have been two areas — two 
areas where we have been very concerned and we have been 
trying to target. One was youth unemployment, and it’s important 
to note — and again I understand the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is not interested in this — but youth 
unemployment dropped 2.7 percentage points since March and is 
the second lowest in Canada, and that is a key concern, one we 
have been directing our attention to. And I think again, that that 
result, with almost a 3 percentage point drop in youth 
unemployment, putting us in the second lowest position in 
Canada, and almost twice as impressive as Manitoba’s, would 
indicate we’re being successful. 
 
And the final point I’d make, Mr. Chairman, women, which is 
another concern as far as female unemployment is concerned, we 
have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, unadjusted at 7.4 
per cent. It’s a drop of a full percentage point over the last year, 
so when you consider the successes in terms of total employment, 
in terms of improvement in youth unemployment, and women’s 
employment, it would indicate that the things that we are working 
on, the programs that we have put in place, are in fact having 
substantial benefits, and I think that we must take that into 
consideration. 
 
One other very brief comment. The member opposite continues 
to indicate that the expenditures we’re making on tourism 
advertising are somehow ill-founded. Since these estimates 
began earlier this week, it’s almost impossible to count the 
number of calls that have come

into either myself or the department from people involved in 
tourism, expressing the disgust at the line of questioning that has 
been taken opposite. 
 
People in the tourism industry understand the importance — the 
importance of that advertising, and, Mr. Chairman, they 
understand that those ads are not government ads. Those are ads 
about our province; they’re ads about their business; they’re ads 
that attract people to the province and bring economic 
well-being. And I can only indicate that the tourism industry, as 
a group, are very unimpressed with the arguments that are being 
presented on tourism advertising. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you. I have a number of questions, 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask this morning, but I first of all want to 
touch on a few remarks that you had made just recently, in the 
House regarding taking advantage of the tourist trade that would 
be going through Saskatchewan on their way to Expo. Your 
remarks were that the Government of Saskatchewan, particularly 
Tourism and Small Business and, to a larger extent, parks and 
Renewable Resources, wanted to encourage the travellers of 
Canada to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like the members to please be quiet 
to give the minister an opportunity to hear what’s going on. And 
I must add that most of the noise is coming from the opposition 
benches from his colleagues near him, which is making it very 
difficult for the minister to hear the question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I know there’s a lot of 
exuberance in the House today, not only from our side, but it’s 
coming from both sides. And if we just go back to 1982 and to 
1983, and you go into Hansard and you take a look at the type of 
exchanges that came back and forth across the floor, mostly from 
that side, when the election was held in British Columbia . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I must interrupt the member again. The 
member knows he is off the topic, and I would ask him to get 
back to him. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll try and stay 
on the subject. I just wanted to reflect on what has gone on in 
other years. And this is a political forum, and all of a sudden 
we’ve lost that right to operate democratically in a political forum 
here today. So I’m going to accept that, but I just want to say that 
I intend to go back to Hansard from 1982, and especially in 1983, 
and I will bring that back to the House. But I think we have lost 
our democratic right to perform properly in this democratic 
parliamentary forum that we have here. 
 
You made statements, Mr. Minister, that you wanted to 
encourage the travellers that were going through Saskatchewan 
to get off the beaten path. And you wanted to make sure that you 
provided services for the travellers that are going through 
Saskatchewan. Now this is the first time in our history that we’ve 
ever had Expo ’86 out West. The last time we had it, it was in 
Montreal. We have an opportunity this year to take advantage of 
all the travellers that are going to be travelling from the East to 
the West and are going to be going through Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1203 
 

And I just say, Mr. Minister, that you’re right. We want to 
encourage the travellers that are coming through Saskatchewan, 
and we want to encourage them to get off the beaten path and 
take advantage of the facilities that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
I had last night an opportunity to take a look at some of the 
samples that you were giving in your advertising ads, as you 
announced it up in Saskatoon, and I’ve seen some of the 
advertisements, and they were impressive. And they were 
showing our northern Saskatchewan, the lakes and the rivers that 
we have. We want the tourist trade, not only from Canada, but 
from the United States and all over, to take advantage of that. 
And we wanted to open up . . . or maintain the campsites that we 
have. I have been asking the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources for the last two weeks to not go ahead with the closure 
of the campsites, and especially in a year like this, why would 
you want to close them? 
 
We have been discussing the closure of 37 campsites. Now, in 
writing, the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources says 
he’s going to close down, not 37 sites, but 75 sites — 75 
campsites in Saskatchewan. And he put it in writing, he 
answered, and I have the letter. He answered the major of Doré 
Lake, indicating that 75 campsites would be closed. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, what I’m trying to get through to the Minister 
of Tourism and Small Business is that in a year such as this one, 
he should get together with his colleague, the Minister of Parks 
and Renewable Resources, and encourage him not to close down 
any sites, but to maintain them. And if anything, we should be 
opening up more sites so that we can take advantage of the tourist 
trade that’s coming through the province. 
 
This morning in question period I talked about a site up in 
Beaupré Lake which has been there for many years. And I 
indicated that it was an historic site. And I know it’s an historic 
site, and it’s been used for 30 years, ever since the road has gone 
in there. But the minister gets up and says, well, it’s not a historic 
site. But I have a letter here signed by the major of Doré Lake, 
Robert Snell, indicating to the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources to not close down these sites, and especially the 
historic site of Beaupré. 
 
Beaupré Creek is one of the oldest campsites in the area. The first 
conservation officer for the area resided there. And I’m just 
asking you, Mr. Minister, to get together with the Minister of 
Parks and Renewable Resources and not to close down any 
campsites, but to maintain them and to open up new ones, and to 
take advantage of the tourists that are going to be coming through 
this province this summer. 
 
And my gosh! you’re spending thousands and thousands of 
dollars to advertise Saskatchewan. You’re telling them to go up 
North and take a look at our lakes and our rivers and the streams 
that we have up there, take advantage of it, and yet you’re going 
to close down 75 sites. And I think that’s working against that. 
 
So I’d just urge you to change that around and work with your 
colleague, the Minister of Parks and Renewable

Resources, and not close down any sites that are available to the 
tourists that are coming through this province, and to the citizens 
of this province who have used them for many, many years. 
 
(1200) 
 
I have a number of other questions to ask, Mr. Minister, but you 
may want to respond to my statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d like the 
opportunity to respond. Just a couple of comments on the 
numbers. I don’t profess to have as good a grasp of the situation 
in terms of numbers as my colleague, the Minister of Parks, but 
the fact is, and I think you will admit that, and I think it was 
another inadvertent slip of the tongue, that the number “75” 
refers to parking stalls, not to campgrounds. And I think that it’s 
an inadvertent attempt possible . . . or an inadvertent error, but I 
think it’s important that we don’t mislead this committee when 
we do use numbers, and that we don’t throw them around in a 
haphazard manner. However, the comments that you have made, 
and the tone of your questioning, probably as much as anything, 
demonstrate the difference between the approach that your 
government would take to tourism and the approach that this 
government would take. 
 
I indicated, and I have done it many times, that there is a 
tremendous opportunity here with Expo, and that the role of the 
government, the provincial government, is to attempt to provide 
information that will get people to stay additional time in the 
province and, hopefully, get them off the main east-west 
corridors. 
 
Never once did I indicate that it was then the government’s 
responsibility to provide the facilities and the services and the 
attractions. I’ve said that that is the responsibility of the private 
sector. And we have literally hundreds of private sector groups 
lining up with projects, with facilities, with things that they want 
to put in place. 
 
And I think what’s been clearly indicated to us through our 
research: that the travelling public want to have clean, 
well-equipped facilities when they come to Saskatchewan. And 
the types of things that the member is closing don’t fit that bill. 
They’re not well-equipped. They are simply cut out of the bush, 
and they have not been used. What he is closing are things that 
people simply have refused to use. They’ve been under-accessed, 
and they don’t meet the needs. 
 
We believe that our money is better put into our information 
centres, which we have talked about on occasions in these 
estimates, to provide information on where these good facilities 
are. And we’re behind; I admit that. I think after two decades of 
lack of attention to the tourism industry, a complete lack of 
understanding of the commercial side of tourism, we have some 
catching up to do, and we are working at catching up. 
 
I’ll make two points, and then I’ll sit down and let you back. First 
of all, it seems to me that as the MLA for one of those northern 
centres — and you’ve spoken in this House on a number of 
occasions about the lack of job opportunities for your people up 
there. Well it would seem to me that you would encourage private 
sector 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1204 
 

development, that you could get private sector people building 
the facilities that will meet the needs of these tourisms and not be 
advocating the maintenance of unmanned, inadequate facilities 
that have not been used on any type of regular basis over time. 
And I think that would be a thrust that you would take. 
 
And I would relay one other piece of information, and this is 
extremely factual. At a meeting recently in La Ronge attended by 
three different ministers, people involved in the tourism industry 
and in other parts of the economy up there indicated a great deal 
of dissatisfaction with the attitudes of the two northern members. 
They felt that the doom and gloom attitude that things are terrible, 
that we’re not getting anywhere, tended to turn people off; and 
they didn’t come to northern Saskatchewan, and a lot of 
opportunities have been lost. 
 
And you’re absolutely right about our ads. We have accentuated 
northern Saskatchewan, particularly in the American market 
where that type of holiday is something that American people 
look at. And I think, if we all work together and continue to 
promote this province in a realistic manner, that this tourism 
industry can be a very significant factor in overcoming some of 
the many problems that in fact exist in northern Saskatchewan. I 
know my colleagues have on occasion invited you over for a cup 
of coffee. I won’t put it that way, but if there are ideas on how 
employment benefits and opportunities can be created for your 
people, we’re certainly interested in listening to them. 
 
But I don’t think defending or attacking the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources for closing some underused park grounds 
is really conducive to helping northern Saskatchewan. And part 
of our objective is, in fact, to do that. So I hope that that provides 
something in terms of the problems you’ve raised. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Just a short comment, Mr. Speaker. When 
the minister indicated himself and two of his other colleagues 
from cabinet were in La Ronge that the business community in 
La Ronge said that they were dissatisfied with myself as a 
member in northern Saskatchewan — well I just say to you, Mr. 
Minister, you get up the courage to call the election, and you just 
let the folks in northern Saskatchewan make that decision, and 
they will. 
 
You got up here and you spoke, and you sort of suggested that I 
was attacking the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. I 
want to say, Mr. Chairman, that at no time was I attacking him. I 
have been asking him questions in the House, and I have been 
encouraging him to not shut down any sites. And all I was saying 
was that yourself and the minister get together and discuss this 
and see if you can come to some agreements to maintain those 
sites and keep them open. 
 
You talk about . . . You don’t want to get involved; that these 
sites, the 75 sites that are going to be closed down are underused. 
Then you go on to say that they’re unmanned and unused sites. 
And that’s exactly what you said. Then you went on to say that 
anything that you can do that you will, to provide jobs for 
northern Saskatchewan.

Well I want to say that the campsites in northern Saskatchewan 
have always been unmanned, but they have never been unused. 
We don’t have anybody that stands at the camps, and there’s no 
parking fees, but they are maintained by the conservation officers 
and the stand-by crew that they have in that certain area. And 
they most certainly are an important part of northern 
Saskatchewan as far as jobs are concerned. 
 
And if you’re going to close down 75 of those sites, then the 
conservation officer who maintains a stand-by crew all summer 
is not going to need that crew. and what is he going to do, because 
they’re not going to be there? They’re not going to be manned. 
They’re not going to cut wood and put up wood and maintain it. 
They’re not going to pick up the garbage. They’re not going to 
cut the grass — what they do. Then they’re not going to need the 
stand-by crews. And instead of maintaining jobs and creating 
more jobs, what you’re going to do, Mr. Minister, is eventually 
you’re going to phase out jobs. 
 
Because if we have a wet summer and there’s no fires, and 
they’re just going to say to the stand-by crew, well, there’s 
nothing for you to do, so we’re going to lay you off. And that’s 
what happens. Last spring it happened in northern Saskatchewan 
because we had an early spring. They took the react crews who 
are there to fight fires; they hired them on. We got a snowfall; 
they laid them off. And these are Northerners, temporary jobs. 
They laid them off until it dried up again. 
 
So I just say that these campsites are important, not only for the 
tourists that are coming through this province, but for the senior 
citizens, the Boy Scouts, and the Girl Guides who use those 
campsites on a yearly basis. And some of these campsites are 
only used for a couple hours; they don’t stay there all night. 
There’s many, many groups who will go into the campsites, have 
their lunch, relax, walk along the rivers, or walk along the lakes, 
and then they will continue on to another site. So they’re a 
stopping place, and they don’t necessarily have to stay overnight, 
and that’s why they’re so important. and they’ve been there . . . 
 
There’s citizens in this province who have come back to the same 
sites every year, and some of them sites they’ll use two, three 
times a day. They’ll have coffee in the morning, and they’ll travel 
to another one, take their time and relax, and they know that that 
site is there. They know that the campfire is there. They know 
that there’s wood there, and there’s garbage disposal there. And 
they’ve always been there, and they rely on them. All of a sudden 
they’re gone. And I just ask that you take a new look at that. 
 
I want to now turn to northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. I see 
in your economic development fund you had estimated in 
1984-85, $3,199,540. I’m quoting from Public Accounts, Mr. 
Minister. In ’84-85 you budgeted $3,199,000. That year you 
spent $1,407,593, about one-third of what you budgeted. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate how much you spent 
of what you have budgeted for last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the . . . 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1205 
 

Although I wasn’t the minister at the time, that in the year that 
you’re discussing the rationale or the reason for spending only 
the — roughly, I’m not sure of the number — roughly a third was 
that that was when the decentralization of DNS took place, and 
some of those services went to various departments. And so in 
order to have a complete picture you would have to line up how 
those services were reorganized. I think the majority of the 
difference there is accountable for in the fact of the realignment 
of the services in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Would that apply, Mr. Minister, the same to 
the grants to the northern economic development branch. I see 
also, you had $1 million budgeted and you only spent $5,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — $5,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Only $5,000 out of that billion. I just 
wonder, could you explain that one also? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What percentage is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well we don’t have the figures with 
us, so we can’t confirm the numbers. The rationale or the 
reasoning would be exactly the same as the previous answer. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I want to now turn to the regional offices, 
Mr. Minister. Could you indicate the number of regional offices 
that you have in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, we 
have three. I believe they’re at Creighton, La Ronge, and Buffalo 
Narrows. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I was listening with some 
interest to the minister’s comments on campground closures. 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can outline for us . . . Even 
though it’s not under your department, I would imagine that there 
would be exchanges of letters or memos or discussions between 
yourself and the minister in charge of parks. What do you think 
the impact of those closures will be on tourism? and can you give 
an indication of how many campsites, actual sites, will actually 
be closed down as a result of the decision made by your 
colleague? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that in all 
honesty there will be no impact on tourism from the program that 
my colleague has implemented. I think it’s important to note a 
couple of facts. We have 9,000 camping spots in the province — 
and this information was provided by my colleague, and I think 
it was provided this morning in question period — and that 9,000 
camping spots is the highest number per capita in Canada. What 
has been closed, as we have indicated, there are some camping 
spots that were underutilized, that possibly had some other 
reasons. I don’t profess to have them all. 
 
(1215) 
 
The department did communicate with us, and we did provide 
input, because, as I provided your colleague the other day a 
complete list of our consulting work, we do

spend a lot of time consulting with, doing studies on tourism, 
because the whole area has been completely overlooked in 
Saskatchewan for so long. and we are acquiring a tremendous 
base of information that allows us to target our advertising, as we 
indicated publicly yesterday. And it allows us to understand what 
the people who come to the province want. And the fact is that 
they want some specific types of accommodation. And the areas 
that are being closed simply did not meet those requirements, and 
it was deemed reasonable to make changes, and consequently 
they determined to close those. 
 
We have seen a significant increase in the amount of facilities 
that are available. I think of hotel construction in the major cities, 
for example, not to mention smaller centres. and people 
travelling today do in fact require certain types of facilities. They 
have desires. And the Parks and Renewable Resources 
department came to us and that’s the type of information that we 
provided them, and then they made their decisions. And I would 
suggest that as far as tourism is concerned, this is really not going 
to have any impact on numbers or on economic benefits to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister would care to 
answer the question that was put: how many campsites are being 
closed down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — As I indicated, that type of 
information . . . The member has provided me a paper which has 
a few. Oh, here it is. I’m sorry. We’re closing 10 sites. All right? 
Those sites have no showers, no electrification, and I think it was 
that type of information that we had provided the department. 
 
And once again, I don’t know if it’s relevant and I don’t want to 
wander off the topic because I think you’re serious on these 
questions, but people have indicated . . . And in northern 
Saskatchewan, for instance, in ’82 the northern outfitters, when 
we first met with them, had tremendous problems. and they have 
indicated to us, since we started the joint efforts with the northern 
outfitters in terms of our presence at an increased number of sport 
and travel shows in the U.S., since we started our print and 
electronic advertising, they are talking about in the area of a 20 
per cent increase in 1985 over 1984. And some of them are telling 
us that for 1986 they’re completely sold out for the full season. 
 
And probably more importantly are the number of applications 
that are in front of the Parks and Renewable Resources 
department for additions and expansions to those northern 
camps. And I think that that again verifies the fact that travellers 
to the province do in fact want a specific type of accommodation. 
And as I indicated, these 10 sites, that are not electrified and do 
not have showers and those types of amenities, weren’t meeting 
the need, weren’t being used, and consequently the decision. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could the minister indicate which 10 
campsites you’re planning to shut down, on the recommendation 
from your department? You have indicated that you did an 
analysis and a study and recommended certain things to the 
Department of Parks. Can you indicate which 10 sites are being 
shut down in 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1206 
 

the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 
information. I want to make it abundantly clear once more that 
the department that administers them had some problems. They 
were not being utilized. They wanted to know what information 
our department could provide them, maybe so they could develop 
some rationale for why. 
 
As I indicate, we’ve acquired a great deal of information of that 
type. We provided the information; they made the decision. I 
think the question is obviously a good question but I think it’s an 
estimate question for Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder: as it applies to the closures or 
the change, as you would put it, that is occurring in tourism, who 
did the study for your department, that you then advised the Parks 
department on? Who did the consulting and made the 
recommendations? Who did that for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, let me make it very 
clear to the member opposite. We are having a bit of a 
communications problem here. Our department, over the three 
years we’ve been in existence, have done many, both internal and 
external, studies in an attempt to fill the void of tourism 
information that had been created by the complete neglect that 
had been experienced over the past 12 years. 
 
I don’t know if you were here when I indicated that in 1981 there 
was $149,000 budgeted for advertising in tourism. I mean, that 
clearly indicates the lack of emphasis that was placed on it. And 
I’ve talked about the opportunity and where we’re going in the 
future. So we have done numerous studies and we have acquired 
a great deal of information. 
 
Now we didn’t do any single study to respond to Parks and 
Renewable Resources’ request. We simply took that mass of 
information that we’re gathering and said look, these are the 
things that our department perceives to be important to travellers 
coming to the province. And you don’t need an individual study 
to determine that, but it’s a collective gathering of information 
that simply hasn’t been available before. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That, as you say, mass of a study or 
whatever was done, what I want to know is who did it. What 
company did the . . . Was there a private consulting company that 
did this research and advised that we should be moving away 
from campground settings where families can come and have 
picnics and have a Sunday afternoon? Who did that consulting? 
 
What appears to me, and I’m sure to many people in northern 
Saskatchewan . . . And my colleague from Athabasca has I think 
stated it more clearly and succinctly that I ever could because he 
has a better feel for that part of the world . . . 
 
And I use the example of Pine Cree Park down in my 
constituency. There’s no electricity; there’s no facilities to have 
electricity or showers. But I will tell you that that is

one of the most used campgrounds anywhere in the Shaunavon 
constituency. My family and I have gone out there many Sundays 
for barbecues. We go there at noon and spend the afternoon 
wandering around and have a barbecue and then go home. And 
while I’m there I see many tourists who use the Red Coat Trail 
to travel from Manitoba to Alberta on their summer holidays and 
choose to take some time off and spend maybe an extra few 
hours. and as a result of doing this across the province, they may 
spend two or three extra days in the province. 
 
But that unserviced campsite is part of the formula to keep people 
in the province for an extra day or two days. And as a result they 
may stop in Eastend and do some shopping and buy a steak and 
go to the small-business places and use them. 
 
But I simply don’t understand how a big government . . . And 
maybe it’s because their cabinet members are so used to flying 
and staying in Hyatt hotels that they don’t understand families 
that want to go out and have a picnic any more. Maybe they’re 
that arrogant. Maybe they’re that out of touch with reality that 
they think what we need is $3 million in advertising. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the people that use these campsites don’t need 
to be told. And besides that, the people who will see the ads on 
TV, on TV on an ongoing basis, are not going to be the people 
driving through the province. Because how can you see the ads 
on TV when you’re driving your car? This is the stupidity; this is 
the stupidity of this government. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what the $3 million is for, Mr. Chairman. I’ll 
tell you what the $3 million is for. This is a failing government. 
I think we all have agreed on that today. I can tell by the whipped 
look of the members opposite that this is a failing government. 
I’ll tell you they look like whipped goats; that’s what they look 
like. You could herd them around with a wet noodle today, 
they’re so down. 
 
But I want to say about the issue at hand, Mr. Chairman, about 
the issue at hand here, Mr. Chairman, that this advertising, this 3 
million advertising . . . And I know where you’re getting the 
money from. I know where you’re getting the money from. 
You’re closing the campgrounds in the Department of Parks and 
taking it and putting it into Tourism to advertise for the next 
campaign. That’s what’s going on. The people of the province 
know that. 
 
They have watched you birds for the last six months try to turn 
your fortunes around, using their money on television and 
expensive ads, and they are saying, please call an election 
because we can’t afford six more months of $3-million-a-shot 
advertising. I watched those ads. Do you know what the main 
colours are in those ads? They’re the Tory colours. And they’re 
being done by a Tory ad agency. And they’re being done months 
before the next provincial election. 
 
Now you can sanctimoniously stand here and try to explain that 
these ads are being done for tourists who are going to Expo. Well 
I’ll tell you, you’re planning a little late; you’re a little late getting 
into the action. And believe 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1207 
 

it or not, there are those who would believe that this is being done 
for political reasons. There are people who are that cynical about 
the Conservative government; they actually believe that. 
 
They’ve been phoning us and telling us, after that news 
conference you had yesterday. And even the line on the story . . . 
And I listened to it on CKTV. When it was all over, that we’re 
going to spend the $3 million, do you know what the final line 
was? But we don’t know whether it’s going to make any 
difference because we think these people are going to come 
anyway. That was the final line. That’s what they said. 
 
So I say to you, in the most honest time of the day, do you ever 
think that there might be people out there who are cynical about 
this government, who may just think that this is a political ad 
campaign that’s trying to turn a failing government around — a 
failing government that is not able to increase itself in the polls? 
 
And my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has talked about 
what has happened in other provinces, and they have tried that 
there. Prince Edward Island, they tried it in the Department of 
Tourism, to run political ads, and I say to you that government 
was turfed out. In Alberta, the minister has admitted they spent 
even more on tourist ads, political ads, that were referred to by 
many people, and we’ve seen what happened there. 
 
And I’ll tell you, in Saskatchewan, as soon as Premier Devine 
screws up his courage to call an election, we’ll see what happens. 
But $3 million of self-serving advertising . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member to stay 
away from any references to elections. We are talking about 
Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I’m sure if the chairman would . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Opposition members, I would ask 
them to please quieten down. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would say that, if the chairman 
would check the record, he would see that thousands of times 
over the history of this Assembly elections have been referred to. 
And I will abide by your ruling, but I’ll tell you that you haven’t 
read all the Hansards if you’re saying that it hasn’t been allowed. 
And maybe we are changing the rules today because of certain 
things that have happened, and I’ll abide by your ruling. 
 
But elections have been mentioned, elections have been 
mentioned hundreds of times, both positively and negatively. I 
remember after the ’82 election and you and other members were 
chairmen, members talked about the ’82 election over . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe that the member is, in effect, 
debating the rule of the Chair, and I would ask him to get back to 
the topic. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I’m going back to the topic at hand, 
but I’ll tell you, the elections that happen in a

province have a lot to do with . . . Elections, that’s what the 
debate is about. This budget we’re dealing with is an election 
budget, where you close campgrounds that the families of the 
province would use with their families for picnics on Sunday and 
put it into political ads to get your re-elected., that it has 
something to do with elections. It does. Believe it or not. And 
maybe because we have such an arrogant government, such as 
the minister who runs this department, you really believe your 
rhetoric that these ads don’t have anything to do with the election. 
Maybe you believe that. You may believe that. You may be that 
out of touch with reality that you’re actually believing your own 
political rhetoric. 
 
I’ve seen that happen before. I saw it happen with the Trudeau 
government clinging to power into their fifth year. And I’ll say 
in Tourism, in the Department of Tourism, we have $3 million 
that is being used in the same way as Trudeau used money, the 
taxpayers’ money, to try and win elections. 
 
And I say that it’s not fair. It’s not fair to the people of the 
province and the families that want to go to these 10 campsites 
that they will be closed — that they would be closed — and that 
that money would be used for political ads. And you know what’s 
going to happen? You know what’s going to happen? I was part 
of a government, and I believe we advertised too much. I just 
think we did. I think we did. And you know what happened? It 
doesn’t work. In all honesty, I’m trying to give a message to you 
people, that those political ads you’re running are going to be 
your death knell. They’re going to be the end of you. In your fifth 
year to put out a $3 million ad campaign to try to pull you out of 
the fire, it’s going to backfire bad. 
 
(1230) 
 
and you know what people are going to say to these ads that look 
so beautiful to you who are frozen into the past, who think those 
ads that are flowing water and canoes? Do you know what people 
are going to say? I’m paying for that ad and I can’t put food on 
the table for my kids; and I have to go to the food bank to get my 
food because this government hasn’t provided jobs. 
 
And if you think those ads on TV are going to get people to vote 
for you, you’re way out of touch — you’re way out of touch. 
Because when the people who have to go to the food bank for 
their food see those ads on TV that they’re paying for, they are 
going to be terribly upset with you and Premier Devine. Do you 
know what they’re going to do? They’re going to kick you so 
hard at the first opportunity . . . I hope it’s June, but I think after 
last night it may be October or it may be next April, because I 
think what we’re seeing here is a government clinging to power 
well into their fifth year. And you know what has happened to 
other Saskatchewan governments that stayed beyond five years, 
into their fifth year. 
 
There was one government that had a department of tourism, or 
were looking at it, back in 1934. They stayed five year. And do 
you know how many seats they got after clinging to power, the 
only other time we had a Conservative government? Do you 
know how many, Mr. Chairman. They didn’t get any seats. Not 
one. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1208 
 

And I say this kind of advertising, this kind of advertising is 
symbolic of a government that is desperate, that is arrogant even 
in its dying days and is trying to tell the people of the province 
that they have no responsibility to call an election, no 
responsibility to account for the millions and millions of dollars 
they’re spending on self-serving advertising. We had yesterday 
SGI spending 2.2 million on political ads, politically directed ads. 
Now we have the Minister of Tourism saying, we’re going to shut 
down campgrounds but we’re going to spend 3 million on 
tourism. 
 
Well do you think the people of this province are that naive that 
they will look at a government that shuts down the family 
campgrounds on the one hand and spends that money on 
advertising, that this isn’t a government that’s politically 
desperate? Politically desperate. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that I don’t know how you can 
be that arrogant. I really don’t. I thought that the minister who 
was running these estimates through was not that arrogant — was 
not that arrogant. But I say that we have 53 or 54 members now 
. . . I don’t know how many have crossed the floor to the WCC 
already, but they’re fleeing this party, as everyone across the 
province is, because they see the kind of spending priorities are 
shutting down campgrounds, taking the food subsidy away from 
northern people, and putting it into political advertising. 
 
The estimates are that in the coming year $20 million — get this 
number — $20 million will be spent in the Crowns and the 
departments on political self-serving advertising. And I say, can 
anyone believe this government when they see what they do? Can 
anyone believe it? 
 
In 1982 they were opposed to advertising. They were opposed to 
advertising in the Crowns. Do you remember that? And, Mr. 
Chairman, you will remember it because you were part of that 
campaign team. You were there. And now we see the government 
doubling the amount of spending on advertising in their last year, 
in a failing attempt to pull them out of the morass that they now 
find themselves in along with their right-wing colleagues from 
across Canada. 
 
Every right-wing government is in trouble in this country — 
every one. We’ve seen it in Prince Edward Island — part of it 
because of tourism and the political ads they ran; I’ve already 
established that. In Ontario . . . and I remember the ads that they 
showed on tourism in Ontario. I remember those political ads, 
and they went even beyond (believe it or not) what these birds 
are doing here. They flooded the TV with tourist ads. They were 
advertising everything. 
 
And yet, Mr. Chairman, this is the same government that has told 
us in another committee that TV ads don’t work. Do you 
remember that line? Alcohol advertising. But it doesn’t work, 
they say — let them advertise — it doesn’t have an impact on 
people. But today we’re going to bring tourists to the province 
by spending $3 million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you this is a government that’s flying off in

different directions. I think it’s a government that has four wheels 
falling off and the steering disconnected. They’re going this way 
and that way. 
 
Alcohol advertising is all right because it doesn’t work. Like we 
can advertise booze and have kids drinking on the TV, young 
people . . . and then we have this report here that says, “The 
problem with alcohol and drugs has increased to a record 
problem in the province,” but yet TV advertising doesn’t work 
for alcohol. 
 
Well, I’ll say to you that this is a government that’s out of touch, 
and not only out of touch but is deceiving the people of this 
province to an extent that I’ll tell you better call the election soon. 
If you want to have any kind of a working opposition in this 
Assembly, I would encourage you to go to the people now, 
because it’s important to have an opposition in this Assembly. 
 
And I think that the kind of action we see here, $3 million, and 
the minister going on TV bragging about it, and the commentator 
at the end of the interview says, but we don’t think it’s going to 
make any difference because we think they would have come 
anyway. That’s what they said. That’s what they said to you. 
 
But we’re going to spend it anyway, because we’ve got an 
election campaign on. This is part of our pre-election campaign, 
and we’ve got to do her. We’ve got to do it. Because I’ll tell you, 
we’ve got to do it because we want to keep our jobs. We like 
flying around the world. We like flying around the world. You 
know that. 
 
You’ve seen the numbers, Mr. Chairman, that show very clearly, 
in this department and in others, the amount being spent on world 
travel by these people. And maybe that’s why they don’t 
understand campgrounds in the department. Maybe that’s why, 
because the ministers have been spending too much time in Los 
Angeles — in Los Angeles at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel. Do you 
remember that, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I believe that the member is simply playing 
verbal games, and I believe that he should get back to the topic 
and ask his question, or we will move on. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. Would you 
define for the purposes of the use of your interpretation of your 
ruling? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — A ruling of the Chair is not debatable. And 
the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to continue on. 
I want to continue on talking about the spending priorities of this 
government — the spending priorities of this government. 
 
And I’ll tell you, I’m not going to be dissuaded from talking 
about the spending priorities of this government. I’m not. I’m not 
going to stop now after four . . . over four years of bringing out 
problems with this government. It’s not going to be stopped. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1209 
 

Nor will we be able to stop the public who are demanding an 
election. You can run from it, but you can’t hide. And you may 
get away with it in here, trying to shut down a small opposition. 
But I’ll tell you, we’re going to keep working away, the way we 
have for the last four years, because there is a story to be told. 
And it’s got to do with the spending priorities of this government 
where they may be out of touch to the point where they’re 
shutting down campgrounds — that’s what we’re talking about, 
shutting down campgrounds, and we have already established 
that clearly — in order to save money so they can do political 
advertising. 
 
And maybe I was making the point because ministers who are 
clinging to power don’t want to give it up because they enjoy 
staying at the hotels, such as the Beverly Wilshire in Los 
Angeles, at great expense to the provincial taxpayers. And I 
remember the minister at that time, the high-flying minister, who 
said at that time when we brought up the issue that over $200 a 
night was being spent on that hotel room, that it didn’t matter 
whether it was $1,000 or more, he would stay where he wanted. 
And I say that this is part of the problem. This is part of the 
problem of arrogance. 
 
And I’ll tell you, there has been more governments turfed out in 
this country because of that kind of arrogance than for being 
down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know, and I see it 
happening here with these people, laughing in their seats today 
when we’re talking about this important issue. And they can 
laugh. You can laugh all you want. We’re going to keep talking 
about the issues. Absolutely. We’re going to keep talking. 
 
Three million dollars is a lot of money. No, we’re not going to 
be shut down, whether they laugh or not, because we think the 
story that we have to tell is a legitimate one. And all governments 
get kicked out. It’s not a question . . . There’s nothing to be 
embarrassed about getting kicked out. Every government gets 
kicked out. And if you make mistakes in tourism because you 
spend $3 million of hard-earned taxpayers’ money, and you’re 
defeated on that, that’s fine. You have to live with that. 
 
But I would make the point that for the minister to stand here and 
say it’s all right to shut down family campgrounds and to use that 
money to do political advertising, that is stretching a long bow 
— that’s stretching a long bow. And I’ll tell you, it’s going to 
backfire on you — it’s going to backfire on you. 
 
The member from Lloydminster knows very well that there’s 
trouble with this kind of a policy of shutting down campgrounds. 
He looks across the border to the West and sees the tide coming. 
He sees it coming as a result of arrogant government and taking 
money out of family campgrounds and putting it into political 
advertising. And I’ll tell you that we have a great deal of 
difficulty accepting this kind of a change. And when we ask the 
minister: what kind of analysis went into shutting down these 
campgrounds; who did the study; who did the planning? I don’t 
know, he says; don’t know who did it; don’t know where it came 
from.

But yet we have the member from Regina South, who was from 
Regina North, the former minister of Tourism, standing up 
Tuesday, I believe it was, on a rule 16 motion, talking about 
tourism and how we were going to benefit by having people 
coming through the province, taking side tours off the 
Yellowhead and the Trans-Canada, to camp. That’s what he said. 
Now can you believe it, that Friday we’re in the House saying, 
but we’re going to shut the campgrounds down. 
 
The former minister of Tourism, I think, understood. I think he 
really was sincere on Tuesday when he said he wanted the people 
driving through the province to take side tours to northern 
Saskatchewan, where my colleague from Athabasca and 
Cumberland would welcome them with open arms, would 
welcome them there to spend their money at small-business 
places and buy some steak or some food, and then go out to the 
campgrounds and help the small-business people, and buy their 
gas. 
 
But would you believe that three days later we’re in this 
Assembly and the minister in charge of tourism says he’s going 
to allow the campgrounds to be shut down? Now I think that that 
is disgusting. I think any government, any government that tries 
to play both sides of the street in that manner, saying we want 
people to come here to camp, that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the member from Lloydminster will shout from his seat that 
we’re losers, and I can take that; it’s no problem. But I’ll say that 
kind of arrogance, after last night in Alberta, shows where these 
people are at. 
 
But I want to get back to the issue of tourism and camping. The 
former minister of Small Business and Tourism, the member now 
from Regina North who’s planning to run in Regina South, I 
think he had a concept of tourism that was a good one. He kept 
the campgrounds open; in fact, if I’m not wrong, he expanded 
them — he expanded them. He stood up in cabinet and fought for 
them to be extended, and I say to you that that is a laudable 
minister. And when they wanted to do political advertising with 
his budget, do you know what he said? Do you know what he 
said? He said, no way, you’re not taking my budget for political 
advertising. And do you know what Grant Devine then did to him 
when he wouldn’t give him the money? — kicked him out of 
cabinet. That’s what he did; that’s what happened. 
 
I can see it on the faces opposite that that’s what happened, 
because they’re embarrassed — they’re embarrassed. And the 
former minister of Tourism and Small Business can’t even hardly 
come into this House any more — can’t even hardly come into 
this House any more — because of the way he was treated by the 
premier of this province for doing a good job. 
 
And I was in Prince Albert not long ago, and we did a tour — 
and other members of this caucus are well aware of it — where 
we talked about what was done by the former minister in your 
department. Other members may want to comment on some of 
the individuals we met with. Other members may want to 
comment, and I think we will after a little while. 
 
But what they were saying very clearly is, they couldn’t believe 
that Premier Devine had kicked . . . 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1210 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we can talk about Premier Devine all 
we want, and I don’t know why the members don’t want his name 
mentioned any more. I don’t know why. They don’t want to 
mention two people any more — Premier Devine and Brian 
Mulroney. They don’t want to mention their names. They don’t 
want to mention their names any more. 
 
They want to hide their leaders. Can you believe it, Mr. 
Chairman? Both of them, who won massive majorities not long 
ago — they now shout and holler, don’t mention his name, when 
I say Premier Devine. they say, don’t mention his name. For 
God’s sake, don’t mention the name of Premier Devine because 
we have a different strategy. We’re not going to run him this 
time. We’re going to run a tourist campaign about boats and 
rivers, and we’ll run that ad campaign, and we’ll keep Premier 
Devine out of it. 
 
(1245) 
 
But I say to you that they can’t believe, the public can’t believe 
what they’re seeing here, where campgrounds are being shut 
down . . . And the members can yell from their seats all they 
want. No, no, they can yell all they want. And I’ll tell you, the 
chairman can allow it to go on, but we’re going to continue on 
anyway. We’re going to continue on anyway — that the public 
cannot believe, when they look in the Public Accounts and see 
the spending that was done in this department and others on 
travelling around the world, on hotels, on expenses, on liquor — 
yes, believe it or not, on liquor, paid for by the taxpayers — the 
great amount of money that is being spent, and then when we 
come to the little campgrounds that my friend and colleague from 
Athabasca has referred to, they close them down. That’s what’s 
happening. 
 
And I have here a letter from the northern hamlet of Doré Lake, 
just to prove the point of what is happening and how this 
government is so arrogant — stays at big hotels in Los Angeles 
and the cities around the world. 
 
But this is a question of two cities, Mr. Chairman. This is a story 
of two cities. One, where the rich people live; one which is bright 
and shining where the rich people of this province live. And then 
there’s another city where the people from northern 
Saskatchewan, the people who have to go to food banks and the 
people who use the little campgrounds that these people think 
they should shut down. That’s what this story is about. 
 
And I’ll tell you that there are many people, who can’t afford 
entry into some of these bigger parks, who use the little 
campgrounds. and this is another example of how you treat those 
people. But the only problem is, the only justice is that these 
people vote. They vote. And this kind of arrogance and treatment 
is going to get your birds defeated. 
 
Now I want to refer to this letter. I want to refer to this letter. And 
the minister says there has been no opposition to this plan, that 
it’s been a study done — probably by some political firm that is 
being paid for without a

contract, the way many others have been done in that department 
— saying that we can close the campgrounds down and there’s 
no problem. 
 
But here is a letter. And my colleague from Assiniboia was good 
enough to hand this over to me. It’s a letter from the northern 
hamlet of Doré Lake. And it’s dated April 18, 1986: 
 
The Hon. Colin Maxwell, Minister, Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources. (And this deals directly with tourism.) 
Legislative Building, Regina, Sask. Dear Sir: 
 
Now this is addressed to the minister in charge of Parks, and the 
Minister of Tourism will well know that there’s a direct 
relationship between the two departments. 
 
Now I want to read this letter because it reflects a local concern 
about the closing of parks. It relates directly to the issue we are 
speaking about here, whether or not in fact we should keep these 
10 campsites open. We should keep them open. That’s the policy, 
and I’ll tell you, after the election they won’t be closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — They won’t be closed. We’re not going to 
close them. And I would say you don’t have a mandate to close 
those campsites. You have no mandate. You’re in your fifth year; 
you should have had an election last month and you got scared 
off. Why not leave them open until June and then let us decide 
whether or not, or how many more we’re going to put into the 
system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. We want to 
decide how many more we’re going to add to the system. That’s 
what we want to know. 
 
You have no mandate to close these campsites down. You people 
are finished. Not only have you used up your first four-year term, 
but you’re now into your second one which you’re taking without 
asking. 
 
And I say spending $3 million in your fifth year on advertising is 
simply improper and not a fair way to use your massive mandate. 
It’s not fair. It simply isn’t fair, and I can tell by the looks on the 
faces of some of the back-benchers, the member from Moose Jaw 
South, that he agrees. 
 
I believe if you would let that individual into cabinet to help make 
the decisions, you wouldn’t have these kind of decisions being 
made . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I think they have some 
honest members who would say to them and pull them by the 
shirt-tail or maybe sit them down in a chair or back them into a 
corner and say, look you, I’ll tell you we shouldn’t be closing 
these campgrounds down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I 
know. Well the minister says that we look stupid. The minister 
says we look stupid. Well that’s fine. You can say that all you 
want and try to get into a personal attack — that’s fine. You’ve 
been doing it for four years, and it hasn’t bothered us, and the 
indications are that you’re getting into deeper and deeper trouble, 
but I want to get back to this letter. I want to get back to the letter. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1211 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’m sure that the minister is 
having great difficulty hearing the question. Would the members 
please quieten down on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad the members of the 
government benches have finally settled down and that you laid 
the lumber to them a little bit to bring them back to order here in 
this Assembly. 
 
I’ll tell you, the shouting and hollering that has gone on here for 
four years from the massive majority government, I’ll tell you, is 
something to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe that the member is 
commenting on the ruling of the Chair. I don’t believe he has any 
right to do that, and would he please get back to the question at 
hand and ask the question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I wasn’t 
challenging the Chair in any sense of the word. I think your ruling 
was that I was challenging the Chair isn’t proper. What I was 
clearly . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you challenging the Chair? Are you 
challenging the Chair now? Then please get back to the debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, if I was challenging the 
Chair I would say, I challenge the Chair. Obviously I’m not 
challenging you, otherwise I would say it. 
 
No, what I’m trying to do is point out to you some important facts 
that you’re not willing to listen to. That’s what’s happening here. 
We’re being cut off at every turn from trying to defend some 
people who use little campgrounds. And at every turn we’re 
being cut off from the debate. And that bothers us. It bothers us 
a good deal because it’s been happening for a long time. 
 
What I’m saying is that I have a letter here — and I’ll start again 
because I keep getting interrupted — from the northern hamlet 
of Doré Lake, dated April 18, 1986: 
 

Honorable Colin Maxwell, Minister, Department of Parks 
and Renewable Resources, Legislative Buildings, Regina, 
Sask. 
 
Dear Sir: The Council and residents of Dore Lake are 
extremely concerned with the Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources’ decision to close the camping 
facilities at Beaupre and Shirley Lake, and respectfully 
request that this decision be reversed immediately. 

 
Now here’s a council pleading with the government, local 
people, locally-elected, pleading with the government on April 
18th — not even a month ago — pleading with a big government, 
a massive government that has $20 million for advertising, $20 
million for advertising but doesn’t have money to keep these little 
campgrounds open. This is what they can’t understand. 
 
Now these people are — I don’t know what their occupation 
would be but they may be fishermen, or they may be farmers, 
some of them may be unemployed — but

pleading with a big government in Regina, a big arrogant 
government in Regina to keep their little parks open, two of them. 
And they say closure has not been publicized. And I understand 
why: because we’re only going to advertise what’s politically 
good. No opportunity for public input; get that. No consulting. 
 
Now you say you had consultants out there studying this. They’re 
saying you didn’t, that you had no consultants out there. Here’s 
the issue, here is the issue. In this letter, dated April 18th, the 
council . . . and this letter is signed by the mayor, Robert Snell, 
says this: “No opportunity for public input.” Now the minister is 
clearly away off base when he stands here in this Assembly and 
he says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This is on page 1. And I 
say to you this, that this minister when he stands and says clearly 
that there was no opportunity for input, that there is a great deal 
of difficulty in believing you — in believing you, sir, that you are 
honest in your attempt to defend your position of closing these 
parks. 
 

A suggestion has been made that the hamlet of Dore Lake 
take over the campground of Beaupre. We would like to 
point out that this is beyond the jurisdiction of the local 
Hamlet. 
 
Reasons for keeping the facilities open at Beaupre and 
Shirley Lake: (and they list out a number of them). 
 
Considerable cost was incurred to construct these 
campgrounds, i.e., holding tanks, washrooms, (and here I 
thought the minister said that there were none of those 
facilities) barbecue stands, garbage disposal cans, fish 
filleting facilities, camp kitchen. Removal costs would be 
very high. 

 
And I understand why the minister is embarrassed. I understand 
very well why he’s embarrassed when he has misled the House 
— when he has misled the House. That’s what he’s done, misled 
the House. And he gets into yelling and hollering from his seat. 
But I’ll tell you, you’ve got a little problem. You’ve got a big 
problem. 
 
And I’ll tell you that when you say that there are no washrooms 
at these campsites and then we have a letter from the mayor of 
Doré Lake saying in fact that you are not correct, you’ve got a 
problem with the council, because you’ve misled the House. And 
it says: 
 

These campgrounds are a necessary recreation facility both 
for the community and the tourists coming into the area. 

 
For the local community, the families that would want to come 
out, as well as the tourists who maybe, as the former minister of 
Tourism has said, maybe want to go off the yellow coat trail or 
the Trans-Canada Highway to have a little camping trip . . . the 
Yellowhead highway, sorry. I want to correct that for the minister 
who is getting confused again. And it also goes on to talk about 
increased local commerce, and I’ve referred to that. People who 
use these campsites go to town and buy their grub and maybe a 
little fuel for their camp-stoves and fill with gas. Now they’re 
going to drive right on by because there’s no campsite — there’s 
no campsite any more. 
  



 
May 9, 1986 

 

1212 
 

And my colleague from Cumberland, who is an expert in that 
area, knows very well, watching people come through and 
stopping at these campgrounds, how important they are to the 
local community. 
 
Now the letter goes on. This is another point, “Detrimental if 
closed — increased fire hazard”; now that is something that I 
hadn’t referred to or even thought of. But increased fire, because 
there’s no one there looking after them. They will grow up with 
weeds and grass, and somebody who is driving by, not stopping 
any more, may throw a cigarette out; the campground will catch 
on fire and burn all the forest down in that area. And I say that 
that is an excellent point that they are bringing up. 
 
“Increased garbage and pollution” — now this could be what 
they’re doing here. “People will still continue to utilize these sites 
and the destruction to the environment would be extreme.” 
 
Another point: “Historic site — Beaupré is one of the oldest 
campsites in the area.” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
members are shouting that it isn’t. This is the mayor writing this 
letter, and they’re making fun of it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They yell to shut up, but I don’t think that should be allowed in 
this Assembly, Mr. Chairman. But if you want to allow it . . . If 
you want to allow it, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I believe that the debate is 
getting a little out of order, and I believe that the noise level is a 
bit too high from both sides of the House. Order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 


